<doc id="3354" wikidata="Q64" url="?curid=3354" title="Berlin">
<text>Berlin ( ; ) is the capital and largest city of Germany, by both area and population. With 3.66 million inhabitants, it has the highest population within its city limits of any city in the European Union. The city is also one of the states of Germany, being the third smallest state in the country by area. Berlin is surrounded by the state of Brandenburg, and Brandenburg&#x27;s capital Potsdam is nearby. The urban area of Berlin has a population of over 4.6 million and is therefore the most populous urban area in Germany. The Berlin-Brandenburg capital region has around 6.2 million inhabitants and is Germany&#x27;s second-largest metropolitan region after the Rhine-Ruhr region, as well as the fifth-biggest metropolitan region by GDP in the European Union.

Berlin was built along the banks of the Spree river, which flows into the Havel in the western borough of Spandau. The city includes lakes in the western and southeastern boroughs, the largest of which is Müggelsee. About one-third of the city&#x27;s area is composed of forests, parks and gardens, rivers, canals, and lakes.

First documented in the 13th century and at the crossing of two important historic trade routes, Berlin was designated the capital of the Margraviate of Brandenburg (1417–1701), Kingdom of Prussia (1701–1918), German Empire (1871–1918), Weimar Republic (1919–1933), and Nazi Germany (1933–1945). Berlin served as a scientific, artistic, and philosophical hub during the Age of Enlightenment, Neoclassicism, and the German revolutions of 1848–1849. During the &quot;Gründerzeit,&quot; an industrialization-induced economic boom triggered a rapid population increase in Berlin. 1920s Berlin was the third-largest city in the world by population. After World War II and following Berlin&#x27;s occupation, the city was split into West Berlin and East Berlin, divided by the Berlin Wall. East Berlin was declared the capital of East Germany, while Bonn became the West German capital. Following German reunification in 1990, Berlin once again became the capital of all of Germany. Due to its geographic location and history, Berlin has been called &quot;the heart of Europe&quot;.

Berlin is a world city of culture, politics, media and science. Its economy is based on high tech and the service sector, encompassing a diverse range of creative industries, startup companies, research facilities, and media corporations. Berlin serves as a continental hub for air and rail traffic and has a complex public transportation network. Tourism in Berlin makes the city a popular global destination. Significant industries include information technology, the healthcare industry, biomedical engineering, biotechnology, the automotive industry, and electronics.

Berlin is home to several universities, such as the Humboldt University of Berlin, Technische Universität Berlin, the Berlin University of the Arts and the Free University of Berlin. The Berlin Zoological Garden is the most visited zoo in Europe. Babelsberg Studio is the world&#x27;s first large-scale movie studio complex, and there are many films set in Berlin. Berlin is home to three World Heritage Sites: Museum Island, the Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin, and the Berlin Modernism Housing Estates. Other landmarks include the Brandenburg Gate, the Reichstag building, Potsdamer Platz, the Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe, and the Berlin Wall Memorial. Berlin has numerous museums, galleries, and libraries.

== History ==

=== Etymology ===
Berlin lies in northeastern Germany, in an area formerly settled by Slavs which thus exhibits many (Germanised) Slavic-derived placenames until today (see below). The word &quot;Berlin&quot; also has its roots in the language of the West Slavs, and may be related to the Old Polabian stem (&quot;swamp&quot;).

Of Berlin&#x27;s twelve boroughs, five bear a Slavic-derived name—Pankow, Steglitz-Zehlendorf, Marzahn-Hellersdorf, Treptow-Köpenick and Spandau; furthermore, across the city&#x27;s 96 neighbourhoods, there are 22 which bear a Slavic-rooted name—Altglienicke, Alt-Treptow, Britz, Buch, Buckow, Gatow, Karow, Kladow, Köpenick, Lankwitz, Lübars, Malchow, Marzahn, Pankow, Prenzlauer Berg, Rudow, Schmöckwitz, Spandau, Stadtrandsiedlung Malchow, Steglitz, Tegel and Zehlendorf.

=== Prehistory of Berlin ===
The earliest human settlements in the area of modern Berlin are dated around 60,000 BC. A deer mask, dated to 9,000 BC, is attributed to the Maglemosian culture. In 2,000 BC dense human settlements along the Spree and Havel rivers gave rise to the Lusatian culture. Starting around 500 BC Germanic tribes settled in a number of villages in the higher situated areas of today&#x27;s Berlin. After the Semnones left around 200 AD, the Burgundians followed. In the 7th century Slavic tribes, the later known Hevelli and Sprevane, reached the region.

=== 12th century to 16th century ===

In the 12th century the region came under German rule as part of the Margraviate of Brandenburg, founded by Albert the Bear in 1157. Early evidence of middle age settlements in the area of today&#x27;s Berlin are remnants of a house foundation dated 1270 to 1290, found in excavations in Berlin Mitte. The first written records of towns in the area of present-day Berlin date from the late 12th century. Spandau is first mentioned in 1197 and Köpenick in 1209. 1237 is considered the founding date of the city. The two towns over time formed close economic and social ties, and profited from the staple right on the two important trade routes, one was known as &quot;Via Imperii&quot;, and the other trade route reached from Bruges to Novgorod. In 1307 the two towns formed an alliance with a common external policy, their internal administrations still being separated.
In 1326 the territory of Berlin was raided by pagan Lithuanians during the Raid on Brandenburg.

Members of the Hohenzollern family ruled in Berlin until 1918, first as electors of Brandenburg, then as kings of Prussia, and eventually as German emperors. In 1443, Frederick II Irontooth started the construction of a new royal palace in the twin city Berlin-Cölln. The protests of the town citizens against the building culminated in 1448, in the &quot;Berlin Indignation&quot; (). Officially, the Berlin-Cölln palace became permanent residence of the Brandenburg electors of the Hohenzollerns from 1486, when John Cicero came to power. Berlin-Cölln, however, had to give up its status as a free Hanseatic League city. In 1539, the electors and the city officially became Lutheran.

=== 17th to 19th centuries ===
The Thirty Years&#x27; War between 1618 and 1648 devastated Berlin. One third of its houses were damaged or destroyed, and the city lost half of its population. Frederick William, known as the &quot;Great Elector&quot;, who had succeeded his father George William as ruler in 1640, initiated a policy of promoting immigration and religious tolerance. With the Edict of Potsdam in 1685, Frederick William offered asylum to the French Huguenots.

By 1700, approximately 30 percent of Berlin&#x27;s residents were French, because of the Huguenot immigration. Many other immigrants came from Bohemia, Poland, and Salzburg.

Since 1618, the Margraviate of Brandenburg had been in personal union with the Duchy of Prussia. In 1701, the dual state formed the Kingdom of Prussia, as Frederick III, Elector of Brandenburg, crowned himself as king Frederick I in Prussia. Berlin became the capital of the new Kingdom, replacing Königsberg. This was a successful attempt to centralise the capital in the very far-flung state, and it was the first time the city began to grow. In 1709, Berlin merged with the four cities of Cölln, Friedrichswerder, Friedrichstadt and Dorotheenstadt under the name Berlin, &quot;Haupt- und Residenzstadt Berlin&quot;.

In 1740, Frederick II, known as Frederick the Great (1740–1786), came to power. Under the rule of Frederick II, Berlin became a center of the Enlightenment, but also, was briefly occupied during the Seven Years&#x27; War by the Russian army. Following France&#x27;s victory in the War of the Fourth Coalition, Napoleon Bonaparte marched into Berlin in 1806, but granted self-government to the city. In 1815, the city became part of the new Province of Brandenburg.

The Industrial Revolution transformed Berlin during the 19th century; the city&#x27;s economy and population expanded dramatically, and it became the main railway hub and economic center of Germany. Additional suburbs soon developed and increased the area and population of Berlin. In 1861, neighboring suburbs including Wedding, Moabit and several others were incorporated into Berlin. In 1871, Berlin became capital of the newly founded German Empire. In 1881, it became a city district separate from Brandenburg.

=== 20th to 21st centuries ===

In the early 20th century, Berlin had become a fertile ground for the German Expressionist movement. In fields such as architecture, painting and cinema new forms of artistic styles were invented. At the end of World War I in 1918, a republic was proclaimed by Philipp Scheidemann at the Reichstag building. In 1920, the Greater Berlin Act incorporated dozens of suburban cities, villages, and estates around Berlin into an expanded city. The act increased the area of Berlin from . The population almost doubled, and Berlin had a population of around four million. During the Weimar era, Berlin underwent political unrest due to economic uncertainties but also became a renowned center of the Roaring Twenties. The metropolis experienced its heyday as a major world capital and was known for its leadership roles in science, technology, arts, the humanities, city planning, film, higher education, government, and industries. Albert Einstein rose to public prominence during his years in Berlin, being awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1921.

In 1933, Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party came to power. Hitler was inspired by the architecture he had experienced in Vienna, and he wished for a German Empire with a capital city that had a monumental ensemble. The National Socialist regime embarked on monumental construction projects in Berlin as a way to express their power and authority through architecture. Adolf Hitler and Albert Speer developed architectural concepts for the conversion of the city into World Capital Germania; these were never implemented.

NSDAP rule diminished Berlin&#x27;s Jewish community from 160,000 (one-third of all Jews in the country) to about 80,000 due to emigration between 1933 and 1939. After Kristallnacht in 1938, thousands of the city&#x27;s Jews were imprisoned in the nearby Sachsenhausen concentration camp. Starting in early 1943, many were deported to ghettos like Łódź, and to concentration and extermination camps such as Auschwitz.

Berlin hosted the 1936 Summer Olympics for which the Olympic stadium was built.
During World War II, Berlin was the location of multiple Nazi prisons, forced labour camps, 17 subcamps of the Sachsenhausen concentration camp for men and women, including teenagers, of various nationalities, including Polish, Jewish, French, Belgian, Czechoslovak, Russian, Ukrainian, Romani, Dutch, Greek, Norwegian, Spanish, Luxembourgish, German, Austrian, Italian, Yugoslavian, Bulgarian, Hungarian, a camp for Sinti and Romani people (see &quot;Romani Holocaust&quot;), and the Stalag III-D prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs of various nationalities.

During World War II, large parts of Berlin were destroyed during Allied air raids and the 1945 Battle of Berlin. The Allies dropped 67,607 tons of bombs on the city, destroying 6,427 acres of the built-up area. Around 125,000 civilians were killed. After the end of World War II in Europe in May 1945, Berlin received large numbers of refugees from the Eastern provinces. The victorious powers divided the city into four sectors, analogous to Allied-occupied Germany the sectors of the Allies of World War II (the United States, the United Kingdom, and France) formed West Berlin, while the Soviet Union formed East Berlin.

All four Allies of World War II shared administrative responsibilities for Berlin. However, in 1948, when the Western Allies extended the currency reform in the Western zones of Germany to the three western sectors of Berlin, the Soviet Union imposed the Berlin Blockade on the access routes to and from West Berlin, which lay entirely inside Soviet-controlled territory. The Berlin airlift, conducted by the three western Allies, overcame this blockade by supplying food and other supplies to the city from June 1948 to May 1949. In 1949, the Federal Republic of Germany was founded in West Germany and eventually included all of the American, British and French zones, excluding those three countries&#x27; zones in Berlin, while the Marxist–Leninist German Democratic Republic was proclaimed in East Germany. West Berlin officially remained an occupied city, but it politically was aligned with the Federal Republic of Germany despite West Berlin&#x27;s geographic isolation. Airline service to West Berlin was granted only to American, British and French airlines.

The founding of the two German states increased Cold War tensions. West Berlin was surrounded by East German territory, and East Germany proclaimed the Eastern part as its capital, a move the western powers did not recognize. East Berlin included most of the city&#x27;s historic center. The West German government established itself in Bonn. In 1961, East Germany began to build the Berlin Wall around West Berlin, and events escalated to a tank standoff at Checkpoint Charlie. West Berlin was now de facto a part of West Germany with a unique legal status, while East Berlin was de facto a part of East Germany. John F. Kennedy gave his &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot; speech on 26 June 1963, in front of the Schöneberg city hall, located in the city&#x27;s western part, underlining the US support for West Berlin. Berlin was completely divided. Although it was possible for Westerners to pass to the other side through strictly controlled checkpoints, for most Easterners, travel to West Berlin or West Germany was prohibited by the government of East Germany. In 1971, a Four-Power Agreement guaranteed access to and from West Berlin by car or train through East Germany.

In 1989, with the end of the Cold War and pressure from the East German population, the Berlin Wall fell on 9 November and was subsequently mostly demolished. Today, the East Side Gallery preserves a large portion of the wall. On 3 October 1990, the two parts of Germany were reunified as the Federal Republic of Germany, and Berlin again became a reunified city. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, the city experienced significant urban development and still impacts urban planning decisions. 

Walter Momper, the mayor of West Berlin, became the first mayor of the reunified city in the interim. City-wide elections in December 1990 resulted in the first &quot;all Berlin&quot; mayor being elected to take office in January 1991, with the separate offices of mayors in East and West Berlin expiring by that time, and Eberhard Diepgen (a former mayor of West Berlin) became the first elected mayor of a reunited Berlin. On 18 June 1994, soldiers from the United States, France and Britain marched in a parade which was part of the ceremonies to mark the withdrawal of allied occupation troops allowing a reunified Berlin (the last Russian troops departed on 31 August, while the final departure of Western Allies forces was on 8 September 1994). On 20 June 1991, the Bundestag (German Parliament) voted to move the seat of the German capital from Bonn to Berlin, which was completed in 1999, during the chancellorship of Gerhard Schröder.

Berlin&#x27;s 2001 administrative reform merged several boroughs, reducing their number from 23 to 12.

In 2006, the FIFA World Cup Final was held in Berlin.

Construction of the &quot;Berlin Wall Trail&quot; (Berliner Mauerweg) began in 2002 and was completed in 2006.

In a 2016 terrorist attack linked to ISIL, a truck was deliberately driven into a Christmas market next to the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church, leaving 13 people dead and 55 others injured.

In 2018, more than 200,000 protestors took to the streets in Berlin with demonstrations of solidarity against racism, in response to the emergence of far-right politics in Germany.

Berlin Brandenburg Airport (BER) opened in 2020, nine years later than planned, with Terminal 1 coming into service at the end of October, and flights to and from Tegel Airport ending in November. Due to the fall in passenger numbers resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, plans were announced to close BER&#x27;s Terminal 5, the former Schönefeld Airport, beginning in March 2021. The connecting link of U-Bahn line U5 from Alexanderplatz to Hauptbahnhof, along with the new stations Rotes Rathaus and Unter den Linden, opened on 4 December 2020, the Museumsinsel U-Bahn station opened in 2021, which completed all new works on the U5.

A partial opening by the end of 2020 of the Humboldt Forum museum, housed in the reconstructed Berlin Palace, was postponed until March 2021. On 16 September 2022, the opening of the eastern wing, the last section of the Humboldt Forum museum, meant the Humboldt Forum museum was finally completed. It became Germany&#x27;s currently most expensive cultural project.

=== Berlin-Brandenburg fusion attempt ===
The legal basis for a combined state of Berlin and Brandenburg is different from other state fusion proposals. Normally, Article 29 of the Basic Law stipulates that a state fusion requires a federal law. However, a clause added to the Basic Law in 1994, Article 118a, allows Berlin and Brandenburg to unify without federal approval, requiring a referendum and a ratification by both state parliaments.

In 1996, there was an unsuccessful attempt of unifying the states of Berlin and Brandenburg. Both share a common history, dialect and culture and in 2020, there are over 225,000 residents of Brandenburg that commute to Berlin. The fusion had the near-unanimous support by a broad coalition of both state governments, political parties, media, business associations, trade unions and churches. Though Berlin voted in favor by a small margin, largely based on support in former West Berlin, Brandenburg voters disapproved of the fusion by a large margin. It failed largely due to Brandenburg voters not wanting to take on Berlin&#x27;s large and growing public debt and fearing losing identity and influence to the capital.

== Geography ==
=== Topography ===
Berlin is in northeastern Germany, in an area of low-lying marshy woodlands with a mainly flat topography, part of the vast Northern European Plain which stretches all the way from northern France to western Russia. The &quot;Berliner Urstromtal&quot; (an ice age glacial valley), between the low Barnim Plateau to the north and the Teltow plateau to the south, was formed by meltwater flowing from ice sheets at the end of the last Weichselian glaciation. The Spree follows this valley now. In Spandau, a borough in the west of Berlin, the Spree empties into the river Havel, which flows from north to south through western Berlin. The course of the Havel is more like a chain of lakes, the largest being the Tegeler See and the Großer Wannsee. A series of lakes also feeds into the upper Spree, which flows through the Großer Müggelsee in eastern Berlin.

Substantial parts of present-day Berlin extend onto the low plateaus on both sides of the Spree Valley. Large parts of the boroughs Reinickendorf and Pankow lie on the Barnim Plateau, while most of the boroughs of Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf, Steglitz-Zehlendorf, Tempelhof-Schöneberg, and Neukölln lie on the Teltow Plateau.

The borough of Spandau lies partly within the Berlin Glacial Valley and partly on the Nauen Plain, which stretches to the west of Berlin. Since 2015, the Arkenberge hills in Pankow at elevation, have been the highest point in Berlin. Through the disposal of construction debris they surpassed Teufelsberg (), which itself was made up of rubble from the ruins of the Second World War. The Müggelberge at elevation is the highest natural point and the lowest is the Spektesee in Spandau, at elevation.

=== Climate ===
Berlin has an oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;) bordering on a humid continental climate (&quot;Dfb&quot;). This type of climate features mild to very warm summer temperatures and cold, though not very severe, winters. Annual precipitation is modest.

Frosts are common in winter, and there are larger temperature differences between seasons than typical for many oceanic climates. Summers are warm and sometimes humid with average high temperatures of and lows of . Winters are cold with average high temperatures of and lows of . Spring and autumn are generally chilly to mild. Berlin&#x27;s built-up area creates a microclimate, with heat stored by the city&#x27;s buildings and pavement. Temperatures can be higher in the city than in the surrounding areas. Annual precipitation is with moderate rainfall throughout the year. Snowfall mainly occurs from December through March. The hottest month in Berlin was July 1834, with a mean temperature of and the coldest was January 1709, with a mean temperature of . The wettest month on record was July 1907, with of rainfall, whereas the driest were October 1866, November 1902, October 1908 and September 1928, all with of rainfall.
== Cityscape and architecture ==

=== Cityscape ===


Berlin&#x27;s history has left the city with a polycentric metropolitan area and an eclectic mix of architecture. The city&#x27;s appearance today has been predominantly shaped by German history during the 20th century. 17% of Berlin&#x27;s buildings are Gründerzeit or earlier and nearly 25% are of the 1920s and 1930s, when Berlin played a part in the origin of modern architecture.

Devastated by the bombing of Berlin in World War II many of the buildings that had survived in both East and West were demolished during the postwar period. After the reunification, many important heritage structures have been reconstructed, including the &quot;Forum Fridericianum&quot; along with, the Berlin State Opera, Charlottenburg Palace, Gendarmenmarkt, Alte Kommandantur, as well as the City Palace.

The tallest buildings in Berlin are spread across the urban area, with clusters at Potsdamer Platz, City West, and Alexanderplatz.

Over one-third of the city&#x27;s area consists of green and open-space, with the Großer Tiergarten, one of the largest and most popular parks in Berlin, located in the centre of the city.

=== Architecture ===



The Fernsehturm (TV tower) at Alexanderplatz in Mitte is among the tallest structures in the European Union at . Built in 1969, it is visible throughout most of the central districts of Berlin. The city can be viewed from its observation floor. Starting here, the Karl-Marx-Allee heads east, an avenue lined by monumental residential buildings, designed in the Socialist Classicism style. Adjacent to this area is the Rotes Rathaus (City Hall), with its distinctive red-brick architecture. In front of it is the Neptunbrunnen, a fountain featuring a mythological group of Tritons, personifications of the four main Prussian rivers, and Neptune on top of it. Nearby is the Nikolaiviertel, the reconstructed oldest settlement area in the city.

The Brandenburg Gate is an iconic landmark of Berlin and Germany; it stands as a symbol of eventful European history and of unity and peace. The Reichstag building is the traditional seat of the German Parliament. It was remodeled by British architect Norman Foster in the 1990s and features a glass dome over the session area, which allows free public access to the parliamentary proceedings and magnificent views of the city.

The East Side Gallery is an open-air exhibition of art painted directly on the last existing portions of the Berlin Wall. It is the largest remaining evidence of the city&#x27;s historical division.

The Gendarmenmarkt is a neoclassical square in Berlin, the name of which derives from the headquarters of the famous Gens d&#x27;armes regiment located here in the 18th century. Two similarly designed cathedrals border it, the Französischer Dom with its observation platform and the Deutscher Dom. The Konzerthaus (Concert Hall), home of the Berlin Symphony Orchestra, stands between the two cathedrals.
The Museum Island in the River Spree houses five museums built from 1830 to 1930 and is a UNESCO World Heritage site. Restoration and construction of a main entrance to all museums (James Simon Gallery), as well as reconstruction of the Berlin Palace (Stadtschloss) were completed. Also on the island and next to the Lustgarten and palace is Berlin Cathedral, emperor William II&#x27;s ambitious attempt to create a Protestant counterpart to St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica in Rome. A large crypt houses the remains of some of the earlier Prussian royal family. St. Hedwig&#x27;s Cathedral is Berlin&#x27;s Roman Catholic cathedral.

Unter den Linden is a tree-lined east–west avenue from the Brandenburg Gate to the Berlin Palace, and was once Berlin&#x27;s premier promenade. Many Classical buildings line the street, and part of Humboldt University is there. Friedrichstraße was Berlin&#x27;s legendary street during the Golden Twenties. It combines 20th-century traditions with the modern architecture of today&#x27;s Berlin.

Potsdamer Platz is an entire quarter built from scratch after the Wall came down. To the west of Potsdamer Platz is the Kulturforum, which houses the Gemäldegalerie, and is flanked by the Neue Nationalgalerie and the Berliner Philharmonie. The Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe, a Holocaust memorial, is to the north.

The area around Hackescher Markt is home to fashionable culture, with countless clothing outlets, clubs, bars, and galleries. This includes the Hackesche Höfe, a conglomeration of buildings around several courtyards, reconstructed around 1996. The nearby New Synagogue is the center of Jewish culture.

The Straße des 17. Juni, connecting the Brandenburg Gate and Ernst-Reuter-Platz, serves as the central east–west axis. Its name commemorates the uprisings in East Berlin of 17 June 1953. Approximately halfway from the Brandenburg Gate is the Großer Stern, a circular traffic island on which the Siegessäule (Victory Column) is situated. This monument, built to commemorate Prussia&#x27;s victories, was relocated in 1938–39 from its previous position in front of the Reichstag.

The Kurfürstendamm is home to some of Berlin&#x27;s luxurious stores with the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church at its eastern end on Breitscheidplatz. The church was destroyed in the Second World War and left in ruins. Nearby on Tauentzienstraße is KaDeWe, claimed to be continental Europe&#x27;s largest department store. The Rathaus Schöneberg, where John F. Kennedy made his famous &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner!&quot; speech, is in Tempelhof-Schöneberg.

West of the center, Bellevue Palace is the residence of the German President. Charlottenburg Palace, which was burnt out in the Second World War, is the largest historical palace in Berlin.

The Funkturm Berlin is a lattice radio tower in the fairground area, built between 1924 and 1926. It is the only observation tower which stands on insulators and has a restaurant and an observation deck above ground, which is reachable by a windowed elevator.

The Oberbaumbrücke over the Spree river is Berlin&#x27;s most iconic bridge, connecting the now-combined boroughs of Friedrichshain and Kreuzberg. It carries vehicles, pedestrians, and the U1 Berlin U-Bahn line. The bridge was completed in a brick gothic style in 1896, replacing the former wooden bridge with an upper deck for the U-Bahn. The center portion was demolished in 1945 to stop the Red Army from crossing. After the war, the repaired bridge served as a checkpoint and border crossing between the Soviet and American sectors, and later between East and West Berlin. In the mid-1950s, it was closed to vehicles, and after the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961, pedestrian traffic was heavily restricted. Following German reunification, the center portion was reconstructed with a steel frame, and U-Bahn service resumed in 1995.

== Demographics ==

At the end of 2023 the city-state of Berlin had 3.66 million registered inhabitants, in an area of . Berlin is the most populous city proper in the European Union. In 2021, the urban area of Berlin had a population of over 4.6 million inhabitants. , the functional urban area was home to about 5.2 million people. The entire Berlin-Brandenburg capital region has a population of more than 6 million in an area of .

In 2014, the city-state Berlin had 37,368 live births (+6.6%), a record number since 1991. The number of deaths was 32,314. Almost 2.0 million households were counted in the city. 54 percent of them were single-person households. More than 337,000 families with children under the age of 18 lived in Berlin. In 2014, the German capital registered a migration surplus of approximately 40,000 people.

=== Nationalities ===

National and international migration into the city has a long history. In 1685, after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in France, the city responded with the Edict of Potsdam, which guaranteed religious freedom and tax-free status to French Huguenot refugees for ten years. The Greater Berlin Act in 1920 incorporated many suburbs and surrounding cities of Berlin. It formed most of the territory that comprises modern Berlin and increased the population from 1.9 million to 4 million.

Active immigration and asylum politics in West Berlin triggered waves of immigration in the 1960s and 1970s. Berlin is home to at least 180,000 Turkish and Turkish German residents, making it the largest Turkish community outside of Turkey. In the 1990s the &quot;Aussiedlergesetze&quot; enabled immigration to Germany of some residents from the former Soviet Union. Today ethnic Germans from countries of the former Soviet Union make up the largest portion of the Russian-speaking community. The last decade experienced an influx from various Western countries and some African regions. A portion of the African immigrants have settled in the Afrikanisches Viertel. Young Germans, EU-Europeans and Israelis have also settled in the city.

In December 2019 there were 777,345 registered residents of foreign nationality and another 542,975 German citizens with a &quot;migration background&quot; &quot;(Migrationshintergrund, MH)&quot;, meaning they or one of their parents immigrated to Germany after 1955. Foreign residents of Berlin originate from about 190 countries. 48 percent of the residents under the age of 15 have a migration background in 2017. Berlin in 2009 was estimated to have 100,000 to 250,000 unregistered inhabitants. Boroughs of Berlin with a significant number of migrants or foreign born population are Mitte, Neukölln and Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg. The number of Arabic speakers in Berlin could be higher than 150,000. There are at least 40,000 Berliners with Syrian citizenship, third only behind Turkish and Polish citizens. The 2015 refugee crisis made Berlin Europe&#x27;s capital of Arab culture. Berlin is among the cities in Germany that have received the biggest amount of refugees after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. As of November 2022, an estimated 85,000 Ukrainian refugees were registered in Berlin, making Berlin the most popular destination of Ukrainian refugees in Germany.

Berlin has a vibrant expatriate community involving, among others, precarious immigrants, seasonal workers, and refugees. Therefore, Berlin sustains a broad variety of English-based speakers. Speaking a particular type of English does attract prestige and cultural capital in Berlin.

=== Languages ===

German is the official and predominant spoken language in Berlin. It is a West Germanic language that derives most of its vocabulary from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family. German is one of 24 languages of the European Union, and one of the three working languages of the European Commission.

Berlinerisch or Berlinisch is not a dialect linguistically. It is spoken in Berlin and the surrounding metropolitan area. It originates from a Brandenburgish variant. The dialect is now seen more like a sociolect, largely through increased immigration and trends among the educated population to speak standard German in everyday life.

The most commonly spoken foreign languages in Berlin are Turkish, Polish, English, Persian, Arabic, Italian, Bulgarian, Russian, Romanian, Kurdish, Serbo-Croatian, French, Spanish and Vietnamese. Turkish, Arabic, Kurdish, and Serbo-Croatian are heard more often in the western part due to the large Middle Eastern and former-Yugoslavian communities. Polish, English, Russian, and Vietnamese have more native speakers in East Berlin.

=== Religion ===

On the report of the 2011 census, approximately 37 percent of the population reported being members of a legally-recognized church or religious organization. The rest either did not belong to such an organization, or there was no information available about them.

The largest religious denomination recorded in 2010 was the Protestant regional church body—the Evangelical Church of Berlin-Brandenburg-Silesian Upper Lusatia (EKBO)—a united church. EKBO is a member of the Protestant Church in Germany (EKD) and of the Union of Protestant Churches in the EKD (UEK). According to the EKBO, their membership accounted for 18.7 percent of the local population, while the Roman Catholic Church had 9.1 percent of residents registered as its members. About 2.7% of the population identify with other Christian denominations (mostly Eastern Orthodox, but also various Protestants). According to the Berlin residents register, in 2018 14.9 percent were members of the Evangelical Church, and 8.5 percent were members of the Catholic Church. The government keeps a register of members of these churches for tax purposes, because it collects church tax on behalf of the churches. It does not keep records of members of other religious organizations which may collect their own church tax, in this way.

In 2009, approximately 249,000 Muslims were reported by the Office of Statistics to be members of mosques and Islamic religious organizations in Berlin, while in 2016, the newspaper &quot;Der Tagesspiegel&quot; estimated that about 350,000 Muslims observed Ramadan in Berlin. In 2019, about 437,000 registered residents, 11.6% of the total, reported having a migration background from one of the Member states of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Between 1992 and 2011 the Muslim population almost doubled.

About 0.9% of Berliners belong to other religions. Of the estimated population of 30,000–45,000 Jewish residents, approximately 12,000 are registered members of religious organizations.

Berlin is the seat of the Roman Catholic archbishop of Berlin and EKBO&#x27;s elected chairperson is titled the bishop of EKBO. Furthermore, Berlin is the seat of many Orthodox cathedrals, such as the Cathedral of St. Boris the Baptist, one of the two seats of the Bulgarian Orthodox Diocese of Western and Central Europe, and the Resurrection of Christ Cathedral of the Diocese of Berlin (Patriarchate of Moscow).

The faithful of the different religions and denominations maintain many places of worship in Berlin. The Independent Evangelical Lutheran Church has eight parishes of different sizes in Berlin. There are 36 Baptist congregations (within Union of Evangelical Free Church Congregations in Germany), 29 New Apostolic Churches, 15 United Methodist churches, eight Free Evangelical Congregations, four Churches of Christ, Scientist (1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 11th), six congregations of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, an Old Catholic church, and an Anglican church in Berlin. Berlin has more than 80 mosques, ten synagogues, and two Buddhist as well as four Hindu temples.

== Government and politics ==
=== German federal city state ===

Since the German reunification on 3 October 1990, Berlin has been one of the three city-states of Germany among the present 16 federal states of Germany. The Abgeordnetenhaus von Berlin (&quot;House of Representatives&quot;) functions as the city and state parliament, which has 141 seats. Berlin&#x27;s executive body is the Senate of Berlin (&quot;Senat von Berlin&quot;). The Senate consists of the Governing Mayor of Berlin (&quot;Regierender Bürgermeister&quot;), and up to ten senators holding ministerial positions, two of them holding the title of &quot;Mayor&quot; (&quot;Bürgermeister&quot;) as deputy to the Governing Mayor.
The total annual budget of Berlin in 2015 exceeded €24.5 ($30.0) billion including a budget surplus of €205 ($240) million. The German Federal city state of Berlin owns extensive assets, including administrative and government buildings, real estate companies, as well as stakes in the Olympic Stadium, swimming pools, housing companies, and numerous public enterprises and subsidiary companies. The federal state of Berlin runs a real estate portal to advertise commercial spaces or land suitable for redevelopment.

The Social Democratic Party (SPD) and The Left (Die Linke) took control of the city government after the 2001 state election and won another term in the 2006 state election. From the 2016 state election until the 2023 state election, there was a coalition between the Social Democratic Party, the Greens and the Left Party. Since April 2023, the government has been formed by a coalition between the Christian Democrats and the Social Democrats.

The Governing Mayor is simultaneously Lord Mayor of the City of Berlin (&quot;Oberbürgermeister der Stadt&quot;) and Minister President of the State of Berlin (&quot;Ministerpräsident des Bundeslandes&quot;). The office of the Governing Mayor is in the Rotes Rathaus (Red City Hall). Since 2023, this office has been held by Kai Wegner of the Christian Democrats. He is the first conservative mayor in Berlin in more than two decades.

=== Boroughs ===
Berlin is subdivided into 12 boroughs or districts (&quot;Bezirke&quot;). Each borough has several subdistricts or neighborhoods (&quot;Ortsteile&quot;), which have roots in much older municipalities that predate the formation of Greater Berlin on 1 October 1920. These subdistricts became urbanized and incorporated into the city later on. Many residents strongly identify with their neighborhoods, colloquially called &quot;Kiez&quot;. At present, Berlin consists of 96 subdistricts, which are commonly made up of several smaller residential areas or quarters.

Each borough is governed by a borough council (&quot;Bezirksamt&quot;) consisting of five councilors (&quot;Bezirksstadträte&quot;) including the borough&#x27;s mayor (&quot;Bezirksbürgermeister&quot;). The council is elected by the borough assembly (&quot;Bezirksverordnetenversammlung&quot;). However, the individual boroughs are not independent municipalities, but subordinate to the Senate of Berlin. The borough&#x27;s mayors make up the council of mayors (&quot;Rat der Bürgermeister&quot;), which is led by the city&#x27;s Governing Mayor and advises the Senate. The neighborhoods have no local government bodies.

=== City partnerships ===
Berlin to this day maintains official partnerships with 17 cities. Town twinning between West Berlin and other cities began with its sister city Los Angeles, California, in 1967. East Berlin&#x27;s partnerships were canceled at the time of German reunification.

=== Capital city ===
Berlin is the capital of the Federal Republic of Germany. The President of Germany, whose functions are mainly ceremonial under the German constitution, has their official residence in Bellevue Palace. Berlin is the seat of the German Chancellor (Prime Minister), housed in the Chancellery building, the &quot;Bundeskanzleramt&quot;. Facing the Chancellery is the Bundestag, the German Parliament, housed in the renovated Reichstag building since the government&#x27;s relocation to Berlin in 1998. The Bundesrat (&quot;federal council&quot;, performing the function of an upper house) is the representation of the 16 constituent states (&quot;Länder&quot;) of Germany and has its seat at the former Prussian House of Lords. The total annual federal budget managed by the German government exceeded €310 ($375) billion in 2013.

The relocation of the federal government and Bundestag to Berlin was mostly completed in 1999. However, some ministries, as well as some minor departments, stayed in the federal city Bonn, the former capital of West Germany. Discussions about moving the remaining ministries and departments to Berlin continue.

The Federal Foreign Office and the ministries and departments of Defense, Justice and Consumer Protection, Finance, Interior, Economic Affairs and Energy, Labor and Social Affairs, Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth, Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety, Food and Agriculture, Economic Cooperation and Development, Health, Transport and Digital Infrastructure and Education and Research are based in the capital.

=== Embassies ===
Berlin hosts in total 158 foreign embassies as well as the headquarters of many think tanks, trade unions, nonprofit organizations, lobbying groups, and professional associations. Frequent official visits and diplomatic consultations among governmental representatives and national leaders are common in contemporary Berlin.

== Economy ==

In 2018, the GDP of Berlin totaled €147 billion, an increase of 3.1% over the previous year. Berlin&#x27;s economy is dominated by the service sector, with around 84% of all companies doing business in services. In 2015, the total labor force in Berlin was 1.85 million. The unemployment rate reached a 24-year low in November 2015 and stood at 10.0%. From 2012 to 2015 Berlin, as a German state, had the highest annual employment growth rate. Around 130,000 jobs were added in this period.

Important economic sectors in Berlin include life sciences, transportation, information and communication technologies, media and music, advertising and design, biotechnology, environmental services, construction, e-commerce, retail, hotel business, and medical engineering.

Research and development have economic significance for the city. Several major corporations like Volkswagen, Pfizer, and SAP operate innovation laboratories in the city.
The Science and Business Park in Adlershof is the largest technology park in Germany measured by revenue. Within the eurozone, Berlin has become a center for business relocation and international investments.

=== Companies ===
Many German and international companies have business or service centers in the city. For several years Berlin has been recognized as a major center of business founders. In 2015, Berlin generated the most venture capital for young startup companies in Europe.

Among the 10 largest employers in Berlin are the City-State of Berlin, , largest railway company in the world, the hospital providers Charité and Vivantes, the Federal Government of Germany, the local public transport provider BVG, Siemens and Deutsche Telekom.

Siemens, a Global 500 and DAX-listed company is partly headquartered in Berlin. Other DAX-listed companies headquartered in Berlin are the property company Deutsche Wohnen and the online food delivery service Delivery Hero. The national railway operator , Europe&#x27;s largest digital publisher Axel Springer as well as the MDAX-listed firms Zalando and HelloFresh and also have their main headquarters in the city. Among the largest international corporations who have their German or European headquarters in Berlin are Bombardier Transportation, Securing Energy for Europe, Coca-Cola, Pfizer, Sony and TotalEnergies.

As of 2023, Sparkassen-Finanzgruppe, a network of public banks that together form the largest financial services group in Germany and in all of Europe, is headquartered in Berlin. The Bundesverband der Deutschen Volksbanken und Raiffeisenbanken has its headquarters in Berlin, managing around 1.200 trillion euros. The three largest banks in the capital are Deutsche Kreditbank, Landesbank Berlin and Berlin Hyp.

Mercedes-Benz Group manufactures cars, and BMW builds motorcycles in Berlin. In 2022, American electric car manufacturer Tesla opened its first European Gigafactory outside the city borders in Grünheide (Mark), Brandenburg. The Pharmaceuticals division of Bayer and Berlin Chemie are major pharmaceutical companies in the city.

=== Tourism and conventions ===

Berlin had 788 hotels with 134,399 beds in 2014. The city recorded 28.7 million overnight hotel stays and 11.9 million hotel guests in 2014. Tourism figures have more than doubled within the last ten years and Berlin has become the third-most-visited city destination in Europe. Some of the most visited places in Berlin include: Potsdamer Platz, Brandenburger Tor, the Berlin wall, Alexanderplatz, Museumsinsel, Fernsehturm, the East-Side Gallery, Schloss-Charlottenburg, Zoologischer Garten, Siegessäule, Gedenkstätte Berliner Mauer, Mauerpark, Botanical Garden, Französischer Dom, Deutscher Dom and Holocaust-Mahnmal. The largest visitor groups are from Germany, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Italy, Spain and the United States.

According to figures from the International Congress and Convention Association in 2015, Berlin became the leading organizer of conferences globally, hosting 195 international meetings. Some of these congress events take place on venues such as CityCube Berlin or the Berlin Congress Center (bcc).

The Messe Berlin (also known as Berlin ExpoCenter City) is the main convention organizing company in the city. Its main exhibition area covers more than . Several large-scale trade fairs like the consumer electronics trade fair IFA, where the first practical audio tape recorder and the first completely electronic television system were first introduced to the public, the ILA Berlin Air Show, the Berlin Fashion Week (including the &quot;Premium Berlin&quot; and the &quot;Panorama Berlin&quot;), the Green Week, the &quot;Fruit Logistica&quot;, the transport fair InnoTrans, the tourism fair ITB and the adult entertainment and erotic fair Venus are held annually in the city, attracting a significant number of business visitors.
=== Creative industries ===

The creative arts and entertainment business is an important part of Berlin&#x27;s economy. The sector comprises music, film, advertising, architecture, art, design, fashion, performing arts, publishing, R&amp;D, software, TV, radio, and video games.

In 2014, around 30,500 creative companies operated in the Berlin-Brandenburg metropolitan region, predominantly SMEs. Generating a revenue of 15.6 billion Euro and 6% of all private economic sales, the culture industry grew from 2009 to 2014 at an average rate of 5.5% per year.

Berlin is an important European and German film industry hub. It is home to more than 1,000 film and television production companies, 270 movie theaters, and around 300 national and international co-productions are filmed in the region every year. The historic Babelsberg Studios and the production company UFA are adjacent to Berlin in Potsdam. The city is also home of the German Film Academy (Deutsche Filmakademie), founded in 2003, and the European Film Academy, founded in 1988.

=== Media ===

Berlin is home to many magazine, newspaper, book, and scientific/academic publishers and their associated service industries. In addition, around 20 news agencies, more than 90 regional daily newspapers and their websites, as well as the Berlin offices of more than 22 national publications such as , and Die Zeit reinforce the capital&#x27;s position as Germany&#x27;s epicenter for influential debate. Therefore, many international journalists, bloggers, and writers live and work in the city.

Berlin is the central location to several international and regional television and radio stations. The public broadcaster RBB has its headquarters in Berlin as well as the commercial broadcasters MTV Europe and Welt. German international public broadcaster Deutsche Welle has its TV production unit in Berlin, and most national German broadcasters have a studio in the city, including ZDF and RTL.

Berlin has Germany&#x27;s largest number of daily newspapers, with numerous local broadsheets (&quot;Berliner Morgenpost&quot;, &quot;Berliner Zeitung&quot;, &quot;Der Tagesspiegel&quot;), and three major tabloids, as well as national dailies of varying sizes, each with a different political affiliation, such as &quot;Die Welt&quot;, &quot;Neues Deutschland&quot;, and &quot;Die Tageszeitung&quot;. &quot;The Berliner&quot;, a monthly magazine, is Berlin&#x27;s English-language periodical and La Gazette de Berlin a French-language newspaper.

Berlin is also the headquarter of major German-language publishing houses like Walter de Gruyter, Springer, the Ullstein Verlagsgruppe (publishing group), Suhrkamp, and Cornelsen are all based in Berlin. Each of which publishes books, periodicals, and multimedia products.

== Quality of life ==

According to Mercer, Berlin ranked number 19 in the Quality of Living City Ranking in 2024.

Also in 2024, according to &quot;Monocle&quot;, Berlin occupied the position of the 17th-most-livable city in the world. Economist Intelligence Unit ranked Berlin number 21 of all global cities for &quot;livability&quot;. In 2019 Berlin was also number 8 on the Global Power City Index. In the same year Berlin was honored for having the best future prospects of all cities in Germany.

== Transport ==
=== Roads ===
Berlin&#x27;s transport infrastructure provides a diverse range of urban mobility.

A total of 979 bridges cross 197 km (122 miles) the inner-city waterways. Berlin roads total 5,422 km (3,369 miles) of which 77 km (48 miles) are motorways (known as Autobahn). In 2013 only 1.344 million motor vehicles were registered in the city. With 377 cars per 1000 residents in 2013 (570/1000 in Germany), Berlin as a Western global city has one of the lowest numbers of cars per capita.

=== Cycling ===
Berlin is well known for its highly developed bicycle lane system. It is estimated that Berlin has 710 bicycles per 1,000 residents. Around 500,000 daily bike riders accounted for 13 percent of total traffic in 2010.

Cyclists in Berlin have access to 620 km of bicycle paths including approximately 150 km of mandatory bicycle paths, 190 km of off-road bicycle routes, 60 km of bicycle lanes on roads, 70 km of shared bus lanes which are also open to cyclists, 100 km of combined pedestrian/bike paths and 50 km of marked bicycle lanes on roadside pavements or sidewalks. Riders are allowed to carry their bicycles on Regionalbahn (RE), S-Bahn and U-Bahn trains, on trams, and on night buses if a bike ticket is purchased.

=== Taxicabs ===

Taxicabs in Berlin are yellow or beige. In 2024, around 8,000 taxicabs were in service. Like in most of Europe, app-based sharing cab services are available but limited.

=== Rail ===

Long-distance rail lines directly connect Berlin with all of the major cities of Germany. the regional rail lines of the Verkehrsverbund Berlin-Brandenburg provide access to Brandenburg and to the Baltic Sea. The Berlin Hauptbahnhof (Berlin Central Station) is the largest grade-separated railway station in Europe. The Deutsche Bahn runs the high speed Intercity-Express (ICE) to domestic destinations, including Hamburg, Munich, Cologne, Stuttgart, and Frankfurt am Main.

=== Water transport ===
The Spree and the Havel rivers cross Berlin. There are no frequent passenger connections to and from Berlin by water. Berlin&#x27;s largest harbour, the Westhafen, is located in the district of Moabit. It is a transhipment and storage site for inland shipping with a growing importance.

=== Intercity buses ===
There is an increasing quantity of intercity bus services. Berlin city has more than 10 stations that run buses to destinations throughout Berlin. Destinations in Germany and Europe are connected via the intercity bus exchange &quot;Zentraler Omnibusbahnhof Berlin&quot;.

=== Urban public transport ===
The &quot;Berliner Verkehrsbetriebe&quot; (BVG) and the German State-owned Deutsche Bahn (DB) manage several extensive urban public transport systems.

Public transport in Berlin has a long and complicated history because of the 20th-century division of the city, where movement between the two halves was not served. Since 1989, the transport network has been developed extensively. However, it still contains early 20th century traits, such as the U1.

=== Airports ===

Berlin is served by one commercial international airport: Berlin Brandenburg Airport (BER), located just outside Berlin&#x27;s south-eastern border, in the state of Brandenburg. It began construction in 2006, with the intention of replacing Airport (TXL) and Airport (SXF) as the single commercial airport of Berlin. Previously set to open in 2012, after extensive delays and cost overruns, it opened for commercial operations in October 2020. The planned initial capacity of around 27 million passengers per year is to be further developed to bring the terminal capacity to approximately 55 million per year by 2040.

Before the opening of the BER in Brandenburg, Berlin was served by Tegel Airport and Schönefeld Airport. Tegel Airport was within the city limits, and Schönefeld Airport was located at the same site as BER. Both airports together handled 29.5 million passengers in 2015. In 2014, 67 airlines served 163 destinations in 50 countries from Berlin. Airport was a focus city for Lufthansa and Eurowings while Schönefeld served as an important destination for airlines like , easyJet and Ryanair. Until 2008, Berlin was also served by the smaller Tempelhof Airport, which functioned as a city airport, with a convenient location near the city center, allowing for quick transit times between the central business district and the airport. The airport grounds have since been turned into a city park.

== Rohrpost ==

From 1865 to 1976, Berlin operated an expansive pneumatic postal network, reaching a maximum length of 400 kilometers (roughly 250 miles) by 1940. The system was divided into two distinct networks after 1949. The West Berlin system remained in public use until 1963, and continued to be utilized for government correspondence until 1972. Conversely, the East Berlin system, which incorporated the —the central hub of the operation—remained functional until 1976.

== Energy ==
Berlin&#x27;s two largest energy provider for private households are the Swedish firm Vattenfall and the Berlin-based company GASAG. Both offer electric power and natural gas supply. Some of the city&#x27;s electric energy is imported from nearby power plants in southern Brandenburg.

 the five largest power plants measured by capacity are the Heizkraftwerk Reuter West, the Heizkraftwerk Lichterfelde, the Heizkraftwerk Mitte, the Heizkraftwerk Wilmersdorf, and the Heizkraftwerk Charlottenburg. All of these power stations generate electricity and useful heat at the same time to facilitate buffering during load peaks.

In 1993 the power grid connections in the Berlin-Brandenburg capital region were renewed. In most of the inner districts of Berlin power lines are underground cables; only a 380 kV and a 110 kV line, which run from Reuter substation to the urban Autobahn, use overhead lines. The Berlin 380-kV electric line is the backbone of the city&#x27;s energy grid.

== Health ==

Berlin has a long history of discoveries in medicine and innovations in medical technology. The modern history of medicine has been significantly influenced by scientists from Berlin. Rudolf Virchow was the founder of cellular pathology, while Robert Koch developed vaccines for anthrax, cholera, and tuberculosis. For his life&#x27;s work Koch is seen as one of the founders of modern medicine.

The Charité complex (Universitätsklinik Charité) is the largest university hospital in Europe, tracing back its origins to the year 1710. More than half of all German Nobel Prize winners in Physiology or Medicine, including Emil von Behring, Robert Koch and Paul Ehrlich, have worked at the Charité. The Charité is spread over four campuses and comprises around 3,000 beds, 15,500 staff, 8,000 students, and more than 60 operating theaters, and it has a turnover of two billion euros annually.

== Telecommunication ==


Since 2017, the digital television standard in Berlin and Germany is DVB-T2. This system transmits compressed digital audio, digital video and other data in an MPEG transport stream.

Berlin has installed several hundred free public Wireless LAN sites across the capital since 2016. The wireless networks are concentrated mostly in central districts; 650 hotspots (325 indoor and 325 outdoor access points) are installed.

The UMTS (3G) and LTE (4G) networks of the three major cellular operators Vodafone, Telekom Deutschland and O2 enable the use of mobile broadband applications citywide.

== Education and research ==

, Berlin had 878 schools, teaching 340,658 students in 13,727 classes and 56,787 trainees in businesses and elsewhere. The city has a 6-year primary education program. After completing primary school, students continue to the (a comprehensive school) or (college preparatory school). Berlin has a special bilingual school program in the , in which children are taught the curriculum in German and a foreign language, starting in primary school and continuing in high school.

The Französisches Gymnasium Berlin, which was founded in 1689 to teach the children of Huguenot refugees, offers (German/French) instruction. The John F. Kennedy School, a bilingual German–American public school in Zehlendorf, is particularly popular with children of diplomats and the English-speaking expatriate community. 82 teach Latin and 8 teach Classical Greek.

=== Higher education ===

The Berlin-Brandenburg capital region is one of the most prolific centers of higher education and research in Germany and Europe. Historically, 67 Nobel Prize winners are affiliated with the Berlin-based universities.

The city has four public research universities and more than 30 private, professional, and technical colleges &quot;(Hochschulen)&quot;, offering a wide range of disciplines. A record number of 175,651 students were enrolled in the winter term of 2015/16. Among them around 18% have an international background.

The three largest universities combined have approximately 103,000 enrolled students. There are the Freie Universität Berlin &quot;(Free University of Berlin, FU Berlin)&quot; with about 33,000 students, the Humboldt Universität zu Berlin &quot;(HU Berlin)&quot; with 35,000 students, and Technische Universität Berlin &quot;(TU Berlin)&quot; with 35,000 students. The Charité Medical School has around 8,000 students. The FU, the HU, the TU, and the Charité make up the Berlin University Alliance, which has received funding from the Excellence Strategy program of the German government. The Universität der Künste &quot;(UdK)&quot; has about 4,000 students and ESMT Berlin is only one of four business schools in Germany with triple accreditation. The Hertie School, a private public policy school located in Mitte, has more than 900 students and doctoral students. The Berlin School of Economics and Law has an enrollment of about 11,000 students, the Berlin University of Applied Sciences and Technology of about 12,000 students, and the Hochschule für Technik und Wirtschaft (University of Applied Sciences for Engineering and Economics) of about 14,000 students.

=== Research ===
The city has a high density of internationally renowned research institutions, such as the Fraunhofer Society, the DLR Institute for Planetary Research, the Leibniz Association, the Helmholtz Association, and the Max Planck Society, which are independent of, or only loosely connected to its universities. In 2012, around 65,000 professional scientists were working in research and development in the city.

Berlin is one of the knowledge and innovation communities (KIC) of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT). The KIC is based at the Center for Entrepreneurship at TU Berlin and has a focus in the development of IT industries. It partners with major multinational companies such as Siemens, Deutsche Telekom, and SAP.

One of Europe&#x27;s successful research, business and technology clusters is based at WISTA in Berlin-Adlershof, with more than 1,000 affiliated firms, university departments and scientific institutions.

In addition to the university-affiliated libraries, the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin is a major research library. Its two main locations are on Potsdamer Straße and on Unter den Linden. There are also 86 public libraries in the city. ResearchGate, a global social networking site for scientists, is based in Berlin.

== Culture ==

Berlin is known for its numerous cultural institutions, many of which enjoy international reputation. The diversity and vivacity of the metropolis led to a trendsetting atmosphere. An innovative music, dance and art scene has developed in the 21st century.

Young people, international artists and entrepreneurs continued to settle in the city and made Berlin a popular entertainment center in the world.

The expanding cultural performance of the city was underscored by the relocation of the Universal Music Group who decided to move their headquarters to the banks of the River Spree. In 2005, Berlin was named &quot;City of Design&quot; by UNESCO and has been part of the Creative Cities Network ever since.

Many German and International films were shot in Berlin, including &quot;M&quot;, &quot;One, Two, Three&quot;, &quot;Cabaret&quot;, &quot;Christiane F.&quot;, &quot;Possession&quot;, &quot;Octopussy&quot;, &quot;Wings of Desire&quot;, &quot;Run Lola Run&quot;, &quot;The Bourne Trilogy&quot;, &quot;Good Bye, Lenin!&quot;, &quot;The Lives of Others&quot;, &quot;Inglourious Basterds&quot;, &quot;Hanna&quot;, &quot;Unknown&quot; and &quot;Bridge of Spies&quot;.

=== Galleries and museums ===

 Berlin is home to 138 museums and more than 400 art galleries. The ensemble on the Museum Island is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and is in the northern part of the Spree Island between the Spree and the Kupfergraben. As early as 1841 it was designated a &quot;district dedicated to art and antiquities&quot; by a royal decree. Subsequently, the Altes Museum was built in the Lustgarten. The Neues Museum, which displays the bust of Queen Nefertiti, Alte Nationalgalerie, Pergamon Museum, and Bode Museum were built there.

Apart from the Museum Island, there are many additional museums in the city. The Gemäldegalerie (Painting Gallery) focuses on the paintings of the &quot;old masters&quot; from the 13th to the 18th centuries, while the Neue Nationalgalerie (New National Gallery, built by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe) specializes in 20th-century European painting. The Hamburger Bahnhof, in Moabit, exhibits a major collection of modern and contemporary art. The expanded Deutsches Historisches Museum reopened in the Zeughaus with an overview of German history spanning more than a millennium. The Bauhaus Archive is a museum of 20th-century design from the famous Bauhaus school. Museum Berggruen houses the collection of noted 20th century collector Heinz Berggruen, and features an extensive assortment of works by Picasso, Matisse, Cézanne, and Giacometti, among others. The Kupferstichkabinett Berlin (Museum of Prints and Drawings) is part of the Staatlichen Museen zu Berlin (Berlin State Museums) and the Kulturforum at Potsdamer Platz in the Tiergarten district of Berlin&#x27;s Mitte district. It is the largest museum of the graphic arts in Germany and at the same time one of the four most important collections of its kind in the world. The collection includes Friedrich Gilly&#x27;s design for the monument to Frederick II of Prussia.


The Jewish Museum has a standing exhibition on two millennia of German-Jewish history. The German Museum of Technology in Kreuzberg has a large collection of historical technical artifacts. The &quot;Museum für Naturkunde&quot; (Berlin&#x27;s natural history museum) exhibits natural history near Berlin Hauptbahnhof. It has the largest mounted dinosaur in the world (a &quot;Giraffatitan&quot; skeleton). A well-preserved specimen of &quot;Tyrannosaurus rex&quot; and the early bird &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; are at display as well.

In Dahlem, there are several museums of world art and culture, such as the Museum of Asian Art, the Ethnological Museum, the Museum of European Cultures, as well as the Allied Museum. The Brücke Museum features one of the largest collection of works by artist of the early 20th-century expressionist movement. In Lichtenberg, on the grounds of the former East German Ministry for State Security, is the Stasi Museum. The site of Checkpoint Charlie, one of the most renowned crossing points of the Berlin Wall, is still preserved. A private museum venture exhibits a comprehensive documentation of detailed plans and strategies devised by people who tried to flee from the East.

The Beate Uhse Erotic Museum claimed to be the largest erotic museum in the world until it closed in 2014.

The cityscape of Berlin displays large quantities of urban street art. It has become a significant part of the city&#x27;s cultural heritage and has its roots in the graffiti scene of Kreuzberg of the 1980s. The Berlin Wall itself has become one of the largest open-air canvasses in the world. The leftover stretch along the Spree river in Friedrichshain remains as the East Side Gallery. Berlin today is consistently rated as an important world city for street art culture.
Berlin has galleries which are quite rich in contemporary art. Located in Mitte, KW Institute for Contemporary Art, KOW, Sprüth Magers; Kreuzberg there are a few galleries as well such as Blain Southern, Esther Schipper, Future Gallery, König Gallerie.

=== Nightlife and festivals ===
Berlin&#x27;s nightlife has been celebrated as one of the most diverse and vibrant of its kind. In the 1970s and 80s, the SO36 in Kreuzberg was a center for punk music and culture. The &quot;SOUND&quot; and the &quot;Dschungel&quot; gained notoriety. Throughout the 1990s, people in their 20s from all over the world, particularly those in Western and Central Europe, made Berlin&#x27;s club scene a premier nightlife venue. After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, many historic buildings in Mitte, the former city center of East Berlin, were illegally occupied and re-built by young squatters and became a fertile ground for underground and counterculture gatherings. The central boroughs are home to many nightclubs, including the Tresor and the Berghain. The KitKatClub and several other locations are known for their sexually uninhibited parties.

Clubs are not required to close at a fixed time during the weekends, and many parties last well into the morning or even all weekend, including near Alexanderplatz. Several venues have become a popular stage for the Neo-Burlesque scene.

Berlin has a long history of gay culture, and is an important birthplace of the LGBT rights movement. Same-sex bars and dance halls operated freely as early as the 1880s, and the first gay magazine, &quot;Der Eigene&quot;, started in 1896. By the 1920s, gays and lesbians had an unprecedented visibility. Today, in addition to a positive atmosphere in the wider club scene, the city again has a huge number of queer clubs and festivals. The most famous and largest are Berlin Pride, the Christopher Street Day, the Lesbian and Gay City Festival in Berlin-Schöneberg, the Kreuzberg Pride.

The annual Berlin International Film Festival (Berlinale) with around 500,000 admissions is considered to be the largest publicly attended film festival in the world. The Karneval der Kulturen (&quot;Carnival of Cultures&quot;), a multi-ethnic street parade, is celebrated every Pentecost weekend. Berlin is also well known for the cultural festival Berliner Festspiele, which includes the jazz festival JazzFest Berlin, and Young Euro Classic, the largest international festival of youth orchestras in the world. Several technology and media art festivals and conferences are held in the city, including Transmediale and Chaos Communication Congress. The annual Berlin Festival focuses on indie rock, electronic music and synthpop and is part of the International Berlin Music Week. Every year Berlin hosts one of the largest New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations in the world, attended by well over a million people. The focal point is the Brandenburg Gate, where midnight fireworks are centered, but various private fireworks displays take place throughout the entire city. Partygoers in Germany often toast the New Year with a glass of sparkling wine.

=== Performing arts ===

Berlin is home to 44 theaters and stages. The Deutsches Theater in Mitte was built in 1849–50 and has operated almost continuously since then. The Volksbühne at Rosa-Luxemburg-Platz was built in 1913–14, though the company had been founded in 1890. The Berliner Ensemble, famous for performing the works of Bertolt Brecht, was established in 1949. The Schaubühne was founded in 1962 and moved to the building of the former Universum Cinema on Kurfürstendamm in 1981. With a seating capacity of 1,895 and a stage floor of , the Friedrichstadt-Palast in Berlin Mitte is the largest show palace in Europe. For Berlin&#x27;s independent dance and theatre scene, venues such as the Sophiensäle in Mitte and the three houses of the Hebbel am Ufer (HAU) in Kreuzberg are important. Most productions there are also accessible to an English-speaking audience. Some of the dance and theatre groups that also work internationally (Gob Squad, Rimini Protokoll) are based there, as well as festivals such as the international festival Dance in August.

Berlin has three major opera houses: the Deutsche Oper, the Berlin State Opera, and the Komische Oper. The Berlin State Opera on Unter den Linden opened in 1742 and is the oldest of the three. Its musical director is Daniel Barenboim. The Komische Oper has traditionally specialized in operettas and is also at Unter den Linden. The Deutsche Oper opened in 1912 in Charlottenburg.

The city&#x27;s main venue for musical theater performances are the Theater am Potsdamer Platz and Theater des Westens (built in 1895). Contemporary dance can be seen at the &quot;Radialsystem V&quot;. The Tempodrom is host to concerts and circus-inspired entertainment. It also houses a multi-sensory spa experience. The Admiralspalast in Mitte has a vibrant program of variety and music events.

There are seven symphony orchestras in Berlin. The Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra is one of the preeminent orchestras in the world; it is housed in the Berliner Philharmonie near Potsdamer Platz on a street named for the orchestra&#x27;s longest-serving conductor, Herbert von Karajan. Simon Rattle was its principal conductor from 1999 to 2018, a position now held by Kirill Petrenko. The Konzerthausorchester Berlin was founded in 1952 as the orchestra for East Berlin. Christoph Eschenbach is its principal conductor. The Haus der Kulturen der Welt presents exhibitions dealing with intercultural issues and stages world music and conferences. The &quot;Kookaburra&quot; and the &quot;Quatsch Comedy Club&quot; are known for satire and comedy shows. In 2018, the &quot;New York Times&quot; described Berlin as &quot;arguably the world capital of underground electronic music&quot;.

===Cuisine===
The cuisine and culinary offerings of Berlin vary greatly. 23 restaurants in Berlin have been awarded one or more Michelin stars in the Michelin Guide of 2021, which ranks the city at the top for the number of restaurants having this distinction in Germany. Berlin is well known for its offerings of vegetarian and vegan cuisine and is home to an innovative entrepreneurial food scene promoting cosmopolitan flavors, local and sustainable ingredients, pop-up street food markets, supper clubs, as well as food festivals, such as Berlin Food Week.

Many local foods originated from north German culinary traditions and include rustic and hearty dishes with pork, goose, fish, peas, beans, cucumbers, or potatoes. Typical Berliner fare include popular street food like the &quot;Currywurst&quot; (which gained popularity with postwar construction workers rebuilding the city), &quot;Buletten&quot; and the &quot;Berliner&quot; donut, known in Berlin as (). German bakeries offering a variety of breads and pastries are widespread. One of Europe&#x27;s largest delicatessen markets is found at the KaDeWe, and among the world&#x27;s largest chocolate stores is &quot;Rausch&quot;.

Berlin is also home to a diverse gastronomy scene reflecting the immigrant history of the city. Turkish and Arab immigrants brought their culinary traditions to the city, such as the lahmajoun and falafel, which have become common fast food staples. The modern fast-food version of the doner kebab sandwich which evolved in Berlin in the 1970s, has since become a favorite dish in Germany and elsewhere in the world. Asian cuisine like Chinese, Vietnamese, Thai, Indian, Korean, and Japanese restaurants, as well as Spanish tapas bars, Italian, and Greek cuisine, can be found in many parts of the city.

=== Recreation ===

Zoologischer Garten Berlin, the older of two zoos in the city, was founded in 1844. It is the most visited zoo in Europe and presents the most diverse range of species in the world. It was the home of the captive-born celebrity polar bear Knut. The city&#x27;s other zoo, Tierpark Friedrichsfelde, was founded in 1955.

Berlin&#x27;s Botanischer Garten includes the Botanic Museum Berlin. With an area of and around 22,000 different plant species, it is one of the largest and most diverse collections of botanical life in the world. Other gardens in the city include the Britzer Garten, and the Gärten der Welt (Gardens of the World) in Marzahn.
The Tiergarten park in Mitte, with landscape design by Peter Joseph Lenné, is one of Berlin&#x27;s largest and most popular parks. In Kreuzberg, the Viktoriapark provides a viewing point over the southern part of inner-city Berlin. Treptower Park, beside the Spree in Treptow, features a large Soviet War Memorial. The Volkspark in Friedrichshain, which opened in 1848, is the oldest park in the city, with monuments, a summer outdoor cinema and several sports areas. Tempelhofer Feld, the site of the former city airport, is the world&#x27;s largest inner-city open space.

Potsdam is on the southwestern periphery of Berlin. The city was a residence of the Prussian kings and the German Kaiser, until 1918. The area around Potsdam in particular Sanssouci is known for a series of interconnected lakes and cultural landmarks. The Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin are the largest World Heritage Site in Germany.

Berlin is also well known for its numerous cafés, street musicians, beach bars along the Spree River, flea markets, boutique shops and pop-up stores, which are a source for recreation and leisure.
== Sports ==


Berlin has established a high-profile as a host city of major international sporting events. The city hosted the 1936 Summer Olympics and was the host city for the 2006 FIFA World Cup final. The World Athletics Championships was held at Olympiastadion in 2009 and 2025. The city hosted the Euroleague Final Four basketball competition in 2009 and 2016, and was one of the hosts of FIBA EuroBasket 2015. In 2015 Berlin was the venue for the UEFA Champions League Final. The city bid to host the 2000 Summer Olympics but lost to Sydney.

Berlin hosted the 2023 Special Olympics World Summer Games. This is the first time Germany has ever hosted the Special Olympics World Games.

The annual Berlin Marathona course that holds the most top-10 world record runsand the ISTAF are well-established athletic events in the city. The Mellowpark in Köpenick is one of the biggest skate and BMX parks in Europe. A fan fest at Brandenburg Gate, which attracts several hundreds of thousands of spectators, has become popular during international football competitions, such as the UEFA European Championship.

Friedrich Ludwig Jahn, who is often hailed as the &quot;father of modern gymnastics&quot;, invented the horizontal bar, parallel bars, rings, and the vault around 1811 in Berlin. Jahn&#x27;s Turners movement, first realized at Volkspark Hasenheide, was the origin of modern sports clubs. In 2013, around 600,000 Berliners were registered in one of the more than 2,300 sport and fitness clubs. The city of Berlin operates more than 60 public indoor and outdoor swimming pools. Berlin is the largest Olympic training center in Germany, with around 500 top athletes (15% of all German top athletes) being based there. Forty-seven elite athletes participated in the 2012 Summer Olympics. Berliners would achieve seven gold, twelve silver, and three bronze medals.

Several professional clubs representing the most important spectator team sports in Germany are based in Berlin. The oldest and most popular first-division team based in Berlin is the football club Hertha BSC. The team represented Berlin as a founding member of the Bundesliga in 1963. Other professional team sport clubs include:
== See also ==
* List of fiction set in Berlin
* List of honorary citizens of Berlin
* List of people from Berlin
* List of songs about Berlin

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* Daum, Andreas. &quot;Kennedy in Berlin&quot;. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008, .
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* berlin.de – official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="0" end="6" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035711" start="16" end="27" title="Capital of Germany" label="the capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="48" end="55" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242225" start="74" end="84" title="List of cities in Germany by population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q727640" start="128" end="146" title="List of cities in the European Union by population within city limits" label="highest population"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308569" start="158" end="169" title="city limits" label="city limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="189" end="203" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="233" end="250" title="states of Germany" label="states of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="262" end="282" title="List of German states by area" label="third smallest state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="344" end="355" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="388" end="395" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q648102" start="531" end="564" title="Berlin/Brandenburg Metropolitan Region" label="Berlin-Brandenburg capital region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641256" start="588" end="599" title="inhabitants" label="inhabitants"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="650" end="656" title="region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q164903" start="667" end="677" title="Rhine-Ruhr" label="Rhine-Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628433" start="701" end="741" title="List of EU metropolitan areas by GDP" label="fifth-biggest metropolitan region by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684" start="806" end="811" title="Spree (river)" label="Spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682" start="840" end="845" title="Havel" label="Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158083" start="872" end="879" title="Spandau" label="Spandau"/>
<link wikidata="Q694789" start="971" end="980" title="Müggelsee" label="Müggelsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863908" start="1046" end="1063" title="List of parks and gardens in Berlin" label="parks and gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="1176" end="1187" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="1231" end="1257" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="1271" end="1289" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1303" end="1316" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="1330" end="1345" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1363" end="1375" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="1463" end="1483" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="1485" end="1498" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699" start="1508" end="1539" title="German revolutions of 1848–1849" label="German revolutions of 1848–1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q694519" start="1558" end="1569" title="Gründerzeit" label="Gründerzeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560929" start="1669" end="1681" title="1920s Berlin" label="1920s Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349904" start="1737" end="1755" title="Aftermath of World War II" label="After World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="1820" end="1831" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="1836" end="1847" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="1864" end="1875" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="1937" end="1941" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="1984" end="2004" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="2183" end="2193" title="world city" label="world city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193497" start="2197" end="2204" title="Culture in Berlin" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101454" start="2206" end="2214" title="Politics of Berlin" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q428492" start="2216" end="2221" title="Media in Berlin" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q320054" start="2235" end="2246" title="Economy of Berlin" label="Its economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="2259" end="2268" title="high tech" label="high tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="2277" end="2291" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="2325" end="2344" title="creative industries" label="creative industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="2346" end="2363" title="startup company" label="startup companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q564839" start="2478" end="2517" title="Transport in Berlin" label="a complex public transportation network"/>
<link wikidata="Q445582" start="2519" end="2536" title="Tourism in Berlin" label="Tourism in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15067276" start="2641" end="2660" title="healthcare industry" label="healthcare industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q327092" start="2662" end="2684" title="biomedical engineering" label="biomedical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="2686" end="2699" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="2705" end="2724" title="automotive industry" label="automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="2730" end="2741" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="2796" end="2825" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Humboldt University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51985" start="2827" end="2856" title="Technische Universität Berlin" label="Technische Universität Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55038" start="2862" end="2891" title="Berlin University of the Arts" label="Berlin University of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q153006" start="2900" end="2925" title="Free University of Berlin" label="Free University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154828" start="2931" end="2955" title="Berlin Zoological Garden" label="Berlin Zoological Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q705676" start="2991" end="3008" title="Babelsberg Studio" label="Babelsberg Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031044" start="3083" end="3107" title="list of films set in Berlin" label="many films set in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="3133" end="3153" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q151963" start="3155" end="3168" title="Museum Island" label="Museum Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q852427" start="3174" end="3213" title="Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin" label="Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19094" start="3223" end="3255" title="Berlin Modernism Housing Estates" label="Berlin Modernism Housing Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q82425" start="3285" end="3301" title="Brandenburg Gate" label="Brandenburg Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q151897" start="3307" end="3325" title="Reichstag building" label="Reichstag building"/>
<link wikidata="Q152252" start="3327" end="3342" title="Potsdamer Platz" label="Potsdamer Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q160700" start="3348" end="3387" title="Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe" label="Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q95517" start="3397" end="3417" title="Berlin Wall Memorial" label="Berlin Wall Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q84071" start="3430" end="3457" title="List of museums and galleries in Berlin" label="numerous museums, galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q174794" start="3548" end="3581" title="Germania Slavica" label="an area formerly settled by Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="3741" end="3751" title="West Slavs" label="West Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q36741" start="3783" end="3791" title="Polabian language" label="Polabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q163884" start="3836" end="3851" title="Boroughs and neighborhoods of Berlin" label="twelve boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q163012" start="3885" end="3891" title="Pankow" label="Pankow"/>
<link wikidata="Q158064" start="3893" end="3912" title="Steglitz-Zehlendorf" label="Steglitz-Zehlendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q119284" start="3914" end="3933" title="Marzahn-Hellersdorf" label="Marzahn-Hellersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q158089" start="3935" end="3951" title="Treptow-Köpenick" label="Treptow-Köpenick"/>
<link wikidata="Q158083" start="3956" end="3963" title="Spandau" label="Spandau"/>
<link wikidata="Q641472" start="4065" end="4077" title="Altglienicke" label="Altglienicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q702517" start="4079" end="4090" title="Alt-Treptow" label="Alt-Treptow"/>
<link wikidata="Q428846" start="4092" end="4097" title="Britz" label="Britz"/>
<link wikidata="Q670751" start="4099" end="4103" title="Buch (Berlin)" label="Buch"/>
<link wikidata="Q644410" start="4105" end="4111" title="Buckow (Berlin)" label="Buckow"/>
<link wikidata="Q515832" start="4113" end="4118" title="Gatow" label="Gatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q700184" start="4120" end="4125" title="Karow (Berlin)" label="Karow"/>
<link wikidata="Q519632" start="4127" end="4133" title="Kladow" label="Kladow"/>
<link wikidata="Q521521" start="4135" end="4143" title="Köpenick" label="Köpenick"/>
<link wikidata="Q671474" start="4145" end="4153" title="Lankwitz" label="Lankwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q563664" start="4155" end="4161" title="Lübars" label="Lübars"/>
<link wikidata="Q563541" start="4163" end="4170" title="Malchow (Berlin)" label="Malchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q702521" start="4172" end="4179" title="Marzahn" label="Marzahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707648" start="4181" end="4187" title="Pankow (locality)" label="Pankow"/>
<link wikidata="Q313186" start="4189" end="4204" title="Prenzlauer Berg" label="Prenzlauer Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q614664" start="4206" end="4211" title="Rudow" label="Rudow"/>
<link wikidata="Q563573" start="4213" end="4224" title="Schmöckwitz" label="Schmöckwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q569827" start="4226" end="4233" title="Spandau (locality)" label="Spandau"/>
<link wikidata="Q644396" start="4235" end="4260" title="Stadtrandsiedlung Malchow" label="Stadtrandsiedlung Malchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q700211" start="4262" end="4270" title="Steglitz" label="Steglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q700055" start="4272" end="4277" title="Tegel" label="Tegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q324402" start="4282" end="4292" title="Zehlendorf (Berlin)" label="Zehlendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="4337" end="4353" title="human settlement" label="human settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q928511" start="4465" end="4484" title="Maglemosian culture" label="Maglemosian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684" start="4532" end="4537" title="Spree (river)" label="Spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682" start="4542" end="4547" title="Havel" label="Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q611017" start="4572" end="4588" title="Lusatian culture" label="Lusatian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="4613" end="4628" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q855704" start="4724" end="4732" title="Semnones" label="Semnones"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="4757" end="4768" title="Burgundians" label="Burgundians"/>
<link wikidata="Q165148" start="4829" end="4836" title="Hevelli" label="Hevelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q164650" start="4841" end="4849" title="Sprevane" label="Sprevane"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="4979" end="5005" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156041" start="5018" end="5033" title="Albert the Bear" label="Albert the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q191360" start="5137" end="5153" title="Foundation (engineering)" label="house foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007986" start="5198" end="5210" title="Berlin-Mitte (electoral district)" label="Berlin Mitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q158083" start="5314" end="5321" title="Spandau" label="Spandau"/>
<link wikidata="Q521521" start="5353" end="5361" title="Köpenick" label="Köpenick"/>
<link wikidata="Q506758" start="5506" end="5518" title="staple right" label="staple right"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="5540" end="5551" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q883276" start="5577" end="5588" title="Via Imperii" label="Via Imperii"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="5635" end="5641" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="5645" end="5653" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q805779" start="5827" end="5832" title="Baltic paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186192" start="5833" end="5844" title="Lithuanians" label="Lithuanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12651299" start="5856" end="5875" title="Raid on Brandenburg" label="Raid on Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="5893" end="5905" title="Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="5992" end="5999" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="6019" end="6033" title="German emperor" label="German emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q701736" start="6045" end="6067" title="Frederick II, Elector of Brandenburg" label="Frederick II Irontooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="6102" end="6114" title="Stadtschloss, Berlin" label="royal palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q702209" start="6391" end="6402" title="John Cicero, Elector of Brandenburg" label="John Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="6477" end="6493" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="6553" end="6561" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="6599" end="6621" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152727" start="6756" end="6773" title="Frederick William I, Elector of Brandenburg" label="Frederick William"/>
<link wikidata="Q166675" start="6844" end="6858" title="George William, Elector of Brandenburg" label="George William"/>
<link wikidata="Q819756" start="6955" end="6971" title="Edict of Potsdam" label="Edict of Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="7028" end="7036" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="7183" end="7190" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="7192" end="7198" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q701614" start="7204" end="7212" title="Archbishopric of Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="7270" end="7284" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q153091" start="7294" end="7310" title="Duchy of Prussia" label="Duchy of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="7347" end="7365" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="7370" end="7407" title="Frederick III, Elector of Brandenburg" label="Frederick III, Elector of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="7433" end="7455" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I in Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120832" start="7513" end="7523" title="Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="7867" end="7886" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="7973" end="7990" title="the Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="8034" end="8055" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q605977" start="8116" end="8143" title="War of the Fourth Coalition" label="War of the Fourth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="8145" end="8163" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079568" start="8164" end="8191" title="Fall of Berlin (1806)" label="marched into Berlin in 1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q700264" start="8275" end="8298" title="Province of Brandenburg" label="Province of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="8305" end="8326" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q675187" start="8622" end="8629" title="Wedding (Berlin)" label="Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q699800" start="8631" end="8637" title="Moabit" label="Moabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="8740" end="8753" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="8920" end="8940" title="German Expressionism" label="German Expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9061" end="9072" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="9084" end="9092" title="Weimar Republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q70581" start="9111" end="9130" title="Philipp Scheidemann" label="Philipp Scheidemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q151897" start="9138" end="9156" title="Reichstag (building)" label="Reichstag building"/>
<link wikidata="Q56041" start="9171" end="9189" title="Greater Berlin Act" label="Greater Berlin Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699337" start="9427" end="9437" title="Weimar culture" label="Weimar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="9544" end="9560" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="9777" end="9792" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="9865" end="9888" title="Nobel Prize for Physics" label="Nobel Prize for Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="9908" end="9920" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="9929" end="9939" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="9940" end="9953" title="Nazis came to power" label="came to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="10017" end="10023" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q287025" start="10250" end="10262" title="Nazi architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="10281" end="10293" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156908" start="10363" end="10385" title="Germania (city)" label="World Capital Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="10586" end="10599" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q154498" start="10673" end="10705" title="Sachsenhausen concentration camp" label="Sachsenhausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583015" start="10753" end="10760" title="Jewish ghettos established by Nazi Germany" label="ghettos"/>
<link wikidata="Q327895" start="10766" end="10770" title="Łódź Ghetto" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="10779" end="10792" title="concentration camp" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="10797" end="10815" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="10825" end="10834" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="10855" end="10875" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q151374" start="10890" end="10905" title="Olympiastadion (Berlin)" label="Olympic stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10924" end="10936" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="10988" end="11001" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q154498" start="11028" end="11060" title="Sachsenhausen concentration camp" label="Sachsenhausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q840648" start="11334" end="11339" title="Sinti" label="Sinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="11369" end="11385" title="Romani Holocaust" label="Romani Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597183" start="11402" end="11414" title="Stalag III-D" label="Stalag III-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q321177" start="11415" end="11435" title="German prisoner-of-war camps in World War II" label="prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="11574" end="11590" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="11738" end="11767" title="end of World War II in Europe" label="end of World War II in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="11922" end="11945" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="Allied-occupied Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="11965" end="11987" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="12047" end="12058" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12070" end="12082" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="12090" end="12101" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12334" end="12346" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="12359" end="12374" title="Berlin Blockade" label="Berlin Blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="12480" end="12494" title="Berlin airlift" label="Berlin airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="12691" end="12703" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="12840" end="12856" title="Marxist–Leninist" label="Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="12902" end="12914" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="13222" end="13230" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="13511" end="13515" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="13558" end="13569" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q68689" start="13633" end="13651" title="Checkpoint Charlie" label="Checkpoint Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="13788" end="13803" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q443" start="13819" end="13839" title="Ich bin ein Berliner" label="Ich bin ein Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q313189" start="13886" end="13896" title="Schöneberg" label="Schöneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q519875" start="14251" end="14271" title="Four Power Agreement on Berlin" label="Four-Power Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="14441" end="14457" title="Fall of the Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q313746" start="14523" end="14540" title="East Side Gallery" label="East Side Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="14629" end="14638" title="German reunification" label="reunified"/>
<link wikidata="Q60957" start="15172" end="15188" title="Eberhard Diepgen" label="Eberhard Diepgen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15458" end="15474" title="German reunification#Unified Berlin" label="reunified Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="15621" end="15630" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q314701" start="15651" end="15673" title="Decision on the Capital of Germany" label="voted to move the seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530" start="15775" end="15791" title="Gerhard Schröder" label="Gerhard Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q163884" start="15794" end="15834" title="Berlin&amp;#x27;s 2001 administrative reform" label="Berlin&amp;#x27;s 2001 administrative reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q268567" start="15911" end="15931" title="2006 FIFA World Cup Final" label="FIFA World Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q28036573" start="16070" end="16091" title="2016 Berlin truck attack" label="2016 terrorist attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="16102" end="16106" title="ISIL" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q153951" start="16176" end="16206" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q327656" start="16405" end="16434" title="Far-right politics in Germany (1945-present)" label="far-right politics in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q160556" start="16437" end="16463" title="Berlin Brandenburg Airport" label="Berlin Brandenburg Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9688" start="16600" end="16613" title="Tegel Airport" label="Tegel Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="16690" end="16707" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9689" start="16773" end="16791" title="Schönefeld Airport" label="Schönefeld Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q20196262" start="17118" end="17132" title="Humboldt Forum" label="Humboldt Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="17169" end="17182" title="Berlin Palace" label="Berlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="17535" end="17546" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="17623" end="17632" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="18363" end="18374" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="18740" end="18750" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q560549" start="18769" end="18792" title="Northern European Plain" label="Northern European Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="18909" end="18923" title="glacial valley" label="glacial valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q268651" start="18942" end="18956" title="Barnim Plateau" label="Barnim Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q316883" start="18978" end="18992" title="Teltow plateau" label="Teltow plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q14664222" start="19078" end="19100" title="Weichselian glaciation" label="Weichselian glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684" start="19106" end="19111" title="Spree (river)" label="Spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682" start="19215" end="19220" title="Havel" label="Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908364" start="19375" end="19389" title="Großer Wannsee" label="Großer Wannsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q694789" start="19466" end="19482" title="Müggelsee" label="Großer Müggelsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q158876" start="19635" end="19648" title="Reinickendorf" label="Reinickendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q163012" start="19653" end="19659" title="Pankow" label="Pankow"/>
<link wikidata="Q158095" start="19717" end="19743" title="Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf" label="Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q158064" start="19745" end="19764" title="Steglitz-Zehlendorf" label="Steglitz-Zehlendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q158106" start="19766" end="19786" title="Tempelhof-Schöneberg" label="Tempelhof-Schöneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071168" start="19792" end="19800" title="Neukölln" label="Neukölln"/>
<link wikidata="Q564884" start="20122" end="20133" title="Teufelsberg" label="Teufelsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q451104" start="20217" end="20228" title="Müggelberge" label="Müggelberge"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="20360" end="20375" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="20377" end="20383" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="20417" end="20442" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="20718" end="20733" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="20991" end="21044" title="Urban heat island" label="heat stored by the city&amp;#x27;s buildings and pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q600402" start="21326" end="21338" title="Great Frost of 1709" label="January 1709"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="21651" end="21668" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q694519" start="21847" end="21858" title="Gründerzeit" label="Gründerzeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19094" start="21956" end="21975" title="Berlin Modernism Housing Estates" label="modern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15212263" start="21996" end="22029" title="bombing of Berlin in World War II" label="bombing of Berlin in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370468" start="22205" end="22218" title="Reconstruction (architecture)" label="reconstructed"/>
<link wikidata="Q699504" start="22240" end="22259" title="Forum Fridericianum" label="Forum Fridericianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q312576" start="22282" end="22300" title="Berlin State Opera" label="Berlin State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q154996" start="22302" end="22323" title="Charlottenburg Palace" label="Charlottenburg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q170103" start="22325" end="22339" title="Gendarmenmarkt" label="Gendarmenmarkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q323181" start="22341" end="22358" title="Alte Kommandantur" label="Alte Kommandantur"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="22375" end="22386" title="City Palace, Berlin" label="City Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840899" start="22393" end="22420" title="list of tallest buildings in Berlin" label="tallest buildings in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152252" start="22472" end="22487" title="Potsdamer Platz" label="Potsdamer Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q320676" start="22489" end="22498" title="City West" label="City West"/>
<link wikidata="Q152783" start="22504" end="22518" title="Alexanderplatz" label="Alexanderplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q694020" start="22603" end="22620" title="Großer Tiergarten" label="Großer Tiergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q151356" start="22739" end="22750" title="Fernsehturm Berlin" label="Fernsehturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q152783" start="22765" end="22779" title="Alexanderplatz" label="Alexanderplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q163966" start="22783" end="22788" title="Mitte" label="Mitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q683226" start="22999" end="23014" title="Karl-Marx-Allee" label="Karl-Marx-Allee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134824" start="23096" end="23116" title="Socialist Classicism" label="Socialist Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155210" start="23153" end="23166" title="Rotes Rathaus" label="Rotes Rathaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q650657" start="23247" end="23260" title="Neptunbrunnen (Berlin)" label="Neptunbrunnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148030" start="23307" end="23314" title="Triton (mythology)" label="Tritons"/>
<link wikidata="Q207174" start="23316" end="23331" title="personification" label="personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954" start="23371" end="23378" title="Neptune (mythology)" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q703927" start="23407" end="23421" title="Nikolaiviertel" label="Nikolaiviertel"/>
<link wikidata="Q82425" start="23482" end="23498" title="Brandenburg Gate" label="Brandenburg Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q151897" start="23623" end="23641" title="Reichstag building" label="Reichstag building"/>
<link wikidata="Q104898" start="23730" end="23743" title="Norman Foster (architect)" label="Norman Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q313746" start="23911" end="23928" title="East Side Gallery" label="East Side Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q170103" start="24111" end="24125" title="Gendarmenmarkt" label="Gendarmenmarkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="24131" end="24143" title="neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q315694" start="24334" end="24351" title="Französischer Dom" label="Französischer Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q315644" start="24390" end="24403" title="Deutscher Dom" label="Deutscher Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q151963" start="24515" end="24528" title="Museum Island" label="Museum Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684" start="24536" end="24547" title="Spree (river)" label="River Spree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24555" end="24567" title="#Museums" label="five museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="24601" end="24607" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q836449" start="24608" end="24622" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Germany" label="World Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q664484" start="24693" end="24712" title="James Simon Gallery" label="James Simon Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="24748" end="24761" title="Berlin Palace" label="Berlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q702512" start="24828" end="24838" title="Lustgarten" label="Lustgarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q154563" start="24853" end="24869" title="Berlin Cathedral" label="Berlin Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="24953" end="24978" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170123" start="25067" end="25094" title="St. Hedwig&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St. Hedwig&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q160899" start="25139" end="25155" title="Unter den Linden" label="Unter den Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="25337" end="25356" title="Humboldt University" label="Humboldt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q316893" start="25367" end="25382" title="Friedrichstraße" label="Friedrichstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q702442" start="25429" end="25444" title="Golden Twenties" label="Golden Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q152252" start="25536" end="25551" title="Potsdamer Platz" label="Potsdamer Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="25602" end="25606" title="Berlin Wall" label="Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q165631" start="25686" end="25700" title="Gemäldegalerie, Berlin" label="Gemäldegalerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q32659772" start="25724" end="25744" title="Neue Nationalgalerie" label="Neue Nationalgalerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q32653910" start="25753" end="25774" title="Berliner Philharmonie" label="Berliner Philharmonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q160700" start="25780" end="25819" title="Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe" label="Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="25823" end="25832" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q648165" start="25877" end="25893" title="Hackescher Markt" label="Hackescher Markt"/>
<link wikidata="Q736425" start="26005" end="26019" title="Hackesche Höfe" label="Hackesche Höfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q246474" start="26116" end="26129" title="New Synagogue, Berlin" label="New Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q317094" start="26168" end="26187" title="Straße des 17. Juni" label="Straße des 17. Juni"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="26309" end="26349" title="Uprising of 1953 in East Germany" label="uprisings in East Berlin of 17 June 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q154987" start="26459" end="26470" title="Berlin Victory Column" label="Siegessäule"/>
<link wikidata="Q160272" start="26647" end="26661" title="Kurfürstendamm" label="Kurfürstendamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q153951" start="26721" end="26751" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q698370" start="26774" end="26790" title="Breitscheidplatz" label="Breitscheidplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q686011" start="26890" end="26896" title="KaDeWe" label="KaDeWe"/>
<link wikidata="Q695194" start="26968" end="26986" title="Rathaus Schöneberg" label="Rathaus Schöneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="26994" end="27009" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q443" start="27032" end="27052" title="Ich bin ein Berliner" label="Ich bin ein Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q158106" start="27074" end="27094" title="Tempelhof-Schöneberg" label="Tempelhof-Schöneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q317091" start="27117" end="27132" title="Bellevue Palace (Germany)" label="Bellevue Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q154996" start="27175" end="27196" title="Charlottenburg Palace" label="Charlottenburg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q699724" start="27292" end="27307" title="Funkturm Berlin" label="Funkturm Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q695082" start="27553" end="27567" title="Oberbaumbrücke" label="Oberbaumbrücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q317056" start="27666" end="27680" title="Friedrichshain" label="Friedrichshain"/>
<link wikidata="Q308928" start="27685" end="27694" title="Kreuzberg" label="Kreuzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q68646" start="27741" end="27754" title="Berlin U-Bahn" label="Berlin U-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q695863" start="27791" end="27803" title="brick gothic" label="brick gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="27943" end="27951" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q456362" start="28014" end="28044" title="Berlin border crossings" label="checkpoint and border crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q727640" start="28530" end="28555" title="Largest cities of the European Union by population within city limits" label="most populous city proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="28563" end="28577" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175539" start="28669" end="28690" title="Larger Urban Zones" label="functional urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q648102" start="28740" end="28773" title="Berlin/Brandenburg Metropolitan Region" label="Berlin-Brandenburg capital region"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="29362" end="29377" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q819756" start="29417" end="29433" title="Edict of Potsdam" label="Edict of Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q56041" start="29537" end="29555" title="Greater Berlin Act" label="Greater Berlin Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="29890" end="29897" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q704608" start="29902" end="29916" title="Turks in Germany" label="Turkish German"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="30099" end="30111" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021324" start="30126" end="30133" title="History of Germans in Russia and the Soviet Union" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q387659" start="30390" end="30411" title="Afrikanisches Viertel" label="Afrikanisches Viertel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163966" start="31073" end="31078" title="Mitte" label="Mitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071168" start="31080" end="31088" title="Neukölln" label="Neukölln"/>
<link wikidata="Q158893" start="31093" end="31117" title="Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg" label="Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857240" start="31301" end="31320" title="2015 European migrant crisis" label="2015 refugee crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="31470" end="31502" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="31690" end="31700" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q918002" start="31925" end="31941" title="cultural capital" label="cultural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="32047" end="32069" title="West Germanic languages" label="West Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="32138" end="32151" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q629071" start="32243" end="32259" title="working language" label="working language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="32268" end="32287" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q648102" start="32381" end="32410" title="Berlin/Brandenburg Metropolitan Region" label="surrounding metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q488584" start="32433" end="32447" title="Brandenburgisch dialect" label="Brandenburgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q207101" start="32493" end="32502" title="sociolect" label="sociolect"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="32592" end="32607" title="standard German" label="standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="33404" end="33414" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q565744" start="33415" end="33435" title="Landeskirche" label="regional church body"/>
<link wikidata="Q524096" start="33440" end="33510" title="Evangelical Church of Berlin-Brandenburg-Silesian Upper Lusatia" label="Evangelical Church of Berlin-Brandenburg-Silesian Upper Lusatia (EKBO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q966577" start="33513" end="33526" title="united church" label="united church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="33552" end="33586" title="Protestant Church in Germany" label="Protestant Church in Germany (EKD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q314309" start="33598" end="33643" title="Union of Protestant Churches in the EKD" label="Union of Protestant Churches in the EKD (UEK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="33747" end="33768" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="33906" end="33922" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34212" end="34222" title="Church tax#Germany" label="church tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="34404" end="34410" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q475454" start="34433" end="34453" title="Amt für Statistik Berlin-Brandenburg" label="Office of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10189" start="34561" end="34577" title="Der Tagesspiegel" label="Der Tagesspiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="34630" end="34637" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814239" start="34769" end="34825" title="Member states of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation" label="Member states of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q264971" start="35101" end="35136" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Berlin" label="Roman Catholic archbishop of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q524096" start="35141" end="35145" title="Evangelical Church of Berlin-Brandenburg-Silesian Upper Lusatia" label="EKBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q242758" start="35340" end="35358" title="Bulgarian Orthodox Church" label="Bulgarian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414914" start="35563" end="35590" title="List of places of worship in Berlin" label="places of worship in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q700036" start="35596" end="35635" title="Independent Evangelical Lutheran Church" label="Independent Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="35698" end="35705" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005073" start="35728" end="35785" title="Union of Evangelical Free Church Congregations in Germany" label="Union of Evangelical Free Church Congregations in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q512232" start="35791" end="35811" title="New Apostolic Church" label="New Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="35818" end="35834" title="United Methodist" label="United Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682820" start="35888" end="35917" title="Church of Christ, Scientist" label="Churches of Christ, Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="35966" end="36013" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="36018" end="36030" title="Old Catholic" label="Old Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="36046" end="36054" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="36130" end="36138" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="36155" end="36160" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="36246" end="36266" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="36324" end="36341" title="states of Germany" label="states of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q640859" start="36394" end="36421" title="Abgeordnetenhaus von Berlin" label="Abgeordnetenhaus von Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q540130" start="36562" end="36578" title="Senate of Berlin" label="Senate of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q641159" start="36638" end="36663" title="Governing Mayor of Berlin" label="Governing Mayor of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="37394" end="37417" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="37428" end="37436" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q821350" start="37495" end="37514" title="Berlin state election, 2001" label="2001 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539361" start="37543" end="37562" title="Berlin state election, 2006" label="2006 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19787659" start="37573" end="37592" title="Berlin state election, 2016" label="2016 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q111584160" start="37603" end="37622" title="2023 Berlin state election" label="2023 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q155210" start="38090" end="38119" title="Rotes Rathaus" label="Rotes Rathaus (Red City Hall)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721361" start="38162" end="38172" title="Kai Wegner" label="Kai Wegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q584571" start="38716" end="38720" title="Kiez" label="Kiez"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="39569" end="39582" title="Sister city" label="Town twinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="39591" end="39602" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="39681" end="39692" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="39742" end="39762" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q25223" start="39848" end="39868" title="President of Germany" label="President of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="39918" end="39937" title="Grundgesetz" label="German constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q317091" start="39971" end="39986" title="Bellevue Palace (Germany)" label="Bellevue Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901835" start="40002" end="40006" title="Seat of government" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="40014" end="40031" title="Chancellor of Germany (1949–)" label="German Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q320459" start="40064" end="40084" title="Federal Chancellery (Berlin)" label="Chancellery building"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="40150" end="40159" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q151897" start="40208" end="40226" title="Reichstag building" label="Reichstag building"/>
<link wikidata="Q146138" start="40289" end="40298" title="Bundesrat of Germany" label="Bundesrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="40359" end="40370" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="40379" end="40393" title="federalism" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="40401" end="40422" title="States of Germany" label="16 constituent states"/>
<link wikidata="Q658078" start="40486" end="40509" title="Prussian House of Lords" label="Prussian House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q313827" start="40645" end="40655" title="Cabinet of Germany" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q537250" start="40785" end="40797" title="federal city" label="federal city"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="40798" end="40802" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q126911" start="40840" end="40864" title="Berlin-Bonn Act" label="Discussions about moving"/>
<link wikidata="Q56034" start="40931" end="40953" title="Foreign Office (Germany)" label="Federal Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q493353" start="40992" end="40999" title="Federal Ministry of Defence (Germany)" label="Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q498251" start="41001" end="41032" title="Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection" label="Justice and Consumer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q499118" start="41034" end="41041" title="Federal Ministry of Finance (Germany)" label="Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q502698" start="41043" end="41051" title="Federal Ministry of the Interior (Germany)" label="Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q488589" start="41053" end="41080" title="Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (Germany)" label="Economic Affairs and Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q491578" start="41082" end="41106" title="Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs" label="Labor and Social Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q166020" start="41108" end="41156" title="Federal Ministry of Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth" label="Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q493344" start="41158" end="41209" title="Federal Ministry of the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety" label="Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q699656" start="41211" end="41231" title="Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture" label="Food and Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q684357" start="41233" end="41269" title="Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development" label="Economic Cooperation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q491566" start="41271" end="41277" title="Federal Ministry of Health (Germany)" label="Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q491637" start="41279" end="41315" title="Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure" label="Transport and Digital Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q492234" start="41320" end="41342" title="Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Germany)" label="Education and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="41864" end="41878" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="42595" end="42605" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="42607" end="42613" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q552581" start="42619" end="42622" title="SAP" label="SAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="42785" end="42793" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351664" start="42864" end="42874" title="investment (macroeconomics)" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="43048" end="43065" title="Entrepreneurship" label="business founders"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="43128" end="43145" title="Startup company" label="startup companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q162684" start="43292" end="43299" title="Charité" label="Charité"/>
<link wikidata="Q878059" start="43304" end="43312" title="Vivantes" label="Vivantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q99633" start="43385" end="43388" title="Berliner Verkehrsbetriebe" label="BVG"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="43390" end="43397" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9396" start="43402" end="43418" title="Deutsche Telekom" label="Deutsche Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q621102" start="43432" end="43442" title="Fortune Global 500" label="Global 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q155718" start="43447" end="43450" title="DAX" label="DAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204510" start="43577" end="43592" title="Deutsche Wohnen" label="Deutsche Wohnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384493" start="43630" end="43643" title="Delivery Hero" label="Delivery Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q163560" start="43717" end="43730" title="Axel Springer SE" label="Axel Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q595622" start="43746" end="43750" title="MDAX" label="MDAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q136570" start="43764" end="43771" title="Zalando" label="Zalando"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014836" start="43776" end="43786" title="HelloFresh" label="HelloFresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="43944" end="43969" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496677" start="43971" end="43997" title="Securing Energy for Europe" label="Securing Energy for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="43999" end="44008" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="44010" end="44016" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="44018" end="44022" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q154037" start="44027" end="44040" title="TotalEnergies" label="TotalEnergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307760" start="44055" end="44078" title="Sparkassen-Finanzgruppe" label="Sparkassen-Finanzgruppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q251927" start="44093" end="44104" title="public bank" label="public bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009029" start="44227" end="44287" title="Bundesverband der Deutschen Volksbanken und Raiffeisenbanken" label="Bundesverband der Deutschen Volksbanken und Raiffeisenbanken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203255" start="44401" end="44420" title="Deutsche Kreditbank" label="Deutsche Kreditbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q319888" start="44422" end="44439" title="Landesbank Berlin" label="Landesbank Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q821289" start="44444" end="44454" title="Berlin Hyp" label="Berlin Hyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="44457" end="44476" title="Mercedes-Benz Group" label="Mercedes-Benz Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q249173" start="44500" end="44522" title="BMW Motorrad" label="BMW builds motorcycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q478214" start="44578" end="44583" title="Tesla, Inc." label="Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q622449" start="44650" end="44666" title="Grünheide (Mark)" label="Grünheide (Mark)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="44713" end="44718" title="Bayer" label="Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q821052" start="44723" end="44736" title="Berlin Chemie" label="Berlin Chemie"/>
<link wikidata="Q152252" start="45149" end="45164" title="Potsdamer Platz" label="Potsdamer Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q82425" start="45166" end="45183" title="Brandenburg Gate" label="Brandenburger Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="45185" end="45200" title="Berlin Wall" label="the Berlin wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q152783" start="45202" end="45216" title="Alexanderplatz" label="Alexanderplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q151963" start="45218" end="45230" title="Museum Island" label="Museumsinsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q151356" start="45232" end="45243" title="Fernsehturm Berlin" label="Fernsehturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q313746" start="45249" end="45266" title="East Side Gallery" label="East-Side Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q154996" start="45268" end="45290" title="Charlottenburg Palace" label="Schloss-Charlottenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154828" start="45292" end="45311" title="Berlin Zoological Garden" label="Zoologischer Garten"/>
<link wikidata="Q154987" start="45313" end="45324" title="Berlin Victory Column" label="Siegessäule"/>
<link wikidata="Q95517" start="45326" end="45353" title="Gedenkstätte Berliner Mauer" label="Gedenkstätte Berliner Mauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q639887" start="45355" end="45364" title="Mauerpark" label="Mauerpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q163255" start="45366" end="45382" title="Berlin-Dahlem Botanical Garden and Botanical Museum" label="Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q315694" start="45384" end="45401" title="French Cathedral, Berlin" label="Französischer Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q315644" start="45403" end="45416" title="Deutscher Dom" label="Deutscher Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q160700" start="45421" end="45438" title="Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe" label="Holocaust-Mahnmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288160" start="45589" end="45638" title="International Congress and Convention Association" label="International Congress and Convention Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q708065" start="45862" end="45874" title="Messe Berlin" label="Messe Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q695795" start="46086" end="46089" title="IFA Berlin" label="IFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273610" start="46123" end="46136" title="Magnetophon" label="tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q70999" start="46151" end="46190" title="Manfred von Ardenne" label="completely electronic television system"/>
<link wikidata="Q785990" start="46232" end="46251" title="ILA Berlin Air Show" label="ILA Berlin Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892425" start="46257" end="46276" title="Berlin Fashion Week" label="Berlin Fashion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q493494" start="46361" end="46371" title="Berlin International Green Week" label="Green Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q537789" start="46425" end="46434" title="InnoTrans" label="InnoTrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q387339" start="46453" end="46456" title="ITB Berlin" label="ITB"/>
<link wikidata="Q657974" start="46501" end="46506" title="Venus Award" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="46625" end="46656" title="Creative industries" label="creative arts and entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152817" start="46787" end="46794" title="German fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="46825" end="46832" title="research and development" label="R&amp;amp;D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927926" start="46859" end="46870" title="Video gaming in Germany" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q622439" start="46985" end="46989" title="Small and medium-sized enterprises" label="SMEs"/>
<link wikidata="Q688510" start="47189" end="47209" title="Cinema of Germany" label="German film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q705676" start="47414" end="47432" title="Babelsberg Studios" label="Babelsberg Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q41468" start="47460" end="47463" title="Universum Film AG" label="UFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="47490" end="47497" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q879171" start="47528" end="47547" title="Deutsche Filmakademie" label="German Film Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377331" start="47598" end="47619" title="European Film Academy" label="European Film Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157142" start="47959" end="47967" title="Die Zeit" label="Die Zeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19899" start="48274" end="48277" title="Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg" label="RBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297082" start="48348" end="48358" title="MTV Europe" label="MTV Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959672" start="48363" end="48367" title="Welt (German TV channel)" label="Welt"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="48409" end="48423" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="48537" end="48540" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q155702" start="48545" end="48548" title="RTL Television" label="RTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q665319" start="48633" end="48643" title="broadsheet" label="broadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q700856" start="48652" end="48671" title="Berliner Morgenpost" label="Berliner Morgenpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q10185" start="48685" end="48701" title="Berliner Zeitung" label="Berliner Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q10189" start="48715" end="48731" title="Der Tagesspiegel" label="Der Tagesspiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="48756" end="48764" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q29872" start="48871" end="48879" title="Die Welt" label="Die Welt"/>
<link wikidata="Q158547" start="48893" end="48910" title="Neues Deutschland" label="Neues Deutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161423" start="48928" end="48944" title="Die Tageszeitung" label="Die Tageszeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q321463" start="48958" end="48970" title="The Berliner (magazine)" label="The Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q570344" start="49047" end="49067" title="La Gazette de Berlin" label="La Gazette de Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q98818" start="49177" end="49194" title="Walter de Gruyter" label="Walter de Gruyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q163560" start="49196" end="49204" title="Axel Springer AG" label="Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q301609" start="49253" end="49261" title="Suhrkamp" label="Suhrkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391599" start="49408" end="49414" title="Mercer (consulting firm)" label="Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q646749" start="49515" end="49534" title="Monocle (UK magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Monocle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="49609" end="49636" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="50155" end="50163" title="Autobahn" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378400" start="50446" end="50458" title="bicycle lane" label="bicycle lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q515449" start="51019" end="51031" title="Regionalbahn" label="Regionalbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="51205" end="51213" title="taxicabs" label="taxicabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q27973" start="51265" end="51285" title="Ridesharing company" label="sharing cab services"/>
<link wikidata="Q315451" start="51449" end="51483" title="Verkehrsverbund Berlin-Brandenburg" label="Verkehrsverbund Berlin-Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="51502" end="51513" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="51525" end="51535" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097" start="51541" end="51560" title="Berlin Hauptbahnhof" label="Berlin Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643599" start="51601" end="51616" title="grade separation" label="grade-separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9322" start="51648" end="51661" title="Deutsche Bahn" label="Deutsche Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="51682" end="51699" title="Intercity-Express" label="Intercity-Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="51742" end="51749" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="51751" end="51757" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="51759" end="51766" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="51768" end="51777" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="51783" end="51800" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684" start="51831" end="51836" title="Spree (river)" label="Spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682" start="51845" end="51850" title="Havel" label="Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525783" start="51980" end="51989" title="Westhafen" label="Westhafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q699800" start="52021" end="52027" title="Moabit" label="Moabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q493016" start="52174" end="52195" title="intercity bus service" label="intercity bus service"/>
<link wikidata="Q190380" start="52372" end="52403" title="Zentraler Omnibusbahnhof Berlin" label="Zentraler Omnibusbahnhof Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q99633" start="52453" end="52478" title="Berliner Verkehrsbetriebe" label="Berliner Verkehrsbetriebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9322" start="52518" end="52531" title="Deutsche Bahn" label="Deutsche Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q160556" start="52974" end="53000" title="Berlin Brandenburg Airport" label="Berlin Brandenburg Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9688" start="53157" end="53164" title="Berlin Tegel Airport" label="Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9689" start="53175" end="53182" title="Berlin Schönefeld Airport" label="Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="53909" end="53918" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q168836" start="53923" end="53932" title="Eurowings" label="Eurowings"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="54005" end="54012" title="easyJet" label="easyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="54017" end="54024" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9686" start="54076" end="54093" title="Tempelhof Airport" label="Tempelhof Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136075" start="54394" end="54418" title="Pneumatic tube" label="pneumatic postal network"/>
<link wikidata="Q157675" start="54909" end="54919" title="Vattenfall" label="Vattenfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343030" start="54949" end="54954" title="GASAG" label="GASAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="55095" end="55106" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861988" start="55119" end="55160" title="List of power stations in Germany" label="largest power plants measured by capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="55335" end="55348" title="power station" label="power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="55359" end="55370" title="electricity generation" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="55375" end="55386" title="Heat" label="useful heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="55694" end="55702" title="Autobahn" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q228061" start="55728" end="55755" title="Berlin 380-kV electric line" label="Berlin 380-kV electric line"/>
<link wikidata="Q76432" start="56003" end="56017" title="Rudolf Virchow" label="Rudolf Virchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="56063" end="56074" title="Robert Koch" label="Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q162684" start="56220" end="56227" title="Charité" label="Charité"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813474" start="56280" end="56299" title="university hospital" label="university hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q76425" start="56440" end="56456" title="Emil von Behring" label="Emil von Behring"/>
<link wikidata="Q57089" start="56474" end="56486" title="Paul Ehrlich" label="Paul Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="56753" end="56771" title="digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352150" start="56806" end="56812" title="DVB-T2" label="DVB-T2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="56836" end="56846" title="video compression" label="compressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q173114" start="56847" end="56860" title="digital audio" label="digital audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q173131" start="56862" end="56875" title="digital video" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194435" start="56897" end="56918" title="MPEG transport stream" label="MPEG transport stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="56970" end="56982" title="Wireless LAN" label="Wireless LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="57164" end="57168" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="57178" end="57181" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="57234" end="57242" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401704" start="57244" end="57263" title="Telekom Deutschland" label="Telekom Deutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401561" start="57268" end="57270" title="Telefónica Germany" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q318186" start="57840" end="57870" title="Französisches Gymnasium Berlin" label="Französisches Gymnasium Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672802" start="57982" end="58004" title="John F. Kennedy School, Berlin" label="John F. Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q324402" start="58051" end="58061" title="Zehlendorf (Berlin)" label="Zehlendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="58170" end="58175" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="58188" end="58203" title="Classical Greek" label="Classical Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q153006" start="58864" end="58888" title="Free University of Berlin" label="Freie Universität Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="58972" end="59002" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Humboldt Universität zu Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51985" start="59053" end="59082" title="Technische Universität Berlin" label="Technische Universität Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162684" start="59133" end="59140" title="Charité" label="Charité"/>
<link wikidata="Q85746670" start="59235" end="59261" title="Berlin University Alliance" label="Berlin University Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q705657" start="59299" end="59318" title="German Universities Excellence Initiative" label="Excellence Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55038" start="59357" end="59379" title="Berlin University of the Arts" label="Universität der Künste"/>
<link wikidata="Q569528" start="59427" end="59438" title="ESMT Berlin" label="ESMT Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435271" start="59492" end="59512" title="triple accreditation" label="triple accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q317156" start="59518" end="59531" title="Hertie School" label="Hertie School"/>
<link wikidata="Q464443" start="59636" end="59670" title="Berlin School of Economics and Law" label="Berlin School of Economics and Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q851413" start="59719" end="59771" title="Berliner Hochschule für Technik" label="Berlin University of Applied Sciences and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q875138" start="59806" end="59843" title="HTW Berlin" label="Hochschule für Technik und Wirtschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q161057" start="60042" end="60060" title="Fraunhofer Society" label="Fraunhofer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="60066" end="60102" title="DLR Institute for Planetary Research" label="DLR Institute for Planetary Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q680090" start="60108" end="60127" title="Leibniz Association" label="Leibniz Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q679913" start="60133" end="60154" title="Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres" label="Helmholtz Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q158085" start="60164" end="60182" title="Max Planck Society" label="Max Planck Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="60320" end="60344" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q993120" start="60430" end="60477" title="European Institute of Innovation and Technology" label="European Institute of Innovation and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="60658" end="60665" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9396" start="60667" end="60683" title="Deutsche Telekom" label="Deutsche Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q552581" start="60689" end="60692" title="SAP SE" label="SAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101364" start="60761" end="60769" title="List of technology centers" label="clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537326" start="60782" end="60787" title="WISTA" label="WISTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q599941" start="60791" end="60807" title="Berlin-Adlershof" label="Berlin-Adlershof"/>
<link wikidata="Q170109" start="60957" end="60983" title="Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin" label="Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160899" start="61067" end="61083" title="Unter den Linden" label="Unter den Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q754454" start="61133" end="61145" title="ResearchGate" label="ResearchGate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="61725" end="61746" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="61875" end="61881" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139352" start="61907" end="61930" title="Creative Cities Network" label="Creative Cities Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q127021" start="62017" end="62018" title="M (1931 film)" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283810" start="62032" end="62047" title="One, Two, Three" label="One, Two, Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q918363" start="62061" end="62068" title="Cabaret (1972 film)" label="Cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q698644" start="62082" end="62095" title="Christiane F. (film)" label="Christiane F."/>
<link wikidata="Q1773078" start="62109" end="62119" title="Possession (1981 film)" label="Possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q204398" start="62133" end="62142" title="Octopussy" label="Octopussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156911" start="62156" end="62171" title="Wings of Desire" label="Wings of Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q468697" start="62185" end="62197" title="Run Lola Run" label="Run Lola Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q868683" start="62211" end="62229" title="Bourne (film series)" label="The Bourne Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154817" start="62243" end="62259" title="Good Bye, Lenin!" label="Good Bye, Lenin!"/>
<link wikidata="Q153882" start="62273" end="62292" title="The Lives of Others" label="The Lives of Others"/>
<link wikidata="Q153723" start="62306" end="62326" title="Inglourious Basterds" label="Inglourious Basterds"/>
<link wikidata="Q170268" start="62340" end="62345" title="Hanna (film)" label="Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q158759" start="62359" end="62366" title="Unknown (2011 film)" label="Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18067135" start="62383" end="62398" title="Bridge of Spies (film)" label="Bridge of Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q151963" start="62522" end="62535" title="Museum Island" label="Museum Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="62548" end="62567" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q156722" start="62784" end="62796" title="Altes Museum" label="Altes Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q157316" start="62830" end="62842" title="Neues Museum" label="Neues Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q582172" start="62863" end="62886" title="Nefertiti Bust" label="bust of Queen Nefertiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q162111" start="62888" end="62908" title="Alte Nationalgalerie" label="Alte Nationalgalerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q157298" start="62910" end="62925" title="Pergamon Museum" label="Pergamon Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q157825" start="62931" end="62942" title="Bode Museum" label="Bode Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q165631" start="63043" end="63057" title="Gemäldegalerie, Berlin" label="Gemäldegalerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q32659772" start="63180" end="63200" title="Neue Nationalgalerie" label="Neue Nationalgalerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508" start="63233" end="63257" title="Ludwig Mies van der Rohe" label="Ludwig Mies van der Rohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q584756" start="63310" end="63327" title="Hamburger Bahnhof" label="Hamburger Bahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q699800" start="63332" end="63338" title="Moabit" label="Moabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q688335" start="63413" end="63442" title="Deutsches Historisches Museum" label="Deutsches Historisches Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q811389" start="63540" end="63555" title="Bauhaus Archive" label="Bauhaus Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="63607" end="63614" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q641630" start="63623" end="63639" title="Museum Berggruen" label="Museum Berggruen"/>
<link wikidata="Q66992" start="63694" end="63709" title="Heinz Berggruen" label="Heinz Berggruen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="63760" end="63767" title="Picasso" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="63769" end="63776" title="Matisse" label="Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="63778" end="63785" title="Cézanne" label="Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q157194" start="63791" end="63801" title="Giacometti" label="Giacometti"/>
<link wikidata="Q555946" start="63821" end="63840" title="Kupferstichkabinett Berlin" label="Kupferstichkabinett"/>
<link wikidata="Q700216" start="63895" end="63923" title="Berlin State Museums" label="Staatlichen Museen zu Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q386482" start="63955" end="63985" title="Kulturforum" label="Kulturforum at Potsdamer Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q62973" start="64216" end="64231" title="Friedrich Gilly" label="Friedrich Gilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q157003" start="64297" end="64310" title="Jewish Museum Berlin" label="Jewish Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q706530" start="64384" end="64411" title="German Museum of Technology (Berlin)" label="German Museum of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q308928" start="64415" end="64424" title="Kreuzberg" label="Kreuzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233098" start="64493" end="64514" title="Natural History Museum, Berlin" label="Museum für Naturkunde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970365" start="64536" end="64558" title="natural history museum" label="natural history museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="64569" end="64584" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097" start="64590" end="64609" title="Berlin Hauptbahnhof" label="Berlin Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q14410" start="64669" end="64681" title="Giraffatitan" label="Giraffatitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="64734" end="64751" title="Tyrannosaurus" label="Tyrannosaurus rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q100196" start="64783" end="64796" title="Archaeopteryx" label="Archaeopteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q700541" start="64831" end="64837" title="Dahlem (Berlin)" label="Dahlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q370045" start="64903" end="64922" title="Museum of Asian Art" label="Museum of Asian Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q688353" start="64928" end="64947" title="Ethnological Museum of Berlin" label="Ethnological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q318174" start="64953" end="64980" title="Museum Europäischer Kulturen" label="Museum of European Cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q316329" start="64997" end="65010" title="Allied Museum" label="Allied Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q833759" start="65016" end="65029" title="Brücke Museum" label="Brücke Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q329609" start="65141" end="65152" title="Lichtenberg, Berlin" label="Lichtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="65183" end="65222" title="Stasi" label="East German Ministry for State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q570472" start="65231" end="65243" title="Stasi Museum" label="Stasi Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q68689" start="65257" end="65275" title="Checkpoint Charlie" label="Checkpoint Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q382575" start="65368" end="65382" title="Checkpoint Charlie Museum" label="museum venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q552761" start="65511" end="65535" title="Beate Uhse Erotic Museum" label="Beate Uhse Erotic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516" start="65674" end="65684" title="street art" label="street art"/>
<link wikidata="Q308928" start="65799" end="65808" title="Kreuzberg" label="Kreuzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892493" start="65827" end="65838" title="Berlin Wall graffiti art" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q317056" start="65955" end="65969" title="Friedrichshain" label="Friedrichshain"/>
<link wikidata="Q313746" start="65985" end="66002" title="East Side Gallery" label="East Side Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q63190489" start="66294" end="66309" title="Esther Schipper" label="Esther Schipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q561850" start="66498" end="66502" title="SO36" label="SO36"/>
<link wikidata="Q308928" start="66506" end="66515" title="Kreuzberg" label="Kreuzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="66533" end="66543" title="punk music" label="punk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="66716" end="66723" title="Western Europe" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="66811" end="66834" title="fall of the Berlin Wall" label="fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="67021" end="67035" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q678186" start="67112" end="67118" title="Tresor (club)" label="Tresor"/>
<link wikidata="Q136975" start="67127" end="67135" title="Berghain" label="Berghain"/>
<link wikidata="Q322135" start="67141" end="67151" title="KitKatClub" label="KitKatClub"/>
<link wikidata="Q152783" start="67380" end="67394" title="Alexanderplatz" label="Alexanderplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982463" start="67447" end="67460" title="Neo-Burlesque" label="Neo-Burlesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q115226" start="67531" end="67569" title="Scientific-Humanitarian Committee" label="birthplace of the LGBT rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892460" start="67938" end="67950" title="Berlin Pride" label="Berlin Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630631" start="67956" end="67978" title="Christopher Street Day" label="Christopher Street Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q881719" start="67984" end="68013" title="Lesbian and Gay City Festival" label="Lesbian and Gay City Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q829768" start="68040" end="68055" title="Kreuzberg Pride" label="Kreuzberg Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="68069" end="68103" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="68337" end="68346" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q325448" start="68408" end="68427" title="Berliner Festspiele" label="Berliner Festspiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q470650" start="68462" end="68477" title="JazzFest Berlin" label="JazzFest Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601217" start="68483" end="68501" title="Young Euro Classic" label="Young Euro Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059337" start="68541" end="68556" title="youth orchestra" label="youth orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q265292" start="68663" end="68675" title="Transmediale" label="Transmediale"/>
<link wikidata="Q516804" start="68680" end="68708" title="Chaos Communication Congress" label="Chaos Communication Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q821280" start="68721" end="68736" title="Berlin Festival" label="Berlin Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q321263" start="69193" end="69207" title="Sekt" label="sparkling wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q703955" start="69281" end="69298" title="Deutsches Theater (Berlin)" label="Deutsches Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q617244" start="69382" end="69392" title="Volksbühne" label="Volksbühne"/>
<link wikidata="Q659158" start="69396" end="69416" title="Rosa-Luxemburg-Platz" label="Rosa-Luxemburg-Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q534914" start="69488" end="69505" title="Berliner Ensemble" label="Berliner Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="69542" end="69556" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q569461" start="69587" end="69597" title="Schaubühne" label="Schaubühne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="69709" end="69725" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q565670" start="69762" end="69783" title="Friedrichstadt-Palast" label="Friedrichstadt-Palast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592692" start="69961" end="69981" title="Hebbel-Theater" label="Hebbel am Ufer (HAU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533476" start="70155" end="70164" title="Gob Squad" label="Gob Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153257" start="70166" end="70182" title="Rimini Protokoll" label="Rimini Protokoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q54862949" start="70257" end="70272" title="Tanz im August" label="Dance in August"/>
<link wikidata="Q153562" start="70298" end="70309" title="opera house" label="opera house"/>
<link wikidata="Q637834" start="70316" end="70329" title="Deutsche Oper" label="Deutsche Oper"/>
<link wikidata="Q312576" start="70335" end="70353" title="Berlin State Opera" label="Berlin State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q687694" start="70363" end="70376" title="Komische Oper" label="Komische Oper"/>
<link wikidata="Q160899" start="70404" end="70420" title="Unter den Linden" label="Unter den Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q152768" start="70492" end="70508" title="Daniel Barenboim" label="Daniel Barenboim"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="70561" end="70569" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q698233" start="70756" end="70775" title="Theater des Westens" label="Theater des Westens"/>
<link wikidata="Q896180" start="70863" end="70872" title="Tempodrom" label="Tempodrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q359242" start="70979" end="70993" title="Admiralspalast" label="Admiralspalast"/>
<link wikidata="Q152222" start="71106" end="71135" title="Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q32653910" start="71206" end="71227" title="Berliner Philharmonie" label="Berliner Philharmonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q154895" start="71319" end="71338" title="Herbert von Karajan" label="Herbert von Karajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q157814" start="71340" end="71352" title="Simon Rattle" label="Simon Rattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q478275" start="71423" end="71438" title="Kirill Petrenko" label="Kirill Petrenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q526791" start="71444" end="71471" title="Konzerthausorchester Berlin" label="Konzerthausorchester Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60814" start="71526" end="71546" title="Christoph Eschenbach" label="Christoph Eschenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q704933" start="71579" end="71605" title="Haus der Kulturen der Welt" label="Haus der Kulturen der Welt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="71826" end="71840" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="71915" end="71931" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q47629" start="71958" end="71965" title="German cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72068" end="72082" title="Michelin Guide#Stars" label="Michelin stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="72090" end="72104" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="72269" end="72274" title="Veganism" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316209" start="72704" end="72715" title="street food" label="street food"/>
<link wikidata="Q176063" start="72731" end="72741" title="Currywurst" label="Currywurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q251265" start="72835" end="72843" title="Frikadeller" label="Buletten"/>
<link wikidata="Q152526" start="72864" end="72872" title="Berliner (doughnut)" label="Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231410" start="73012" end="73024" title="delicatessen" label="delicatessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q686011" start="73049" end="73055" title="KaDeWe" label="KaDeWe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414887" start="73316" end="73325" title="lahmajoun" label="lahmajoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q188788" start="73330" end="73337" title="falafel" label="falafel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20734" start="73419" end="73430" title="doner kebab" label="doner kebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515061" start="73446" end="73463" title="Kadir Nurman" label="evolved in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154828" start="73758" end="73784" title="Berlin Zoological Garden" label="Zoologischer Garten Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159697" start="73997" end="74001" title="Knut (polar bear)" label="Knut"/>
<link wikidata="Q702771" start="74030" end="74054" title="Tierpark Berlin" label="Tierpark Friedrichsfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q163255" start="74078" end="74110" title="Berlin-Dahlem Botanical Garden and Botanical Museum" label="Berlin&amp;#x27;s Botanischer Garten"/>
<link wikidata="Q565659" start="74330" end="74344" title="Britzer Garten" label="Britzer Garten"/>
<link wikidata="Q464302" start="74354" end="74369" title="Erholungspark Marzahn" label="Gärten der Welt"/>
<link wikidata="Q694020" start="74409" end="74424" title="Tiergarten (park)" label="Tiergarten park"/>
<link wikidata="Q65910" start="74460" end="74478" title="Peter Joseph Lenné" label="Peter Joseph Lenné"/>
<link wikidata="Q566495" start="74554" end="74566" title="Viktoriapark" label="Viktoriapark"/>
<link wikidata="Q666937" start="74637" end="74651" title="Treptower Park" label="Treptower Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q677833" start="74673" end="74680" title="Treptow" label="Treptow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48441" start="74699" end="74718" title="Soviet War Memorial (Treptower Park)" label="Soviet War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q317056" start="74737" end="74751" title="Friedrichshain" label="Friedrichshain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402748" start="74873" end="74889" title="Tempelhofer Feld" label="Tempelhofer Feld"/>
<link wikidata="Q9686" start="74914" end="74926" title="Berlin Tempelhof Airport" label="city airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="74980" end="74987" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="75064" end="75071" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="75087" end="75100" title="German Emperor" label="German Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q151330" start="75152" end="75161" title="Sanssouci" label="Sanssouci"/>
<link wikidata="Q852427" start="75236" end="75275" title="Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin" label="Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="75292" end="75311" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638773" start="75460" end="75472" title="pop-up store" label="pop-up store"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="75650" end="75670" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="75701" end="75720" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="75732" end="75761" title="World Athletics Championships" label="World Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q151374" start="75774" end="75788" title="Olympiastadion (Berlin)" label="Olympiastadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q152772" start="75792" end="75796" title="2009 World Athletics Championships" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q74124045" start="75801" end="75805" title="2025 World Athletics Championships" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411948" start="75827" end="75848" title="Euroleague Final Four" label="Euroleague Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411901" start="75875" end="75879" title="2009 Euroleague Final Four" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q23057946" start="75884" end="75888" title="2016 Euroleague Final Four" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360003" start="75923" end="75938" title="EuroBasket 2015" label="EuroBasket 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557593" start="75977" end="76004" title="2015 UEFA Champions League Final" label="UEFA Champions League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="76031" end="76051" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="76064" end="76070" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q99755521" start="76091" end="76131" title="2023 Special Olympics World Summer Games" label="2023 Special Olympics World Summer Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q161222" start="76226" end="76241" title="Berlin Marathon" label="Berlin Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q703948" start="76302" end="76307" title="Internationales Stadionfest" label="ISTAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q929333" start="76362" end="76372" title="Mellowpark" label="Mellowpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="76605" end="76631" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q77098" start="76634" end="76655" title="Friedrich Ludwig Jahn" label="Friedrich Ludwig Jahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q623270" start="76738" end="76752" title="horizontal bar" label="horizontal bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q692104" start="76754" end="76767" title="parallel bars" label="parallel bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q655318" start="76769" end="76774" title="Rings (gymnastics)" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q598168" start="76784" end="76789" title="Vault (gymnastics)" label="vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542364" start="76825" end="76832" title="Turners" label="Turners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027549" start="76861" end="76881" title="Volkspark Hasenheide" label="Volkspark Hasenheide"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="76908" end="76920" title="sports clubs" label="sports clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q102720" start="77593" end="77603" title="Hertha BSC" label="Hertha BSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="77661" end="77671" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977091" start="77743" end="77772" title="List of fiction set in Berlin" label="List of fiction set in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q896752" start="77775" end="77810" title="List of honorary citizens of Berlin" label="List of honorary citizens of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q168209" start="77813" end="77839" title="List of people from Berlin" label="List of people from Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863723" start="77842" end="77868" title="List of songs about Berlin" label="List of songs about Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q501116" start="77926" end="77939" title="Andreas Daum" label="Daum, Andreas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3355" wikidata="Q331853" url="?curid=3355" title="Benjamin Lee Whorf">
<text>Benjamin Atwood Lee Whorf (; April 24, 1897 – July 26, 1941) was an American linguist and fire prevention engineer best known for proposing the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis. He believed that the structures of different languages shape how their speakers perceive and conceptualize the world. Whorf saw this idea, named after him and his mentor Edward Sapir, as having implications similar to those of Einstein&#x27;s principle of physical relativity. However, the concept originated from 19th-century philosophy and thinkers like Wilhelm von Humboldt and Wilhelm Wundt.

Whorf initially pursued chemical engineering but developed an interest in linguistics, particularly Biblical Hebrew and indigenous Mesoamerican languages. His groundbreaking work on the Nahuatl language earned him recognition, and he received a grant to study it further in Mexico. He presented influential papers on Nahuatl upon his return. Whorf later studied linguistics with Edward Sapir at Yale University while working as a fire prevention engineer.

During his time at Yale, Whorf worked on describing the Hopi language and made notable claims about its perception of time. He also conducted research on the Uto-Aztecan languages, publishing influential papers. In 1938, he substituted for Sapir, teaching a seminar on American Indian linguistics. Whorf&#x27;s contributions extended beyond linguistic relativity; he wrote a grammar sketch of Hopi, studied Nahuatl dialects, proposed a deciphering of Maya hieroglyphic writing, and contributed to Uto-Aztecan reconstruction.

After Whorf&#x27;s premature death from cancer in 1941, his colleagues curated his manuscripts and promoted his ideas regarding language, culture, and cognition. However, in the 1960s, his views fell out of favor due to criticisms claiming his ideas were untestable and poorly formulated. In recent decades, interest in Whorf&#x27;s work has resurged, with scholars reevaluating his ideas and engaging in a more in-depth understanding of his theories. The field of linguistic relativity remains an active area of research in psycholinguistics and linguistic anthropology, generating ongoing debates between relativism and universalism, as well as in the study of raciolinguistics. Whorf&#x27;s contributions to linguistics, such as the allophone and the cryptotype, have been widely accepted. 

== Biography ==

=== Early life ===
The son of Harry Church Whorf and Sarah Edna Lee Whorf, Benjamin Atwood Lee Whorf was born on April 24, 1897, in Winthrop, Massachusetts. His father was an artist, intellectual, and designer – first working as a commercial artist and later as a dramatist. Whorf had two younger brothers, John and Richard, who both went on to become notable artists. John became an internationally renowned painter and illustrator; Richard was an actor in films such as &quot;Yankee Doodle Dandy&quot; and later an Emmy-nominated television director of such shows as &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot;. Whorf was the intellectual of the three and started conducting chemical experiments with his father&#x27;s photographic equipment at a young age. He was also an avid reader, interested in botany, astrology, and Middle American prehistory. He read William H. Prescott&#x27;s &quot;Conquest of Mexico&quot; several times. At the age of 17, he began keeping a copious diary in which he recorded his thoughts and dreams.

=== Career in fire prevention ===
In 1918, Whorf graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where his academic performance was of average quality, with a degree in chemical engineering. In 1920, he married Celia Inez Peckham; they had three children, Raymond Ben, Robert Peckham and Celia Lee. Around the same time he began work as a fire prevention engineer (an inspector) for the Hartford Fire Insurance Company. He was particularly good at the job and was highly commended by his employers. His job required him to travel to production facilities throughout New England to be inspected. One anecdote describes him arriving at a chemical plant and being denied access by the director, who would not allow anyone to see the production procedure, which was a trade secret. Having been told what the plant produced, Whorf wrote a chemical formula on a piece of paper, saying to the director: &quot;I think this is what you&#x27;re doing&quot;. The surprised director asked Whorf how he knew about the secret procedure, and he simply answered: &quot;You couldn&#x27;t do it in any other way.&quot;

Whorf helped to attract new customers to the Fire Insurance Company; they favored his thorough inspections and recommendations. Another famous anecdote from his job was used by Whorf to argue that language use affects habitual behavior. Whorf described a workplace in which full gasoline drums were stored in one room and empty ones in another; he said that because of flammable vapor the &quot;empty&quot; drums were more dangerous than those that were full, although workers handled them less carefully to the point that they smoked in the room with &quot;empty&quot; drums, but not in the room with full ones. Whorf argued that by habitually speaking of the vapor-filled drums as empty and by extension as inert, the workers were oblivious to the risk posed by smoking near the &quot;empty drums&quot;.

=== Early interest in religion and language ===
Whorf was a spiritual man throughout his lifetime, although what religion he followed has been the subject of debate. As a young man, he produced a manuscript titled &quot;Why I have discarded evolution&quot;, causing some scholars to describe him as a devout Methodist, who was impressed with fundamentalism, and perhaps supportive of creationism. However, throughout his life Whorf&#x27;s main religious interest was theosophy, a nonsectarian organization based on Buddhist and Hindu teachings that promotes the view of the world as an interconnected whole and the unity and brotherhood of humankind &quot;without distinction of race, creed, sex, caste or color&quot;. Some scholars have argued that the conflict between spiritual and scientific inclinations has been a driving force in Whorf&#x27;s intellectual development, particularly in the attraction by ideas of linguistic relativity. Whorf said that &quot;of all groups of people with whom I have come in contact, Theosophical people seem the most capable of becoming excited about ideas—new ideas.&quot;

Around 1924, Whorf first became interested in linguistics. Originally, he analyzed Biblical texts, seeking to uncover hidden layers of meaning. Inspired by the esoteric work &quot;La langue hebraïque restituée&quot; by Antoine Fabre d&#x27;Olivet, he began a semantic and grammatical analysis of Biblical Hebrew. Whorf&#x27;s early manuscripts on Hebrew and Maya have been described as exhibiting a considerable degree of mysticism, as he sought to uncover esoteric meanings of glyphs and letters.

=== Early studies in Mesoamerican linguistics ===
Whorf studied Biblical linguistics mainly at the Watkinson Library (now Hartford Public Library). This library had an extensive collection of materials about Native American linguistics and folklore, originally collected by James Hammond Trumbull. It was at the Watkinson library that Whorf became friends with a young boy, John B. Carroll, who later went on to study psychology under B. F. Skinner, and who in 1956 edited and published a selection of Whorf&#x27;s essays as &quot;Language, Thought and Reality&quot; . The collection rekindled Whorf&#x27;s interest in Mesoamerican antiquity. He began studying the Nahuatl language in 1925, and later, beginning in 1928, he studied the collections of Maya hieroglyphic texts. Quickly becoming conversant with the materials, he began a scholarly dialog with Mesoamericanists such as Alfred Tozzer, the Maya archaeologist at Harvard University, and Herbert Spinden of the Brooklyn Museum.

In 1928, he first presented a paper at the International Congress of Americanists in which he presented his translation of a Nahuatl document held at the Peabody Museum at Harvard. He also began to study the comparative linguistics of the Uto-Aztecan language family, which Edward Sapir had recently demonstrated to be a linguistic family. In addition to Nahuatl, Whorf studied the Piman and Tepecano languages, while in close correspondence with linguist J. Alden Mason.

=== Field studies in Mexico ===
Because of the promise shown by his work on Uto-Aztecan, Tozzer and Spinden advised Whorf to apply for a grant with the Social Science Research Council (SSRC) to support his research. Whorf considered using the money to travel to Mexico to procure Aztec manuscripts for the Watkinson library, but Tozzer suggested he spend the time in Mexico documenting modern Nahuatl dialects. In his application Whorf proposed to establish the oligosynthetic nature of the Nahuatl language. Before leaving Whorf presented the paper &quot;Stem series in Maya&quot; at the Linguistic Society of America conference, in which he argued that in the Mayan languages syllables carry symbolic content. The SSRC awarded Whorf the grant and in 1930 he traveled to Mexico City, where Professor Robert H. Barlow put him in contact with several speakers of Nahuatl to serve as his informants. The outcome of the trip to Mexico was Whorf&#x27;s sketch of Milpa Alta Nahuatl, published only after his death, and an article on a series of Aztec pictograms found at the Tepozteco monument at Tepoztlán, Morelos in which he noted similarities in form and meaning between Aztec and Maya day signs.

=== At Yale ===

Although Whorf had been entirely an autodidact in linguistic theory and field methodology up to this point, he had already made a name for himself in Mesoamerican linguistics. Whorf had met Sapir, the leading US linguist of the day, at professional conferences, and in 1931 Sapir came to Yale from the University of Chicago to take a position as Professor of Anthropology. Alfred Tozzer sent Sapir a copy of Whorf&#x27;s paper on &quot;Nahuatl tones and saltillo&quot;. Sapir replied stating that it &quot;should by all means be published&quot;; however, it was not until 1993 that it was prepared for publication by Lyle Campbell and Frances Karttunen.

Whorf took Sapir&#x27;s first course at Yale on &quot;American Indian Linguistics&quot;. He enrolled in a program of graduate studies, nominally working towards a PhD in linguistics, but he never actually attempted to obtain a degree, satisfying himself with participating in the intellectual community around Sapir. At Yale, Whorf joined the circle of Sapir&#x27;s students that included such luminaries as Morris Swadesh, Mary Haas, Harry Hoijer, G. L. Trager and Charles F. Voegelin. Whorf took on a central role among Sapir&#x27;s students and was well respected.

Sapir had a profound influence on Whorf&#x27;s thinking. Sapir&#x27;s earliest writings had espoused views of the relation between thought and language stemming from the Humboldtian tradition he acquired through Franz Boas, which regarded language as the historical embodiment of &quot;volksgeist&quot;, or ethnic world view. But Sapir had since become influenced by a current of logical positivism, such as that of Bertrand Russell and the early Ludwig Wittgenstein, particularly through Ogden and Richards&#x27; &quot;The Meaning of Meaning&quot;, from which he adopted the view that natural language potentially obscures, rather than facilitates, the mind to perceive and describe the world as it really is. In this view, proper perception could only be accomplished through formal logics. During his stay at Yale, Whorf acquired this current of thought partly from Sapir and partly through his own readings of Russell and of Ogden and Richards. As Whorf became more influenced by positivist science, he also distanced himself from some approaches to language and meaning that he saw as lacking in rigor and insight. One of these was Polish philosopher Alfred Korzybski&#x27;s General semantics, which was espoused in the US by Stuart Chase. Chase admired Whorf&#x27;s work and frequently sought out a reluctant Whorf, who considered Chase to be &quot;utterly incompetent by training and background to handle such a subject.&quot; Ironically, Chase would later write the foreword for Carroll&#x27;s collection of Whorf&#x27;s writings.

==== Work on Hopi and descriptive linguistics ====
Sapir also encouraged Whorf to continue his work on the historical and descriptive linguistics of Uto-Aztecan. Whorf published several articles on that topic in this period, some of them with G. L. Trager, who had become his close friend. Whorf took a special interest in the Hopi language and started working with Ernest Naquayouma, a speaker of Hopi from Toreva village living in Manhattan, New York. Whorf credited Naquayouma as the source of most of his information on the Hopi language, although in 1938 he took a short field trip to the village of Mishongnovi, on the Second Mesa of the Hopi Reservation in Arizona.

In 1936, Whorf was appointed honorary research fellow in anthropology at Yale, and he was invited by Franz Boas to serve on the committee of the Society of American Linguistics (later Linguistic Society of America). In 1937, Yale awarded him the Sterling Fellowship. He was a lecturer in anthropology from 1937 through 1938, replacing Sapir, who was gravely ill. Whorf gave graduate level lectures on &quot;Problems of American Indian Linguistics&quot;. In 1938 with Trager&#x27;s assistance he elaborated a report on the progress of linguistic research at the department of anthropology at Yale. The report includes some of Whorf&#x27;s influential contributions to linguistic theory, such as the concept of the allophone and of covert grammatical categories. has argued, that in this report Whorf&#x27;s linguistic theories exist in a condensed form, and that it was mainly through this report that Whorf exerted influence on the discipline of descriptive linguistics.

==== Final years ====
In late 1938, Whorf&#x27;s own health declined. After an operation for cancer, he fell into an unproductive period. He was also deeply affected by Sapir&#x27;s death in early 1939. It was in the writings of his last two years that he laid out the research program of linguistic relativity. His 1939 memorial article for Sapir, &quot;The Relation of Habitual Thought And Behavior to Language&quot;, in particular has been taken to be Whorf&#x27;s definitive statement of the issue, and is his most frequently quoted piece.

In his last year Whorf also published three articles in the &quot;MIT Technology Review&quot; titled &quot;Science and Linguistics&quot;, &quot;Linguistics as an Exact Science&quot; and &quot;Language and Logic&quot;. He was also invited to contribute an article to a theosophical journal, &quot;Theosophist&quot;, published in Madras, India, for which he wrote &quot;Language, Mind and Reality&quot;. In these final pieces, he offered a critique of Western science in which he suggested that non-European languages often referred to physical phenomena in ways that more directly reflected aspects of reality than many European languages, and that science ought to pay attention to the effects of linguistic categorization in its efforts to describe the physical world. He particularly criticized the Indo-European languages for promoting a mistaken essentialist world view, which had been disproved by advances in the science, in contrast suggesting that other languages dedicated more attention to processes and dynamics rather than stable essences. Whorf argued that paying attention to how other physical phenomena are described across languages could make valuable contributions to science by pointing out the ways in which certain assumptions about reality are implicit in the structure of language itself, and how language guides the attention of speakers towards certain phenomena in the world; these phenomena risk becoming overemphasized while leaving other phenomena at risk of being overlooked.
== Posthumous reception and legacy ==
At Whorf&#x27;s death, his friend G. L. Trager was appointed as curator of his unpublished manuscripts. Some of them were published in the years after his death by another of Whorf&#x27;s friends, Harry Hoijer. In the decade following, Trager and particularly Hoijer did much to popularize Whorf&#x27;s ideas about linguistic relativity, and it was Hoijer who coined the term &quot;Sapir–Whorf hypothesis&quot; at a 1954 conference. Trager then published an article titled &quot;The systematization of the Whorf hypothesis&quot;, which contributed to the idea that Whorf had proposed a hypothesis that should be the basis for a program of empirical research. Hoijer also published studies of Indigenous languages and cultures of the American South West in which Whorf found correspondences between cultural patterns and linguistic ones. The term, even though technically a misnomer, went on to become the most widely known label for Whorf&#x27;s ideas. According to John A. Lucy, &quot;Whorf&#x27;s work in linguistics was and still is recognized as being of superb professional quality by linguists&quot;.

=== Universalism and anti-Whorfianism ===
Whorf&#x27;s work began to fall out of favor less than a decade after his death, and he was subjected to severe criticism from scholars of language, culture and psychology. In 1953 and 1954, psychologists Roger Brown and Eric Lenneberg criticized Whorf for his reliance on anecdotal evidence, formulating a hypothesis to scientifically test his ideas, which they limited to an examination of a causal relation between grammatical or lexical structure and cognition or perception. Whorf himself did not advocate a straight causality between language and thought; instead he wrote that &quot;Language and culture had grown up together&quot;; that both were mutually shaped by the other. Hence, has argued that because the aim of the formulation of the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis was to test simple causation, it failed to test Whorf&#x27;s ideas from the outset.

Focusing on color terminology, with easily discernible differences between perception and vocabulary, Brown and Lenneberg published in 1954 a study of Zuni color terms that slightly support a weak effect of semantic categorization of color terms on color perception. In doing so they began a line of empirical studies that investigated the principle of linguistic relativity.

Empirical testing of the Whorfian hypothesis declined in the 1960s to 1980s as Noam Chomsky began to redefine linguistics and much of psychology in formal universalist terms. Several studies from that period refuted Whorf&#x27;s hypothesis, demonstrating that linguistic diversity is a surface veneer that masks underlying universal cognitive principles. Many studies were highly critical and disparaging in their language, ridiculing Whorf&#x27;s analyses and examples or his lack of an academic degree. Throughout the 1980s, most mentions of Whorf or of the Sapir–Whorf hypotheses continued to be disparaging, and led to a widespread view that Whorf&#x27;s ideas had been proven wrong. Because Whorf was treated so severely in the scholarship during those decades, he has been described as &quot;one of the prime whipping boys of introductory texts to linguistics&quot;. With the advent of cognitive linguistics and psycholinguistics in the late 1980s, some linguists sought to rehabilitate Whorf&#x27;s reputation, as scholarship began to question whether earlier critiques of Whorf were justified.

By the 1960s, analytical philosophers also became aware of the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis, and philosophers such as Max Black and Donald Davidson published scathing critiques of Whorf&#x27;s strong relativist viewpoints. Black characterized Whorf&#x27;s ideas about metaphysics as demonstrating &quot;amateurish crudity&quot;. According to Black and Davidson, Whorf&#x27;s viewpoint and the concept of linguistic relativity meant that translation between languages with different conceptual schemes would be impossible. Recent assessments such as those by Leavitt and Lee, however, consider Black and Davidson&#x27;s interpretation to be based on an inaccurate characterization of Whorf&#x27;s viewpoint, and even rather absurd given the time he spent trying to translate between different conceptual schemes. In their view, the critiques are based on a lack of familiarity with Whorf&#x27;s writings; according to these recent Whorf scholars a more accurate description of his viewpoint is that he thought translation to be possible, but only through careful attention to the subtle differences between conceptual schemes.

Eric Lenneberg, Noam Chomsky, and Steven Pinker have also criticized Whorf for failing to be sufficiently clear in his formulation of how language influences thought, and for failing to provide real evidence to support his assumptions. Generally Whorf&#x27;s arguments took the form of examples that were anecdotal or speculative, and functioned as attempts to show how &quot;exotic&quot; grammatical traits were connected to what were considered equally exotic worlds of thought. Even Whorf&#x27;s defenders admitted that his writing style was often convoluted and couched in neologisms – attributed to his awareness of language use, and his reluctance to use terminology that might have pre-existing connotations. argues that Whorf was mesmerized by the foreignness of indigenous languages, and exaggerated and idealized them. According to Lakoff, Whorf&#x27;s tendency to exoticize data must be judged in the historical context: Whorf and the other Boasians wrote at a time in which racism and jingoism were predominant, and when it was unthinkable to many that &quot;savages&quot; had redeeming qualities, or that their languages were comparable in complexity to those of Europe. For this alone Lakoff argues, Whorf can be considered to be &quot;[n]ot just a pioneer in linguistics, but a pioneer as a human being&quot;.

Today, many followers of universalist schools of thought continue to oppose the idea of linguistic relativity, seeing it as unsound or even ridiculous. For example, Steven Pinker argues in his book &quot;The Language Instinct&quot; that thought exists prior to language and independently of it, a view also espoused by philosophers of language such as Jerry Fodor, John Locke and Plato. In this interpretation, language is inconsequential to human thought because humans do not think in &quot;natural&quot; language, i.e. any language used for communication. Rather, we think in a meta-language that precedes natural language, which Pinker following Fodor calls &quot;mentalese.&quot; Pinker attacks what he calls &quot;Whorf&#x27;s radical position&quot;, declaring, &quot;the more you examine Whorf&#x27;s arguments, the less sense they make.&quot; Scholars of a more &quot;relativist&quot; bent such as John A. Lucy and Stephen C. Levinson have criticized Pinker for misrepresenting Whorf&#x27;s views and arguing against strawmen.

=== Corroboration of Whorf&#x27;s claims ===

The idea that Whorf defended a kind of &quot;linguistic relativity&quot; stems from his article &quot;Language, Mind and Reality&quot; published during the Second World War, where Whorf criticized American scientists, especially some physicists who were searching for a substance where there are only substantive words such as &quot;energy&quot; and searching for an expenditure of energy where there are only transitive verbs such as &quot;transform&quot;, thus trying to disprove Einstein&#x27;s Theory of Relativity, which helps us predict how much mass must be consumed to produce how much energy. Whorf claimed in this article that this &quot;Aryan Western Logic&quot; coming from &quot;Western Languages&quot; was stopping scientists to accept the theory and spend efforts on its applications, such as the creation of the atomic bomb, which could be decisive for the United States to win or lose the war against the Germans. This is a period when some national socialists in Germany were trying to develop an Aryan Physics, free from counterintuitive findings by Jewish physicists such as Albert Einstein.

Studies on the construction of experience through meaning have been increasing since the 1990s, and a series of experimental results have corroborated Whorf&#x27;s claims, when understood as he presented them, especially in cultural psychology and linguistic anthropology. One of the earliest linguistic descriptions directing positive attention towards Whorf&#x27;s claims that grammatical categories construed meaning was George Lakoff&#x27;s &quot;Women, Fire and Dangerous Things&quot;, in which he argued that Whorf had been on the right track when he claimed that a contrast in grammatical categories is a resource for a contrast in experiencial meaning, thus that the way we usually represent our experience (including through grammatical categories) impacts the way our senses are organised as experience. In 1992 psychologist John A. Lucy published two books on the topic: the first one analyzed the intellectual genealogy of the hypothesis, arguing that previous studies had failed to appreciate the subtleties of Whorf&#x27;s thinking; they had been unable to formulate a research agenda that would actually test Whorf&#x27;s claims. Lucy proposed a new research design so that the hypothesis of linguistic relativity could be tested empirically, and to avoid the pitfalls of earlier studies which Lucy claimed had tended to presuppose the universality of the categories they were studying. His second book was an empirical study of the relation between grammatical categories and cognition in the Yucatec Maya language of Mexico.

In 1996 Penny Lee&#x27;s reappraisal of Whorf&#x27;s writings was published, reinstating Whorf as a serious and capable thinker. Lee argued that previous explorations of the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis had largely ignored Whorf&#x27;s actual writings, and consequently asked questions very unlike those Whorf had asked. Also in that year a volume, &quot;Rethinking Linguistic Relativity&quot; edited by John J. Gumperz and Stephen C. Levinson gathered a range of researchers working in psycholinguistics, sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology to bring renewed attention to the issue of how Whorf&#x27;s theories could be updated, and a subsequent review of the new direction of the linguistic relativity paradigm cemented the development. Since then considerable empirical research into linguistic relativity has been carried out, especially at the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics with scholarship motivating two edited volumes of linguistic relativity studies, and in American Institutions by scholars such as Lera Boroditsky and Dedre Gentner.

In turn universalist scholars frequently dismiss Whorf&#x27;s claims as &quot;dull&quot; or &quot;boring&quot;, as well as positive findings of influence of grammatical categories on thought or behavior, which are often subtle rather than spectacular. Despite the fact that scientists were trying to find substances and loss of energy in the transformation of mass into energy and that Whorf was correct in his critique against such lines of research, these researchers do not mention the context in which Whorf wrote his critique of scientists and claim that Whorf&#x27;s supposed &quot;linguistic relativity&quot; had promised more spectacular findings than it was able to provide.

Whorf&#x27;s views have been compared to those of philosophers such as Friedrich Nietzsche and the late Ludwig Wittgenstein, both of whom considered language to have important bearing on thought and reasoning. His hypotheses have also been compared to the views of psychologists such as Lev Vygotsky, whose social constructivism considers the cognitive development of children to be mediated by the social use of language. Vygotsky shared Whorf&#x27;s interest in gestalt psychology, and he also read Sapir&#x27;s works. Others have seen similarities between Whorf&#x27;s work and the ideas of literary theorist Mikhail Bakhtin, who read Whorf and whose approach to textual meaning was similarly holistic and relativistic. Whorf&#x27;s ideas have also been interpreted as a radical critique of positivist science.

== Work ==

=== Linguistic relativity ===
Whorf is best known as the main proponent of what he called the principle of linguistic relativity, but which is often known as &quot;the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis&quot;, named for him and Edward Sapir. Whorf never stated the principle in the form of a hypothesis, and the idea that linguistic categories influence perception and cognition was shared by many other scholars before him. But because Whorf, in his articles, gave specific examples of how he saw the grammatical categories of specific languages related to conceptual and behavioral patterns, he pointed towards an empirical research program that has been taken up by subsequent scholars, and which is often called &quot;Sapir–Whorf studies&quot;.

==== Sources of influence on Whorf&#x27;s thinking ====
Whorf and Sapir both drew explicitly on Albert Einstein&#x27;s principle of general relativity; hence linguistic relativity refers to the concept of grammatical and semantic categories of a specific language providing a frame of reference as a medium through which observations are made. Following an original observation by Boas, Sapir demonstrated that speakers of a given language perceive sounds that are acoustically different as the same, if the sound comes from the underlying phoneme and does not contribute to changes in semantic meaning. Furthermore, speakers of languages are attentive to sounds, particularly if the same two sounds come from different phonemes. Such differentiation is an example of how various observational frames of reference leads to different patterns of attention and perception.

Whorf was also influenced by gestalt psychology, believing that languages require their speakers to describe the same events as different gestalt constructions, which he called &quot;isolates from experience&quot;. An example is how the action of cleaning a gun is different in English and Shawnee: English focuses on the instrumental relation between two objects and the purpose of the action (removing dirt); whereas the Shawnee language focuses on the movement—using an arm to create a dry space in a hole. The event described is the same, but the attention in terms of figure and ground are different.

==== Degree of influence of language on thought ====
If read superficially, some of Whorf&#x27;s statements lend themselves to the interpretation that he supported linguistic determinism. For example, in an often-quoted passage Whorf writes:
The statements about the obligatory nature of the terms of language have been taken to suggest that Whorf meant that language completely determined the scope of possible conceptualizations. However, neo-Whorfians argue that here Whorf is writing about the terms in which we speak of the world, not the terms in which we think of it. Whorf noted that to communicate thoughts and experiences with members of a speech community speakers must use the linguistic categories of their shared language, which requires moulding experiences into the shape of language to speak them—a process called &quot;thinking for speaking&quot;. This interpretation is supported by Whorf&#x27;s subsequent statement that &quot;No individual is free to describe nature with absolute impartiality, but is constrained by certain modes of interpretation even when he thinks himself most free&quot;. Similarly, the statement that observers are led to different pictures of the universe has been understood as an argument that different conceptualizations are not comparable, making translation between different conceptual and linguistic systems impossible. Neo-Whorfians argue this to be a misreading since throughout his work one of his main points was that such systems could be &quot;calibrated&quot; and thereby be made commensurable, but only when we become aware of the differences in conceptual schemes through linguistic analysis.

==== Hopi time ====

Whorf&#x27;s study of Hopi time has been the most widely discussed and criticized example of linguistic relativity. In his analysis he argues that there is a relation between how the Hopi people conceptualize time, how they speak of temporal relations, and the grammar of the Hopi language. Whorf&#x27;s most elaborate argument for the existence of linguistic relativity was based on what he saw as a fundamental difference in the understanding of time as a conceptual category among the Hopi. He argued that the Hopi language, in contrast to English and other SAE languages, does not treat the flow of time as a sequence of distinct countable instances, like &quot;three days&quot; or &quot;five years&quot;, but rather as a single process. Because of this difference, the language lacks nouns that refer to units of time. He proposed that the Hopi view of time was fundamental in all aspects of their culture and furthermore explained certain patterns of behavior. In his 1939 memorial essay to Sapir he wrote that &quot;... the Hopi language is seen to contain no words, grammatical forms, construction or expressions that refer directly to what we call &#x27;time&#x27;, or to past, present, or future...&quot;

Linguist Ekkehart Malotki challenged Whorf&#x27;s analyses of Hopi temporal expressions and concepts with numerous examples how the Hopi language refers to time. Malotki argues that in the Hopi language the system of tenses consists of future and non-future and that the single difference between the three-tense system of European languages and the Hopi system, is that the latter combines past and present to form a single category.

Critics of Whorf frequently refer to Malotki&#x27;s data, which would appear to contradict Whorf&#x27;s statements on Hopi, in order to refute his concept of linguistic relativity; while other scholars have defended the analysis of Hopi, arguing that Whorf&#x27;s claim was not that Hopi lacked words or categories to describe temporality, but that the Hopi concept of time is altogether different from that of English speakers. Whorf described the Hopi categories of tense, noting that time is not divided into past, present and future, as is common in European languages, but rather a single tense refers to both present and past while another refers to events that have not yet happened and may or may not happen in the future. He also described a large array of stems that he called &quot;tensors&quot; which describes aspects of temporality, but without referring to countable units of time as in English and most European languages.

=== Contributions to linguistic theory ===
Whorf&#x27;s distinction between &quot;overt&quot; (phenotypical) and &quot;covert&quot; (cryptotypical) grammatical categories has become widely influential in linguistics and anthropology. British linguist Michael Halliday wrote about Whorf&#x27;s notion of the &quot;cryptotype&quot;, and the conception of &quot;how grammar models reality&quot;, that it would &quot;eventually turn out to be among the major contributions of twentieth century linguistics&quot;.

Furthermore, Whorf introduced the concept of allophones, which are positional phonetic variants of a single superordinate phoneme; in doing so he placed a cornerstone in consolidating early phoneme theory. The term was popularized by G. L. Trager and Bernard Bloch in a 1941 paper on English phonology and went on to become part of standard usage within the American structuralist tradition. Whorf considered allophones to be another example of linguistic relativity. The principle of allophony describes how acoustically different sounds can be treated as reflections of a single phoneme in a language. This sometimes makes the different sound appear similar to native speakers of the language, even to the point that they are unable to distinguish them auditorily without special training. Whorf wrote that: &quot;[allophones] are also relativistic. Objectively, acoustically, and physiologically the allophones of [a] phoneme may be extremely unlike, hence the impossibility of determining what is what. You always have to keep the observer in the picture. What linguistic pattern makes like is like, and what it makes unlike is unlike&quot;.(Whorf, 1940)

Central to Whorf&#x27;s inquiries was the approach later described as metalinguistics by G. L. Trager, who in 1950 published four of Whorf&#x27;s essays as &quot;Four articles on Metalinguistics&quot;. Whorf was crucially interested in the ways in which speakers come to be aware of the language that they use, and become able to describe and analyze language using language itself to do so. Whorf saw that the ability to arrive at progressively more accurate descriptions of the world hinged partly on the ability to construct a metalanguage to describe how language affects experience, and thus to have the ability to calibrate different conceptual schemes. Whorf&#x27;s endeavors have since been taken up in the development of the study of metalinguistics and metalinguistic awareness, first by Michael Silverstein who published a radical and influential rereading of Whorf in 1979 and subsequently in the field of linguistic anthropology.

=== Studies of Uto-Aztecan languages ===
Whorf conducted important work on the Uto-Aztecan languages, which Sapir had conclusively demonstrated as a valid language family in 1915. Working first on Nahuatl, Tepecano, and Tohono O&#x27;odham, he had established familiarity with the language group before he met Sapir in 1928. During Whorf&#x27;s time at Yale, he published several articles on Uto-Aztecan linguistics, such as &quot;Notes on the Tübatulabal language&quot;. In 1935 he published &quot;The Comparative Linguistics of Uto-Aztecan&quot;, and a review of Kroeber&#x27;s survey of Uto-Aztecan linguistics. Whorf&#x27;s work served to further cement the foundations of comparative Uto-Aztecan studies.

The first Native American language Whorf studied was the Uto-Aztecan language Nahuatl, which he first studied from colonial grammars and documents; later, it became the subject of his first field work experience in 1930. Based on his studies of Classical Nahuatl, Whorf argued that Nahuatl was an oligosynthetic language, a typological category that he invented. In Mexico working with native speakers, he studied the dialects of Milpa Alta and Tepoztlán. His grammar sketch of the Milpa Alta dialect of Nahuatl was not published during his lifetime, but it was published posthumously by Harry Hoijer and became quite influential and used as the basic description of &quot;Modern Nahuatl&quot; by many scholars. The description of the dialect is quite condensed and in some places difficult to understand because of Whorf&#x27;s propensity of inventing his own unique terminology for grammatical concepts, but the work has generally been considered to be technically advanced. He also produced an analysis of the prosody of these dialects which he related to the history of the glottal stop and vowel length in Nahuan languages. This work was prepared for publication by Lyle Campbell and Frances Karttunen in 1993, who also considered it a valuable description of the two endangered dialects, and the only one of its kind to include detailed phonetic analysis of supra-segmental phenomena.

In Uto-Aztecan linguistics, one of Whorf&#x27;s achievements was to determine the reason the Nahuatl language has the phoneme , not found in the other languages of the family. The existence of in Nahuatl had puzzled previous linguists and caused Sapir to reconstruct a phoneme for proto-Uto-Aztecan based only on evidence from Aztecan. In a 1937 paper published in the journal &quot;American Anthropologist&quot;, Whorf argued that the phoneme resulted from some of the Nahuan or Aztecan languages having undergone a sound change from the original * to in the position before *. This sound law is known as &quot;Whorf&#x27;s law&quot;, considered valid although a more detailed understanding of the precise conditions under which it took place has since been developed.

Also in 1937, Whorf and his friend G. L. Trager published a paper in which they elaborated on the Azteco-Tanoan language family, proposed originally by Sapir as a family comprising the Uto-Aztecan and the Kiowa-Tanoan languages—(the Tewa and Kiowa languages).

=== Maya epigraphy ===
In a series of published and unpublished studies in the 1930s, Whorf argued that Mayan writing was to some extent phonetic. While his work on deciphering the Maya script gained some support from Alfred Tozzer at Harvard, the main authority on Ancient Maya culture at the time, J. E. S. Thompson, strongly rejected Whorf&#x27;s ideas, saying that Mayan writing lacked a phonetic component and is therefore impossible to decipher based on a linguistic analysis. Whorf argued that it was exactly the reluctance to apply linguistic analysis of Maya languages that had held the decipherment back. Whorf sought for cues to phonetic values within the elements of the specific signs, never realizing that the system was logo-syllabic. Although Whorf&#x27;s approach to understanding the Maya script is now known to have been misguided, his central claim that the script was phonetic and should be deciphered as such was vindicated by Yuri Knorozov&#x27;s syllabic decipherment of Mayan writing in the 1950s.

== Notes ==
===Commentary notes===
==References==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* B. L. Whorf, .
* . Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University Library.
* What Whorf Really Said – Evaluation of Pinker&#x27;s (1994) critique of Whorf, by Nick Yee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331853" start="0" end="25" title="Benjamin Lee Whorf" label="Benjamin Atwood Lee Whorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="77" end="85" title="Linguistics" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451640" start="90" end="105" title="fire prevention" label="fire prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="144" end="166" title="Sapir–Whorf Hypothesis" label="Sapir–Whorf hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191095" start="338" end="350" title="Edward Sapir" label="Edward Sapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="395" end="403" title="Albert Einstein" label="Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="424" end="443" title="general relativity" label="physical relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q77888" start="524" end="544" title="Wilhelm von Humboldt" label="Wilhelm von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q75814" start="549" end="562" title="Wilhelm Wundt" label="Wilhelm Wundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="589" end="609" title="chemical engineering" label="chemical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="665" end="680" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478413" start="696" end="718" title="Mesoamerican languages" label="Mesoamerican languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="751" end="767" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl language"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="960" end="975" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q56421" start="1078" end="1091" title="Hopi language" label="Hopi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34073" start="1180" end="1201" title="Uto-Aztecan languages" label="Uto-Aztecan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q211248" start="1473" end="1490" title="Maya script" label="Maya hieroglyphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179488" start="2073" end="2090" title="psycholinguistics" label="psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="2095" end="2118" title="linguistic anthropology" label="linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83188" start="2155" end="2165" title="relativism" label="relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001724" start="2170" end="2182" title="universalism" label="universalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136934" start="2211" end="2227" title="Raciolinguistics" label="raciolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="2284" end="2293" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422614" start="2302" end="2312" title="cryptotype" label="cryptotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q54170" start="2492" end="2515" title="Winthrop, Massachusetts" label="Winthrop, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q21647153" start="2667" end="2671" title="John Whorf" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431326" start="2676" end="2683" title="Richard Whorf" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321622" start="2838" end="2857" title="Yankee Doodle Dandy" label="Yankee Doodle Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="2877" end="2881" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q941737" start="2935" end="2958" title="The Beverly Hillbillies" label="The Beverly Hillbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q505844" start="3213" end="3232" title="William H. Prescott" label="William H. Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3246" end="3264" title="William H. Prescott#The History of the Conquest of Mexico" label="Conquest of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="3452" end="3489" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="3563" end="3583" title="chemical engineering" label="chemical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q444110" start="3781" end="3812" title="The Hartford" label="Hartford Fire Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="5544" end="5553" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="5611" end="5620" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9149" start="5645" end="5659" title="fundamentalism" label="fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="5687" end="5698" title="creationism" label="creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635660" start="5770" end="5779" title="Theosophy (Boehmian)" label="theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="5818" end="5826" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="5831" end="5836" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="5877" end="5909" title="holism" label="world as an interconnected whole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="6463" end="6474" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="6577" end="6585" title="esoteric" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q586123" start="6636" end="6663" title="Fabre d&amp;#x27;Olivet" label="Antoine Fabre d&amp;#x27;Olivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="6713" end="6728" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="6839" end="6848" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674510" start="7038" end="7061" title="Hartford Public Library" label="Hartford Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="7124" end="7151" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Native American linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="7156" end="7164" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135478" start="7190" end="7212" title="James Hammond Trumbull" label="James Hammond Trumbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q132336" start="7290" end="7305" title="John Bissell Carroll" label="John B. Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q213195" start="7351" end="7364" title="B. F. Skinner" label="B. F. Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="7535" end="7546" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="7581" end="7588" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q211248" start="7667" end="7690" title="Maya script" label="Maya hieroglyphic texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723536" start="7798" end="7811" title="Alfred Tozzer" label="Alfred Tozzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="7839" end="7857" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133505" start="7863" end="7878" title="Herbert Spinden" label="Herbert Spinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="7886" end="7901" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249027" start="8058" end="8072" title="Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology" label="Peabody Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34073" start="8143" end="8170" title="Uto-Aztecan languages" label="Uto-Aztecan language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q191095" start="8178" end="8190" title="Edward Sapir" label="Edward Sapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194600" start="8286" end="8291" title="Piman languages" label="Piman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915525" start="8296" end="8313" title="Tepecano language" label="Tepecano language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676266" start="8360" end="8374" title="J. Alden Mason" label="J. Alden Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694727" start="8529" end="8560" title="Social Science Research Council" label="Social Science Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965602" start="8770" end="8786" title="Nahuatl dialects" label="Nahuatl dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q48612" start="8839" end="8853" title="oligosynthetic" label="oligosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554021" start="8966" end="8995" title="Linguistic Society of America" label="Linguistic Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q33738" start="9039" end="9054" title="Mayan languages" label="Mayan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="9149" end="9160" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q552288" start="9178" end="9194" title="R. H. Barlow" label="Robert H. Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q936087" start="9336" end="9346" title="Milpa Alta" label="Milpa Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q794182" start="9418" end="9434" title="Aztec writing" label="Aztec pictograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352495" start="9448" end="9457" title="Tepozteco" label="Tepozteco"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="9481" end="9488" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="9628" end="9638" title="Autodidacticism" label="autodidact"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="9880" end="9884" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="9894" end="9915" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="9951" end="9963" title="Anthropology" label="Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450352" start="10209" end="10222" title="Lyle Campbell" label="Lyle Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357740" start="10227" end="10244" title="Frances Karttunen" label="Frances Karttunen"/>
<link wikidata="Q333227" start="10655" end="10669" title="Morris Swadesh" label="Morris Swadesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q445239" start="10671" end="10680" title="Mary Haas" label="Mary Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9002166" start="10682" end="10694" title="Harry Hoijer" label="Harry Hoijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541484" start="10696" end="10708" title="G. L. Trager" label="G. L. Trager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077571" start="10713" end="10732" title="Charles F. Voegelin" label="Charles F. Voegelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77888" start="10986" end="10997" title="Wilhelm von Humboldt" label="Humboldtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="11028" end="11038" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193627" start="11196" end="11214" title="logical positivism" label="logical positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="11232" end="11248" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="11263" end="11282" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q503276" start="11305" end="11310" title="C. K. Ogden" label="Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q718585" start="11315" end="11329" title="I. A. Richards" label="Richards&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750820" start="11336" end="11358" title="The Meaning of Meaning" label="The Meaning of Meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="11594" end="11606" title="formal logic" label="formal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q333402" start="11972" end="11988" title="Alfred Korzybski" label="Alfred Korzybski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621039" start="11996" end="12013" title="General semantics" label="General semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q590563" start="12047" end="12059" title="Stuart Chase" label="Stuart Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="12463" end="12473" title="historical linguistics" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q777864" start="12478" end="12501" title="descriptive linguistics" label="descriptive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q56421" start="12683" end="12696" title="Hopi language" label="Hopi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="12789" end="12798" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855094" start="12981" end="12992" title="Second Mesa, Arizona" label="Second Mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414272" start="13000" end="13016" title="Hopi Reservation" label="Hopi Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="13020" end="13027" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="13131" end="13141" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554021" start="13214" end="13243" title="Linguistic Society of America" label="Linguistic Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="13743" end="13752" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422614" start="13760" end="13789" title="cryptotype" label="covert grammatical categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="14291" end="14312" title="linguistic relativity" label="linguistic relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q796078" start="14613" end="14634" title="MIT Technology Review" label="MIT Technology Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="14875" end="14881" title="Chennai" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="14883" end="14888" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="15348" end="15371" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q391156" start="15397" end="15409" title="Essentialism" label="essentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9002166" start="16289" end="16301" title="Harry Hoijer" label="Harry Hoijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16731676" start="17058" end="17070" title="John A. Lucy" label="John A. Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574025" start="17447" end="17458" title="Roger Brown (psychologist)" label="Roger Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320392" start="17463" end="17477" title="Eric Lenneberg" label="Eric Lenneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q376431" start="18112" end="18122" title="color term" label="color term"/>
<link wikidata="Q10188" start="18251" end="18255" title="Zuni language" label="Zuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="18556" end="18568" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001724" start="18632" end="18644" title="universalism" label="universalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q508969" start="19369" end="19390" title="cognitive linguistics" label="cognitive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179488" start="19395" end="19412" title="psycholinguistics" label="psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="19594" end="19617" title="Analytical philosophy" label="analytical philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q687424" start="19692" end="19701" title="Max Black" label="Max Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q311772" start="19706" end="19721" title="Donald Davidson (philosopher)" label="Donald Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320392" start="20701" end="20715" title="Eric Lenneberg" label="Eric Lenneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="20717" end="20729" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="20735" end="20748" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q313772" start="21543" end="21549" title="George Lakoff" label="Lakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="21687" end="21693" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689591" start="21698" end="21706" title="jingoism" label="jingoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q470501" start="22231" end="22252" title="The Language Instinct" label="The Language Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q319186" start="22379" end="22390" title="Jerry Fodor" label="Jerry Fodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="22392" end="22402" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="22407" end="22412" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q279161" start="22695" end="22704" title="Language of thought hypothesis" label="mentalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16731676" start="22933" end="22945" title="John A. Lucy" label="John A. Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608833" start="22950" end="22969" title="Stephen C. Levinson" label="Stephen C. Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q912820" start="23052" end="23060" title="Strawman fallacy" label="strawmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="23607" end="23627" title="Theory of Relativity" label="Theory of Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="23937" end="23948" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="24067" end="24086" title="Nazism" label="national socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q565644" start="24124" end="24137" title="Deutsche Physik" label="Aryan Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378247" start="24446" end="24465" title="cultural psychology" label="cultural psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="24470" end="24493" title="linguistic anthropology" label="linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q313772" start="24646" end="24659" title="George Lakoff" label="George Lakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q13354" start="25731" end="25752" title="Yucatec Maya language" label="Yucatec Maya language"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="25756" end="25762" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q9236948" start="26163" end="26178" title="John J. Gumperz" label="John J. Gumperz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608833" start="26183" end="26202" title="Stephen C. Levinson" label="Stephen C. Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179488" start="26246" end="26263" title="psycholinguistics" label="psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q160845" start="26265" end="26281" title="sociolinguistics" label="sociolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="26286" end="26309" title="linguistic anthropology" label="linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q832911" start="26616" end="26658" title="Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics" label="Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528728" start="26789" end="26804" title="Lera Boroditsky" label="Lera Boroditsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249842" start="26809" end="26822" title="Dedre Gentner" label="Dedre Gentner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="27581" end="27600" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="27614" end="27633" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q180819" start="27797" end="27809" title="Lev Vygotsky" label="Lev Vygotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135710" start="27817" end="27838" title="social constructivism" label="social constructivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185375" start="28122" end="28137" title="Mikhail Bakhtin" label="Mikhail Bakhtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="28304" end="28314" title="Positivism" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="29171" end="29186" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="29207" end="29225" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="29615" end="29622" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q272021" start="29976" end="29994" title="gestalt psychology" label="gestalt psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669206" start="30237" end="30244" title="Shawnee language" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412040" start="30520" end="30537" title="Figure-ground (perception)" label="figure and ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554037" start="30718" end="30740" title="linguistic determinism" label="linguistic determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q383340" start="31204" end="31220" title="speech community" label="speech community"/>
<link wikidata="Q117255" start="32414" end="32418" title="Hopi" label="Hopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q471271" start="32792" end="32805" title="Standard Average European" label="SAE languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350480" start="33456" end="33472" title="Ekkehart Malotki" label="Ekkehart Malotki"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="34351" end="34356" title="tense (grammar)" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q562952" start="35074" end="35090" title="Michael Halliday" label="Michael Halliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422614" start="35136" end="35146" title="cryptotype" label="cryptotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="35378" end="35387" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="35455" end="35462" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15489555" start="35584" end="35597" title="Bernard Bloch (linguist)" label="Bernard Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="35914" end="35921" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918137" start="36563" end="36578" title="metalinguistics" label="metalinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918137" start="37236" end="37251" title="metalinguistics" label="metalinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13419941" start="37256" end="37280" title="metalinguistic awareness" label="metalinguistic awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391924" start="37291" end="37310" title="Michael Silverstein" label="Michael Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="37411" end="37434" title="linguistic anthropology" label="linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34073" start="37516" end="37537" title="Uto-Aztecan languages" label="Uto-Aztecan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915525" start="37643" end="37651" title="Tepecano language" label="Tepecano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393095" start="37657" end="37676" title="Oʼodham language" label="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham"/>
<link wikidata="Q56704" start="37881" end="37901" title="Tübatulabal language" label="Tübatulabal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q311538" start="38002" end="38016" title="Alfred L. Kroeber" label="Kroeber&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="38226" end="38233" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q559242" start="38393" end="38410" title="Classical Nahuatl" label="Classical Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q48612" start="38445" end="38468" title="oligosynthetic language" label="oligosynthetic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q936087" start="38578" end="38588" title="Milpa Alta" label="Milpa Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020785" start="38593" end="38602" title="Tepoztlán" label="Tepoztlán"/>
<link wikidata="Q9002166" start="38736" end="38748" title="Harry Hoijer" label="Harry Hoijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965602" start="38821" end="38835" title="Nahuatl dialects" label="Modern Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="39161" end="39168" title="prosody (linguistics)" label="prosody"/>
<link wikidata="Q602418" start="39512" end="39527" title="Segment (linguistics)" label="supra-segmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579783" start="39923" end="39946" title="American Anthropologist" label="American Anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965602" start="40010" end="40037" title="Nahuan languages" label="Nahuan or Aztecan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q754984" start="40057" end="40069" title="sound change" label="sound change"/>
<link wikidata="Q754984" start="40124" end="40133" title="sound law" label="sound law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142348" start="40152" end="40168" title="Whorf&amp;#x27;s law" label="Whorf&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q548830" start="40409" end="40422" title="Aztec-Tanoan languages" label="Azteco-Tanoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="40423" end="40438" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q386288" start="40522" end="40538" title="Tanoan languages" label="Tanoan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q56492" start="40544" end="40548" title="Tewa language" label="Tewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56631" start="40553" end="40567" title="Kiowa language" label="Kiowa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723536" start="40790" end="40803" title="Alfred Tozzer" label="Alfred Tozzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q705504" start="40872" end="40889" title="J. Eric S. Thompson" label="J. E. S. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="41307" end="41320" title="Logogram" label="logo-syllabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407741" start="41521" end="41534" title="Yuri Knorozov" label="Yuri Knorozov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3356" wikidata="Q1124" url="?curid=3356" title="Bill Clinton">
<text>William Jefferson Clinton (né Blythe; born August 19, 1946) is an American politician and lawyer who served as the 42nd president of the United States from 1993 to 2001. A member of the Democratic Party, he previously served as the attorney general of Arkansas from 1977 to 1979 and as the governor of Arkansas from 1979 to 1981, and again from 1983 to 1992. Clinton, whose policies reflected a centrist &quot;Third Way&quot; political philosophy, became known as a New Democrat.

Born and raised in Arkansas, Clinton graduated from Georgetown University in 1968, and later from Yale Law School, where he met his future wife, Hillary Rodham. After graduating from law school, Clinton returned to Arkansas and won election as state attorney general, followed by two non-consecutive tenures as Arkansas governor. As governor, he overhauled the state&#x27;s education system and served as chairman of the National Governors Association. Clinton was elected president in the 1992 election, defeating the incumbent Republican Party president George H. W. Bush, and the independent businessman Ross Perot. He became the first president to be born in the Baby Boomer generation and the youngest to serve two full terms.

Clinton presided over the second longest period of peacetime economic expansion in American history. He signed into law the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act but failed to pass his plan for national health care reform. Starting in the mid-1990s, he began an ideological evolution as he became much more conservative in his domestic policy, advocating for and signing the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act, the State Children&#x27;s Health Insurance Program and financial deregulation measures. He appointed Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer to the U.S. Supreme Court. In foreign policy, Clinton ordered U.S. military intervention in the Bosnian and Kosovo wars, eventually signing the Dayton Peace agreement. He also called for the expansion of NATO in Eastern Europe and many former Warsaw Pact members joined NATO during his presidency. Clinton&#x27;s foreign policy in the Middle East saw him sign the Iraq Liberation Act which gave aid to groups against Saddam Hussein. He also participated in the Oslo I Accord and Camp David Summit to advance the Israeli–Palestinian peace process, and assisted the Northern Ireland peace process.

Clinton won re-election in the 1996 election, defeating Republican nominee Bob Dole and returning Reform Party nominee Ross Perot. In his second term, Clinton made use of permanent normal trade. Many of his second term accomplishments were overshadowed by the Clinton–Lewinsky scandal, when it was revealed in early 1998 that he had been engaging in an eighteen month-long sexual relationship with White House intern Monica Lewinsky. This scandal escalated throughout the year, culminating in December when Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives, becoming the first U.S. president to be impeached since Andrew Johnson. The two impeachment articles that the House passed were centered around perjury and Clinton using the powers of the presidency to commit obstruction of justice. In January 1999, Clinton&#x27;s impeachment trial began in the Senate, where he was acquitted two months later on both charges. During the last three years of Clinton&#x27;s presidency, the Congressional Budget Office reported a budget surplus—the first and only such surplus since 1969.

Clinton left office in 2001 with the joint-highest approval rating of any U.S. president. His presidency ranks among the middle to upper tier in historical rankings of U.S. presidents. However, his personal conduct and misconduct allegations, as well as his association with sex offender Jeffrey Epstein, have made him the subject of substantial scrutiny. Since leaving office, Clinton has been involved in public speaking and humanitarian work. He created the Clinton Foundation to address international causes such as the prevention of HIV/AIDS and global warming. In 2009, he was named the United Nations special envoy to Haiti. After the 2010 Haiti earthquake, Clinton founded the Clinton Bush Haiti Fund with George W. Bush and Barack Obama. He has remained active in Democratic Party politics, campaigning for his wife&#x27;s 2008 and 2016 presidential campaigns. Following Jimmy Carter&#x27;s death in December 2024, he is the earliest-serving living former U.S. president and the only living president to have served in the 20th century.

==Early life and career==

Clinton was born William Jefferson Blythe III on August 19, 1946, at Julia Chester Hospital in Hope, Arkansas. He is the son of William Jefferson Blythe Jr., a traveling salesman who died in an automobile accident three months before his birth, and Virginia Dell Cassidy (later Virginia Kelley). Blythe had initially survived the crash, but drowned in a drainage ditch. His parents married on September 4, 1943, but this union later proved bigamous, as Blythe was still married to his fourth wife. Virginia traveled to New Orleans to study nursing soon after Bill was born, leaving him in Hope with her parents Eldridge and Edith Cassidy, who owned and ran a small grocery store. At a time when the southern United States was racially segregated, Clinton&#x27;s grandparents sold goods on credit to people of all races. In 1950, Bill&#x27;s mother returned from nursing school and married Roger Clinton Sr., who co-owned an automobile dealership in Hot Springs, Arkansas, with his brother and Earl T. Ricks. The family moved to Hot Springs in 1950. Although he immediately assumed use of his stepfather&#x27;s surname, it was not until Clinton turned 15 that he formally adopted the surname Clinton as a gesture toward him. Clinton has described his stepfather as a gambler and an alcoholic who regularly abused his family. The physical abuse only ceased after a then-14-year-old Bill challenged his stepfather to &quot;stand and face&quot; him, though the verbal abuse continued. Bill would eventually forgive Roger Sr. for his abusive actions near the latter&#x27;s death.

In Hot Springs, Clinton attended St. John&#x27;s Catholic Elementary School, Ramble Elementary School, and the segregated Hot Springs High School, where he was an active student leader, avid reader, and musician. Clinton was in the chorus and played the tenor saxophone, winning first chair in the state band&#x27;s saxophone section. While in high school, Clinton performed for two years in a jazz trio, The 3 Kings, with Randy Goodrum, who became a successful professional pianist.

In 1961, Clinton became a member of the Hot Springs Chapter of the Order of DeMolay, a youth group affiliated with Freemasonry, but he never became a Freemason. He briefly considered dedicating his life to music, but as he noted in his autobiography &quot;My Life&quot;:
Clinton began an interest in law at Hot Springs High when he took up the challenge to argue the defense of the ancient Roman senator Catiline in a mock trial in his Latin class. After a vigorous defense that made use of his &quot;budding rhetorical and political skills&quot;, he told the Latin teacher Elizabeth Buck it &quot;made him realize that someday he would study law&quot;.

Clinton has identified two influential moments in his life, both occurring in 1963, that contributed to his decision to become a public figure. One was his visit as a Boys Nation senator to the White House to meet President John F. Kennedy. The other was watching Martin Luther King Jr.&#x27;s 1963 &quot;I Have a Dream&quot; speech on TV, which impressed him so much that he later memorized it.

==College and law school years==
===Georgetown University===
With the aid of scholarships, Clinton attended the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., receiving a Bachelor of Science in foreign service in 1968. Georgetown was the only university where Clinton applied.

In 1964 and 1965, Clinton won elections for class president. From 1964 to 1967, he was an intern and then a clerk in the office of Arkansas Senator J. William Fulbright. While in college, he became a brother of service fraternity Alpha Phi Omega and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. He is a member of Kappa Kappa Psi honorary band fraternity.

===Oxford===
Upon graduating from Georgetown in 1968, Clinton won a Rhodes Scholarship to University College, Oxford, where he initially read for a B.Phil. in philosophy, politics, and economics but transferred to a B.Litt. in politics and, ultimately, a B.Phil. in politics. Clinton did not expect to return for the second year because of the draft and so he switched programs; this type of activity was common among other Rhodes Scholars from his cohort. He was offered to study at Yale Law School, so he left early to return to the United States and did not receive a degree from Oxford.

Clinton befriended fellow American Rhodes Scholar Frank Aller during his time at Oxford. In 1969, Aller received a draft letter that mandated deployment to the Vietnam War. Aller&#x27;s 1971 suicide had an influential impact on Clinton. British writer and feminist Sara Maitland said of Clinton, &quot;I remember Bill and Frank Aller taking me to a pub in Walton Street in the summer term of 1969 and talking to me about the Vietnam War. I knew nothing about it, and when Frank began to describe the napalming of civilians I began to cry. Bill said that feeling bad wasn&#x27;t good enough. That was the first time I encountered the idea that liberal sensitivities weren&#x27;t enough and you had to do something about such things&quot;. Clinton was a member of the Oxford University Basketball Club and also played for Oxford University&#x27;s rugby union team.

While Clinton was president in 1994, he received an honorary Doctor of Civil Law degree and a fellowship from the University of Oxford, specifically for being &quot;a doughty and tireless champion of the cause of world peace&quot;, having &quot;a powerful collaborator in his wife&quot;, and for winning &quot;general applause for his achievement of resolving the gridlock that prevented an agreed budget&quot;.

===Vietnam War opposition and draft controversy===
During the Vietnam War, Clinton received educational draft deferments while he was in England in 1968 and 1969. While at Oxford, he participated in Vietnam War protests and organized a Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam event in October 1969. He was planning to attend law school in the U.S. and knew he might lose his deferment. Clinton tried unsuccessfully to obtain positions in the National Guard and the Air Force officer candidate school, and he then made arrangements to join the Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps (ROTC) program at the University of Arkansas.

He subsequently decided not to join the ROTC, saying in a letter to the officer in charge of the program that he opposed the war, but did not think it was honorable to use ROTC, National Guard, or Reserve service to avoid serving in Vietnam. He further stated that because he opposed the war, he would not volunteer to serve in uniform, but would subject himself to the draft, and would serve if selected only as a way &quot;to maintain my political viability within the system&quot;. Clinton registered for the draft and received a high number (311), meaning that those whose birthdays had been drawn as numbers1 to 310 would be drafted before him, making it unlikely he would be called up. (In fact, the highest number drafted was 195.)

Colonel Eugene Holmes, the Army officer who had been involved with Clinton&#x27;s ROTC application, suspected that Clinton attempted to manipulate the situation to avoid the draft and avoid serving in uniform. He issued a notarized statement during the 1992 presidential campaign:

During the 1992 campaign, it was revealed that Clinton&#x27;s uncle had attempted to secure him a position in the Navy Reserve, which would have prevented him from being deployed to Vietnam. This effort was unsuccessful and Clinton said in 1992 that he had been unaware of it until then. Although legal, Clinton&#x27;s actions with respect to the draft and deciding whether to serve in the military were criticized during his first presidential campaign by conservatives and some Vietnam veterans, some of whom charged that he had used Fulbright&#x27;s influence to avoid military service. Clinton&#x27;s 1992 campaign manager, James Carville, successfully argued that Clinton&#x27;s letter in which he declined to join the ROTC should be made public, insisting that voters, many of whom had also opposed the Vietnam War, would understand and appreciate his position.

===Law school===
After Oxford, Clinton attended Yale Law School and earned a Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree in 1973. In 1971, he met his future wife, Hillary Rodham, in the Yale Law Library; she was a class year ahead of him. They began dating and were soon inseparable. After only about a month, Clinton postponed his summer plans to be a coordinator for the George McGovern campaign for the 1972 United States presidential election to move in with her in California. The couple continued living together in New Haven when they returned to law school.

Clinton eventually moved to Texas with Rodham in 1972 to take a job leading McGovern&#x27;s effort there. He spent considerable time in Dallas, at the campaign&#x27;s local headquarters on Lemmon Avenue, where he had an office. Clinton worked with future two-term mayor of Dallas Ron Kirk, future governor of Texas Ann Richards, and then unknown television director and filmmaker Steven Spielberg.

==Failed congressional campaign and tenure as Attorney General of Arkansas==
After graduating from Yale Law School, Clinton returned to Arkansas and became a law professor at the University of Arkansas. In 1974, he ran for the House of Representatives. Running in the conservative 3rd district against incumbent Republican John Paul Hammerschmidt, Clinton&#x27;s campaign was bolstered by the anti-Republican and anti-incumbent mood resulting from the Watergate scandal. Hammerschmidt, who had received 77 percent of the vote in 1972, defeated Clinton by only a 52 percent to 48 percent margin. In 1976, Clinton ran for Arkansas attorney general. Defeating the secretary of state and the deputy attorney general in the Democratic primary, Clinton was elected with no opposition in the general election, as no Republican had run for the office.

==Governor of Arkansas (1979–1981, 1983–1992)==


In 1978, Clinton entered the Arkansas gubernatorial primary. At just 31 years old, he was one of the youngest gubernatorial candidates in the state&#x27;s history. Clinton was elected governor of Arkansas in 1978, having defeated the Republican candidate Lynn Lowe, a farmer from Texarkana. Clinton was only 32 years old when he took office, the youngest governor in the country at the time and the second youngest governor in the history of Arkansas. Due to his youthful appearance, Clinton was often called the &quot;Boy Governor&quot;. He worked on educational reform and directed the maintenance of Arkansas&#x27;s roads, with wife Hillary leading a successful committee on urban health care reform. However, his term included an unpopular motor vehicle tax and citizens&#x27; anger over the escape of Cuban refugees (from the Mariel boatlift) detained in Fort Chaffee in 1980. Monroe Schwarzlose, of Kingsland in Cleveland County, polled 31 percent of the vote against Clinton in the Democratic gubernatorial primary of 1980. Some suggested Schwarzlose&#x27;s unexpected voter turnout foreshadowed Clinton&#x27;s defeat by Republican challenger Frank D. White in the general election that year. As Clinton once joked, he was the youngest ex-governor in the nation&#x27;s history.

After leaving office in January 1981, Clinton joined friend Bruce Lindsey&#x27;s Little Rock law firm of Wright, Lindsey and Jennings. In 1982, he was elected governor a second time and kept the office for ten years. Effective with the 1986 election, Arkansas had changed its gubernatorial term of office from two to four years. During his term, he helped transform Arkansas&#x27;s economy and improved the state&#x27;s educational system. For senior citizens, he removed the sales tax from medications and increased the home property-tax exemption. He became a leading figure among the New Democrats, a group of Democrats who advocated welfare reform, smaller government, and other policies not supported by liberals. Formally organized as the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), the New Democrats argued that in light of President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s landslide victory in 1984, the Democratic Party needed to adopt a more centrist political stance in order to succeed at the national level. Clinton delivered the Democratic response to Reagan&#x27;s 1985 State of the Union Address and served as chair of the National Governors Association from 1986 to 1987, bringing him to an audience beyond Arkansas.

In the early 1980s, Clinton made reform of the Arkansas education system a top priority of his gubernatorial administration. The Arkansas Education Standards Committee was chaired by Clinton&#x27;s wife Hillary, who was also an attorney as well as the chair of the Legal Services Corporation. The committee transformed Arkansas&#x27;s education system. Proposed reforms included more spending for schools (supported by a sales-tax increase), better opportunities for gifted children, vocational education, higher teachers&#x27; salaries, more course variety, and compulsory teacher competency exams. The reforms passed in September 1983 after Clinton called a special legislative session—the longest in Arkansas history. Many have considered this the greatest achievement of the Clinton governorship. He defeated four Republican candidates for governor: Lowe (1978), White (1982 and 1986), Jonesboro businessmen Woody Freeman (1984), and Sheffield Nelson of Little Rock (1990).

Also in the 1980s, the Clintons&#x27; personal and business affairs included transactions that became the basis of the Whitewater controversy investigation, which later dogged his presidential administration. After extensive investigation over several years, no indictments were made against the Clintons related to the years in Arkansas.

According to some sources, Clinton was a death penalty opponent in his early years, but he eventually switched positions. However he might have felt previously, by 1992, Clinton was insisting that Democrats &quot;should no longer feel guilty about protecting the innocent&quot;. During Clinton&#x27;s final term as governor, Arkansas performed its first executions since 1964 (the death penalty had been reinstated in 1976). As Governor, he oversaw the first four executions carried out by the state of Arkansas since the death penalty was reinstated there in 1976: one by electric chair and three by lethal injection. To draw attention to his stance on capital punishment, Clinton flew home to Arkansas mid-campaign in 1992, in order to affirm in person that the controversial execution of Ricky Ray Rector would go forward as scheduled.

=== Scandals and allegations ===
During his time as governor in the 1980s, Arkansas was the center of a drug smuggling operation through Mena Airport. CIA agent Barry Seal allegedly imported three to five billion dollars worth of cocaine through the airport, and the operation was linked to the Iran–Contra affair. Clinton was accused of knowing about this operation, although nothing could be proven against him. Journalist Sam Smith tied him to various questionable business dealings. Clinton was also accused by Gennifer Flowers to have used cocaine as governor and his half-brother Roger was sentenced to prison in 1985 for possession and smuggling of cocaine, but was later pardoned by his brother after serving his sentence. During his time in Arkansas, there were also other scandals such as the Whitewater controversy involving the Clintons&#x27; real estate dealings, and Bill Clinton was accused of serious sexual misconduct in Arkansas, including allegations of using the Arkansas State Police to gain access to women (Troopergate affair). The killing of Don Henry and Kevin Ives in 1987 started various conspiracy theories that accused Clinton and the Arkansas state authorities of covering up the crime.

===1988 Democratic presidential primaries===

In 1987, the media speculated that Clinton would enter the presidential race. Clinton decided to remain as Arkansas governor (following consideration for the potential candidacy of Hillary for governor, initially favored—but ultimately vetoed—by the First Lady). For the nomination, Clinton endorsed Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis. He gave the nationally televised opening night address at the 1988 Democratic National Convention, but his speech, which was 33 minutes long and twice the length it was expected to be, was criticized for being too long. Clinton presented himself both as a moderate and as a member of the New Democrat wing of the Democratic Party, and he headed the moderate Democratic Leadership Council in 1990 and 1991.

===1992 United States presidential election===
In the first primary contest, the Iowa Caucus, Clinton finished a distant third to Iowa senator Tom Harkin. During the campaign for the New Hampshire primary, reports surfaced that Clinton had engaged in an extramarital affair with Gennifer Flowers. Clinton fell far behind former Massachusetts senator Paul Tsongas in the New Hampshire polls. Following Super Bowl XXVI, Clinton and his wife Hillary went on &quot;60 Minutes&quot; to rebuff the charges. Their television appearance was a calculated risk, but Clinton regained several delegates. He finished second to Tsongas in the New Hampshire primary, but after trailing badly in the polls and coming within single digits of winning, the media viewed it as a victory. News outlets labeled him &quot;The Comeback Kid&quot; for earning a firm second-place finish.

Winning the big prizes of Florida and Texas and many of the Southern primaries on Super Tuesday gave Clinton a sizable delegate lead. However, former California governor Jerry Brown was scoring victories and Clinton had yet to win a significant contest outside his native South. With no major Southern state remaining, Clinton targeted New York, which had many delegates. He scored a resounding victory in New York City, shedding his image as a regional candidate. Having been transformed into the consensus candidate, he secured the Democratic Party nomination, finishing with a victory in Jerry Brown&#x27;s home state of California.

During the campaign, questions of conflict of interest regarding state business and the politically powerful Rose Law Firm, at which Hillary Rodham Clinton was a partner, arose. Clinton argued the questions were moot because all transactions with the state had been deducted before determining Hillary&#x27;s firm pay. Further concern arose when Bill Clinton announced that, with Hillary, voters would be getting two presidents &quot;for the price of one&quot;.

Clinton was still the governor of Arkansas while campaigning for U.S. president, and he returned to his home state to see that Ricky Ray Rector would be executed. After killing a police officer and a civilian, Rector shot himself in the head, leading to what his lawyers said was a state where he could still talk but did not understand the idea of death. According to both Arkansas state law and federal law, a seriously mentally impaired inmate cannot be executed. The courts disagreed with the allegation of grave mental impairment and allowed the execution. Clinton&#x27;s return to Arkansas for the execution was framed in an article for &quot;The New York Times&quot; as a possible political move to counter &quot;soft on crime&quot; accusations.

Bush&#x27;s approval ratings were around 80 percent during the Gulf War, and he was described as unbeatable. When Bush compromised with Democrats to try to lower federal deficits, he reneged on his promise not to raise taxes, which hurt his approval rating. Clinton repeatedly condemned Bush for making a promise he failed to keep. By election time, the economy was souring and Bush saw his approval rating plummet to just slightly over 40 percent. Finally, conservatives were previously united by anti-communism, but with the end of the Cold War, the party lacked a uniting issue. When Pat Buchanan and Pat Robertson addressed Christian themes at the Republican National Convention—with Bush criticizing Democrats for omitting God from their platform—many moderates were alienated. Clinton then pointed to his moderate, &quot;New Democrat&quot; record as governor of Arkansas, though some on the more liberal side of the party remained suspicious. Many Democrats who had supported Ronald Reagan and Bush in previous elections switched their support to Clinton. Clinton and his running mate, Al Gore, toured the country during the final weeks of the campaign, shoring up support and pledging a &quot;new beginning&quot;.

On March 26, 1992, during a Democratic fund raiser of the presidential campaign, Robert Rafsky confronted then Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas and asked what he was going to do about AIDS, to which Clinton replied, &quot;I feel your pain&quot;. The televised exchange led to AIDS becoming an issue in the 1992 presidential election. On April 4, then candidate Clinton met with members of ACT UP and other leading AIDS advocates to discuss his AIDS agenda and agreed to make a major AIDS policy speech, to have people with HIV speak to the Democratic Convention, and to sign onto the AIDS United Action five point plan.
Clinton won the 1992 presidential election (370 electoral votes) against Republican incumbent George H. W. Bush (168 electoral votes) and billionaire populist Ross Perot (zero electoral votes), who ran as an independent on a platform that focused on domestic issues. Bush&#x27;s steep decline in public approval was a significant part of Clinton&#x27;s success. Clinton&#x27;s victory in the election ended twelve years of Republican rule of the White House and twenty of the previous twenty-four years. The election gave Democrats full control of the United States Congress, the first time one party controlled both the executive and legislative branches since Democrats held the 96th United States Congress during the presidency of Jimmy Carter.

According to Seymour Martin Lipset, the 1992 election had several unique characteristics. Voters felt that economic conditions were worse than they actually were, which harmed Bush. A rare event was the presence of a strong third-party candidate. Liberals launched a backlash against 12 years of a conservative White House. The chief factor was Clinton&#x27;s uniting his party, and winning over a number of heterogeneous groups.

==Presidency (1993–2001)==

Clinton&#x27;s &quot;third way&quot; of moderate liberalism built up the nation&#x27;s fiscal health and put the nation on a firm footing abroad amid globalization and the development of anti-American terrorist organizations.

During his presidency, Clinton advocated for a wide variety of legislation and programs, most of which were enacted into law or implemented by the executive branch. His policies, particularly the North American Free Trade Agreement and welfare reform, have been attributed to a centrist Third Way philosophy of governance. His policy of fiscal conservatism helped to reduce deficits on budgetary matters. Clinton presided over the longest period of peacetime economic expansion in American history.

The Congressional Budget Office reported budget surpluses of $69 billion in 1998, $126 billion in 1999, and $236 billion in 2000, during the last three years of Clinton&#x27;s presidency. Over the years of the recorded surplus, the gross national debt rose each year. At the end of the fiscal year (September 30) for each of the years a surplus was recorded, the U.S. Treasury reported a gross debt of $5.413 trillion in 1997, $5.526 trillion in 1998, $5.656 trillion in 1999, and $5.674 trillion in 2000. Over the same period, the Office of Management and Budget reported an end of year (December 31) gross debt of $5.369 trillion in 1997, $5.478 trillion in 1998, $5.606 in 1999, and $5.629 trillion in 2000. At the end of his presidency, the Clintons moved to 15 Old House Lane in Chappaqua, New York, in order to quell political worries about his wife&#x27;s residency for election as a U.S. Senator from New York.

===First term (1993–1997)===


After his presidential transition, Clinton was inaugurated as the 42nd president of the United States on January 20, 1993. Clinton was physically exhausted at the time, and had an inexperienced staff. His high levels of public support dropped in the first few weeks, as he made a series of mistakes. His first choice for attorney general had not paid her taxes on babysitters and was forced to withdraw. The second appointee also withdrew for the same reason. Clinton had repeatedly promised to encourage gays in the military service, despite what he knew to be the strong opposition of the military leadership. He tried anyway, and was publicly opposed by the top generals, and forced by Congress to a compromise position of &quot;Don&#x27;t ask, don&#x27;t tell&quot; whereby homosexuals could serve if and only if they kept it secret. He devised a $16-billion stimulus package primarily to aid inner-city programs desired by liberals, but it was defeated by a Republican filibuster in the Senate. His popularity at the 100 day mark of his term was the lowest of any president at that point.

Public opinion did support one liberal program, and Clinton signed the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, which required large employers to allow employees to take unpaid leave for pregnancy or a serious medical condition. This action had bipartisan support, and was popular with the public.

Two days after taking office, on January 22, 1993—the 20th anniversary of the U.S. Supreme Court decision in &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;—Clinton reversed restrictions on domestic and international family planning programs that had been imposed by Reagan and Bush. Clinton said abortion should be kept &quot;safe, legal, and rare&quot;—a slogan that had been suggested by political scientist Samuel L. Popkin and first used by Clinton in December 1991, while campaigning. During the eight years of the Clinton administration, the abortion rate declined by 18 percent.

On February 15, 1993, Clinton made his first address to the nation, announcing his plan to raise taxes to close a budget deficit. Two days later, in a nationally televised address to a joint session of Congress, Clinton unveiled his economic plan. The plan focused on reducing the deficit rather than on cutting taxes for the middle class, which had been high on his campaign agenda. Clinton&#x27;s advisers pressured him to raise taxes, based on the theory that a smaller federal budget deficit would reduce bond interest rates.

President Clinton&#x27;s attorney general Janet Reno authorized the FBI&#x27;s use of armored vehicles to deploy tear gas into the buildings of the Branch Davidian community near Waco, Texas, in hopes of ending a 51 day siege. During the operation on April 19, 1993, the buildings caught fire and 75 of the residents died, including 24 children. The raid had originally been planned by the Bush administration; Clinton had played no role.

In August, Clinton signed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, which passed Congress without a Republican vote. It cut taxes for 15million low-income families, made tax cuts available to 90 percent of small businesses, and raised taxes on the wealthiest 1.2 percent of taxpayers. Additionally, it mandated that the budget be balanced over many years through the implementation of spending restraints.

On September 22, 1993, Clinton made a major speech to Congress regarding a health care reform plan; the program aimed at achieving universal coverage through a national health care plan. This was one of the most prominent items on Clinton&#x27;s legislative agenda and resulted from a task force headed by Hillary Clinton. The plan was well received in political circles, but it was eventually doomed by well-organized lobby opposition from conservatives, the American Medical Association, and the health insurance industry. However, Clinton biographer John F. Harris said the program failed because of a lack of coordination within the White House. Despite the Democratic majority in Congress, the effort to create a national health care system ultimately died when compromise legislation by George J. Mitchell failed to gain a majority of support in August 1994. The failure of the bill was the first major legislative defeat of the Clinton administration.

On November 30, 1993, Clinton signed into law the Brady Bill, which mandated federal background checks on people who purchase firearms in the United States. The law also imposed a five-day waiting period on purchases, until the NICS system was implemented in 1998. He also expanded the Earned Income Tax Credit, a subsidy for low-income workers.

In December of the same year, allegations by Arkansas state troopers Larry Patterson and Roger Perry were first reported by David Brock in &quot;The American Spectator.&quot; In the affair later known as &quot;Troopergate&quot;, the officers alleged that they had arranged sexual liaisons for Clinton back when he was governor of Arkansas. The story mentioned a woman named &quot;Paula&quot;, a reference to Paula Jones. Brock later apologized to Clinton, saying the article was politically motivated &quot;bad journalism&quot;, and that &quot;the troopers were greedy and had slimy motives&quot;.

That month, Clinton implemented a Department of Defense directive known as &quot;Don&#x27;t Ask, Don&#x27;t Tell&quot;, which allowed gay men and women to serve in the armed services provided they kept their sexual orientation a secret. The Act forbade the military from inquiring about an individual&#x27;s sexual orientation. The policy was developed as a compromise after Clinton&#x27;s proposal to allow gays to serve openly in the military met staunch opposition from prominent Congressional Republicans and Democrats, including senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Sam Nunn (D-GA). According to David Mixner, Clinton&#x27;s support for the compromise led to a heated dispute with Vice President Al Gore, who felt that &quot;the President should lift the ban ... even though [his executive order] was sure to be overridden by the Congress&quot;. Some gay-rights advocates criticized Clinton for not going far enough and accused him of making his campaign promise to get votes and contributions. Their position was that Clinton should have integrated the military by executive order, noting that President Harry S. Truman used executive order to racially desegregate the armed forces. Clinton&#x27;s defenders argued that an executive order might have prompted the Senate to write the exclusion of gays into law, potentially making it harder to integrate the military in the future. Later in his presidency, in 1999, Clinton criticized the way the policy was implemented, saying he did not think any serious person could say it was not &quot;out of whack&quot;. The policy remained controversial, and was finally repealed in 2011, removing open sexual orientation as a reason for dismissal from the armed forces.

On January 1, 1994, Clinton signed the North American Free Trade Agreement into law. Throughout his first year in office, Clinton consistently supported ratification of the treaty by the U.S. Senate. Clinton and most of his allies in the Democratic Leadership Committee strongly supported free trade measures; there remained, however, strong disagreement within the party. Opposition came chiefly from anti-trade Republicans, protectionist Democrats and supporters of Ross Perot. The bill passed the house with 234 votes in favor and 200 votes opposed (132 Republicans and 102 Democrats in favor; 156 Democrats, 43 Republicans, and one independent opposed). The treaty was then ratified by the Senate and signed into law by the president.

On July 29, 1994, the Clinton administration launched the first official White House website, whitehouse.gov. The site was followed with three more versions, with the final version being launched on July 21, 2000. The White House website was part of a wider movement of the Clinton administration toward web-based communication. According to Robert Longley, &quot;Clinton and Gore were responsible for pressing almost all federal agencies, the U.S. court system and the U.S. military onto the Internet, thus opening up America&#x27;s government to more of America&#x27;s citizens than ever before. On July 17, 1996, Clinton issued Executive Order 13011—Federal Information Technology, ordering the heads of all federal agencies to utilize information technology fully to make the information of the agency easily accessible to the public.&quot;

The Omnibus Crime Bill, which Clinton signed into law in September 1994, made many changes to U.S. crime and law enforcement legislation including the expansion of the death penalty to include crimes not resulting in death, such as running a large-scale drug enterprise. During Clinton&#x27;s re-election campaign he said, &quot;My 1994 crime bill expanded the death penalty for drug kingpins, murderers of federal law enforcement officers, and nearly 60 additional categories of violent felons.&quot; It also included a subsection of assault weapons ban for a ten-year period.

After two years of Democratic Party control, the Democrats lost control of Congress to the Republicans in the mid-term elections in 1994, for the first time in forty years.

A speech delivered by President Bill Clinton at the December 6, 1995 White House Conference on HIV/AIDS projected that a cure for AIDS and a vaccine to prevent further infection would be developed. The President focused on his administration&#x27;s accomplishments and efforts related to the epidemic, including an accelerated drug-approval process. He also condemned homophobia and discrimination against people with HIV. Clinton announced three new initiatives: creating a special working group to coordinate AIDS research throughout the federal government; convening public health experts to develop an action plan that integrates HIV prevention with substance abuse prevention; and launching a new effort by the Department of Justice to ensure that health care facilities provide equal access to people with HIV and AIDS. 1996 would mark the first year since the beginning of the HIV/AIDS epidemic that the number of new HIV/AIDS diagnoses would decline, with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) even later reporting a significant 47% decline in the number of AIDS-related deaths in 1997 compared to the previous year. Credit for this decline would be given to the growing effectiveness of new drug therapy which was promoted by the Clinton Administration&#x27;s Department of Health and Human Services, such as highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).

On September 21, 1996, Clinton signed into law the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), which defined marriage for federal purposes as the legal union of one man and one woman; the legislation allowed individual states to refuse to recognize gay marriages that were performed in other states. Paul Yandura, speaking for the White House gay and lesbian liaison office, said Clinton&#x27;s signing DOMA &quot;was a political decision that they made at the time of a re-election&quot;. In defense of his actions, Clinton has said that DOMA was intended to &quot;head off an attempt to send a constitutional amendment banning gay marriage to the states&quot;, a possibility he described as highly likely in the context of a &quot;very reactionary Congress&quot;. Administration spokesman Richard Socarides said, &quot;the alternatives we knew were going to be far worse, and it was time to move on and get the president re-elected.&quot; Clinton himself said DOMA was something &quot;which the Republicans put on the ballot to try to get the base vote for Bush up, I think it&#x27;s obvious that something had to be done to try to keep the Republican Congress from presenting that&quot;; others were more critical. The veteran gay rights and gay marriage activist Evan Wolfson has called these claims &quot;historic revisionism&quot;. Despite this, it has been noted that other than a brief written response to a Reader&#x27;s Digest that questioned whether he agreed with it, Clinton had made no documented reference to the issue of gay marriage until May 1996. In a July 2, 2011, editorial &quot;The New York Times&quot; opined, &quot;The Defense of Marriage Act was enacted in 1996 as an election-year wedge issue, signed by President Bill Clinton in one of his worst policy moments.&quot; Ultimately, in &quot;United States v. Windsor&quot;, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down DOMA in June 2013.

Despite DOMA, Clinton was the first president to select openly gay persons for administrative positions, and he is generally credited as being the first president to publicly champion gay rights. During his presidency, Clinton issued two substantially controversial executive orders on behalf of gay rights, the first lifting the ban on security clearances for LGBT federal employees and the second outlawing discrimination based on sexual orientation in the federal civilian workforce. Under Clinton&#x27;s leadership, federal funding for HIV/AIDS research, prevention and treatment more than doubled. Clinton also pushed for passing hate crimes laws for gays and for the private sector Employment Non-Discrimination Act, which, buoyed by his lobbying, failed to pass the Senate by a single vote in 1996. Advocacy for these issues, paired with the politically unpopular nature of the gay rights movement at the time, led to enthusiastic support for Clinton&#x27;s election and reelection by the Human Rights Campaign. Clinton came out for gay marriage in July 2009 and urged the Supreme Court to overturn DOMA in 2013. He was later honored by GLAAD for his prior pro-gay stances and his reversal on DOMA.

The 1996 United States campaign finance controversy was an alleged effort by China to influence the domestic policies of the United States, before and during the Clinton administration, and involved the fundraising practices of the administration itself. Despite the evidence, the Chinese government denied all accusations.

As part of a 1996 initiative to curb illegal immigration, Clinton signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) on September 30, 1996. Appointed by Clinton, the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform recommended reducing legal immigration from about 800,000 people a year to about 550,000.

In November 1996, Clinton narrowly escaped possible assassination in the Philippines, which was a bridge bomb planted by al-Qaeda and was masterminded by Osama bin Laden. During Clinton&#x27;s presidency, the attempt remained top secret, and it remains classified , when Reuters reported having spoken with eight retired secret service agents about the incident.

====1996 presidential campaign====

Leading up to the 1996 presidential election, Clinton&#x27;s chances of being re-elected initially seemed slim, partially due to his growing untrust among the general public due to the Whitewater controversy and the lopsided defeat of national Democrats in the 1994 elections. His approval rating got as low as 40 percent in early 1995, which led to several high-profile Democrats suggesting he drop out of the race. However in mid-1995, as a result of a rebounding economy and the growing unpopularity of congressional Republicans, public opinion of Clinton up-ticked and early 1996 polls found he had a lead of up to 20 points over his likely Republican opponent Bob Dole.

Unlike Bush in the 1992 election, Clinton&#x27;s incumbency greatly benefited him in the general election, as most Americans felt the country was going in the right direction. Along with Dole, Clinton once again faced Ross Perot, who was nominated by the Reform Party, but he garnered significantly less support than he did in the 1992 election. In the month leading up the election, pundits were predicting a big win for Clinton, as his approval rating saw a high of 60 percent and pollsters finding he was favored with voters in over 30 states.

On election day, Clinton won 379 electoral votes, securing reelection and defeating Dole, who received 159 electoral votes. Clinton garnered 49.2 percent of the popular vote to Dole&#x27;s 40.7 percent and Perot&#x27;s 8.4 percent. With his victory, he became the first Democrat to win two consecutive presidential elections since Franklin D. Roosevelt.

===Second term (1997–2001)===

In the January 1997, State of the Union address, Clinton proposed a new initiative to provide health coverage to up to five million children. Senators Ted Kennedy—a Democrat—and Orrin Hatch—a Republican—teamed up with Hillary Rodham Clinton and her staff in 1997, and succeeded in passing legislation forming the State Children&#x27;s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), the largest (successful) health care reform in the years of the Clinton Presidency. That year, Hillary Clinton shepherded through Congress the Adoption and Safe Families Act and two years later she succeeded in helping pass the Foster Care Independence Act. Bill Clinton negotiated the passage of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 by the Republican Congress.

In October 1997, Clinton announced he was getting hearing aids, due to hearing loss attributed to his age, and his time spent as a musician in his youth. In 1999, he signed into law the Financial Services Modernization Act also known as the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act, which repealed the part of the Glass–Steagall Act that had prohibited a bank from offering a full range of investment, commercial banking, and insurance services since its enactment in 1933.

==== Investigations ====
In November 1993, David Hale—the source of criminal allegations against Bill Clinton in the Whitewater controversy—alleged that while governor of Arkansas, Clinton pressured Hale to provide an illegal $300,000 loan to Susan McDougal, the Clintons&#x27; partner in the Whitewater land deal. A U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission investigation resulted in convictions against the McDougals for their role in the Whitewater project, but the Clintons themselves were never charged, and Clinton maintains his and his wife&#x27;s innocence in the affair. Investigations by Robert B. Fiske and Ken Starr found insufficient to evidence to prosecute the Clintons.

The White House FBI files controversy of June 1996 arose concerning improper access by the White House to FBI security-clearance documents. Craig Livingstone, head of the White House Office of Personnel Security, improperly requested, and received from the FBI, background report files without asking permission of the subject individuals; many of these were employees of former Republican administrations. In March 2000, Independent Counsel Robert Ray determined there was no credible evidence of any crime. Ray&#x27;s report further stated, &quot;there was no substantial and credible evidence that any senior White House official was involved&quot; in seeking the files.

On May 19, 1993, Clinton fired seven employees of the White House Travel Office. This caused the White House travel office controversy even though the travel office staff served at the pleasure of the president and could be dismissed without cause. The White House responded to the controversy by claiming that the firings were done in response to financial improprieties that had been revealed by a brief FBI investigation. Critics contended that the firings had been done to allow friends of the Clintons to take over the travel business and the involvement of the FBI was unwarranted. The House Government Reform and Oversight Committee issued a report which accused the Clinton administration of having obstructed their efforts to investigate the affair. Special counsel Robert Fiske said that Hillary Clinton was involved in the firing and gave &quot;factually false&quot; testimony to the GAO, congress, and the independent counsel. However Fiske said there was not enough evidence to prosecute.

====Impeachment and acquittal====


After a House inquiry, Clinton was impeached on December 19, 1998, by the House of Representatives. The House voted 228–206 to impeach him for perjury to a grand jury and voted 221–212 to impeach him for obstruction of justice. Clinton was only the second U.S. president (the first being Andrew Johnson) to be impeached. Impeachment proceedings were based on allegations that Clinton had illegally lied about and covered up his relationship with 22-year-old White House (and later Department of Defense) employee Monica Lewinsky. After the Starr Report was submitted to the House providing what it termed &quot;substantial and credible information that President Clinton Committed Acts that May Constitute Grounds for an Impeachment&quot;, the House began impeachment hearings against Clinton before the mid-term elections. To hold impeachment proceedings, Republican leadership called a lame-duck session in December 1998.
While the House Judiciary Committee hearings ended in a straight party-line vote, there was lively debate on the House floor. The two charges passed in the House (largely with Republican support, but with a handful of Democratic votes as well) were for perjury and obstruction of justice. The perjury charge arose from Clinton&#x27;s testimony before a grand jury that had been convened to investigate perjury he may have committed in his sworn deposition during &quot;Jones v. Clinton,&quot; Paula Jones&#x27;s sexual harassment lawsuit. The obstruction charge was based on his actions to conceal his relationship with Lewinsky before and after that deposition.

The Senate later acquitted Clinton of both charges. The Senate refused to meet to hold an impeachment trial before the end of the old term, so the trial was held over until the next Congress. Clinton was represented by Washington law firm Williams &amp; Connolly. The Senate finished a twenty-one-day trial on February 12, 1999, with the vote of 55 not guilty/45 guilty on the perjury charge and 50 not guilty/50 guilty on the obstruction of justice charge. Both votes fell short of the constitutional two-thirds majority requirement to convict and remove an officeholder. The final vote was generally along party lines, with no Democrats voting guilty, and only a handful of Republicans voting not guilty.

On January 19, 2001, Clinton&#x27;s law license was suspended for five years after he acknowledged to an Arkansas circuit court he had engaged in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice in the &quot;Jones&quot; case. On October 1, the U.S. Supreme Court suspended Clinton from practicing law in the high court, citing fallout from the Lewinsky scandal, but rather than appealing the decision he resigned from the bar entirely.

====Pardons and commutations ====

Clinton issued 141 pardons and 36 commutations on his last day in office on January 20, 2001. Controversy surrounded Marc Rich and allegations that Hillary Clinton&#x27;s brother, Hugh Rodham, accepted payments in return for influencing the president&#x27;s decision-making regarding the pardons. Federal prosecutor Mary Jo White was appointed to investigate the pardon of Rich. She was later replaced by then-Republican James Comey. The investigation found no wrongdoing on Clinton&#x27;s part. Clinton also pardoned four defendants in the Whitewater Scandal, Chris Wade, Susan McDougal, Stephen Smith, and Robert W. Palmer, all of whom had ties to Clinton when he was governor of Arkansas. Former Clinton HUD Secretary Henry Cisneros, who pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI, was also among Clinton&#x27;s pardons.

==== Campaign finance controversies ====

In February 1997 it was discovered upon documents being released by the Clinton Administration that 938 people had stayed at the White House and that 821 of them had made donations to the Democratic Party and got the opportunity to stay in the Lincoln bedroom as a result of the donations. Some donors included Steven Spielberg, Tom Hanks, Jane Fonda, and Judy Collins. Top donors also got golf games and morning jogs with Clinton as a result of the contributions. Janet Reno was called on to investigate the matter by Trent Lott, but she refused.

In 1996, it was found that several Chinese foreigners made contributions to Clinton&#x27;s reelection campaign and the Democratic National Committee with the backing of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. Some of them also attempted to donate to Clinton&#x27;s defense fund. This violated United States law forbidding non-American citizens from making campaign contributions. Clinton and Al Gore also allegedly met with the foreign donors. A Republican investigation led by Fred Thompson found that Clinton was targeted by the Chinese government. However, Democratic senators Joe Lieberman and John Glenn said that the evidence showed that China only targeted congressional elections and not presidential elections.

===Military and foreign affairs===

====Somalia====

American troops had first entered Somalia during the Bush administration in response to a humanitarian crisis and civil war. Though initially involved to assist humanitarian efforts, the Clinton administration shifted the objectives set out in the mission and began pursuing a policy of attempting to neutralize Somali warlords. In 1993, during the Battle of Mogadishu, two U.S. helicopters were shot down by rocket-propelled grenade attacks to their tail rotors, trapping soldiers behind enemy lines. This resulted in an urban battle that killed 18 American soldiers, wounded 73 others, and resulted in one being taken prisoner. Television news programs depicted the supporters of warlord Mohammed Aidid desecrating the corpses of troops. The backlash resulting from the incident prompted in a drop in support for American intervention in the country and coincided with a more cautious use of troops throughout the rest of the Clinton administration. Following a subsequent national security policy review, U.S. forces were withdrawn from Somalia and later conflicts were approached with fewer soldiers on the ground.

====Rwanda====

In April 1994, genocide broke out in Rwanda. Intelligence reports indicate that Clinton was aware a &quot;final solution to eliminate all Tutsis&quot; was underway, long before the administration publicly used the word &quot;genocide&quot;. Fearing a reprisal of the events in Somalia the previous year, Clinton chose not to intervene. Clinton has called his failure to intervene one of his main foreign policy failings, saying &quot;I don&#x27;t think we could have ended the violence, but I think we could have cut it down. And I regret it.&quot;

====Bosnia and Herzegovina====
In 1993 and 1994, Clinton pressured Western European leaders to adopt a strong military policy against Bosnian Serbs during the Bosnian War. This strategy faced staunch opposition from the United Nations, NATO allies, and Congressional Republicans, leading Clinton to adopt a more diplomatic approach. In 1995, U.S. and NATO aircraft bombed Bosnian Serb targets to halt attacks on UN safe zones and pressure them into a peace accord that would end the Bosnian war. Clinton deployed U.S. peacekeepers to Bosnia in late 1995, to uphold the subsequent Dayton Agreement.

====Irish peace talks====
In 1992, before his presidency, Clinton proposed sending a peace envoy to Northern Ireland, but this was dropped to avoid tensions with the British government. In November 1995, in a ceasefire during the Troubles, Clinton became the first president to visit Northern Ireland, examining both of the two divided communities of Belfast. Despite unionist criticism, Clinton used his visit as a way to negotiate an end to the violent conflict, playing a key role in the peace talks that produced the Good Friday Agreement in 1998.

====Iran====

Clinton sought to continue the Bush administration&#x27;s policy of limiting Iranian influence in the Middle East, which he laid out in the dual containment strategy. In 1994, Clinton declared that Iran was a &quot;state sponsor of terrorism&quot; and a &quot;rogue state&quot;, marking the first time that an American President used that term. Subsequent executive orders heavily sanctioned Iran&#x27;s oil industry and banned almost all trade between U.S. companies and the Iranian government. In February 1996, the Clinton administration agreed to pay Iran US$131.8million (equivalent to $ million in ) in settlement to discontinue a case brought by Iran in 1989 against the U.S. in the International Court of Justice after the shooting down of Iran Air Flight 655 by the U.S. Navy guided missile cruiser.

====Iraq====

In Clinton&#x27;s 1998 State of the Union Address, he warned Congress that Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein was building an arsenal of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.

Clinton signed the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998 on October 31, 1998, which instituted a policy of &quot;regime change&quot; against Iraq, though it explicitly stated it did not provide for direct intervention on the part of American military forces. The administration then launched a four-day bombing campaign named Operation Desert Fox, lasting from December 16 to 19, 1998. At the end of this operation Clinton announced that &quot;So long as Saddam remains in power, he will remain a threat to his people, his region, and the world. With our allies, we must pursue a strategy to contain him and to constrain his weapons of mass destruction program, while working toward the day Iraq has a government willing to live at peace with its people and with its neighbors.&quot; American and British aircraft in the Iraq no-fly zones attacked hostile Iraqi air defenses 166 times in 1999 and 78 times in 2000.

====Osama bin Laden====

Capturing Osama bin Laden was an objective of the U.S. government during the Clinton presidency (and continued to be until bin Laden&#x27;s death in 2011). Despite claims by Mansoor Ijaz and Sudanese officials that the Sudanese government had offered to arrest and extradite bin Laden, and that U.S. authorities rejected each offer, the 9/11 Commission Report stated that &quot;we have not found any reliable evidence to support the Sudanese claim&quot;.

In response to a 1996 State Department warning about bin Laden and the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in East Africa by al-Qaeda (which killed 224 people, including 12 Americans), Clinton ordered several military missions to capture or kill bin Laden, all of which were unsuccessful. In August 1998, Clinton ordered cruise missile strikes on terrorist targets in Afghanistan and Sudan, targeting the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory in Sudan, which was suspected of assisting bin Laden in making chemical weapons, and bin Laden&#x27;s terrorist training camps in Afghanistan. The factory was destroyed by the attack, resulting in the death of one employee and the wounding of 11 other people. After the destruction of the factory, there was a medicine shortage in Sudan due to the plant providing 50 percent of Sudan&#x27;s medicine, and the destruction of the plant led to a shortage of chloroquine, a drug which is used to treat malaria. U.S. officials later acknowledged that there was no evidence the plant was acknowledging manufacturing or storing nerve gas. The attack provoked criticism of Clinton from journalists and academics including Christopher Hitchens, Seymour Hersh, Max Taylor, and others.

====Kosovo====

In the midst of a brutal crackdown on ethnic Albanian separatists in the province of Kosovo by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Clinton authorized the use of U.S. Armed Forces in a NATO bombing campaign against Yugoslavia in 1999, named Operation Allied Force. The stated reasoning behind the intervention was to stop the ethnic cleansing (and what the Clinton administration labeled genocide) of Albanians by Yugoslav anti-guerilla military units. General Wesley Clark was Supreme Allied Commander of NATO and oversaw the mission. With United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, the bombing campaign ended on June 10, 1999. The resolution placed Kosovo under UN administration and authorized a peacekeeping force to be deployed to the region. NATO announced its soldiers all survived combat, though two died in an Apache helicopter crash. Journalists in the popular press criticized genocide statements by the Clinton administration as false and greatly exaggerated. Prior to the bombing campaign on March 24, 1999, estimates showed that the number of civilians killed in the over year long conflict in Kosovo had been approximately 1,800, with critics asserting that little or no evidence existed of genocide. In a post-war inquiry, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe noted &quot;the patterns of the expulsions and the vast increase in lootings, killings, rape, kidnappings and pillage once the NATO air war began on March 24.&quot; In 2001, the UN-supervised Supreme Court of Kosovo ruled that genocide (the intent to destroy a people) did not take place, but recognized &quot;a systematic campaign of terror, including murders, rapes, arsons and severe maltreatments&quot; with the intention being the forceful departure of the Albanian population. The term &quot;ethnic cleansing&quot; was used as an alternative to &quot;genocide&quot; to denote not just ethnically motivated murder but also displacement, though critics charge there is little difference. Slobodan Milošević, the president of Yugoslavia at the time of the atrocities, was eventually brought to trial before the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in the Hague on charges including crimes against humanity and war crimes for his role in the war. He died in 2006, before the completion of the trial.

====China====


Clinton aimed to increase trade with China, minimizing import tariffs and offering the country most favoured nation status in 1993, his administration minimized tariff levels in Chinese imports. Clinton initially conditioned extension of this status on human rights reforms, but ultimately decided to extend the status despite a lack of reform in the specified areas, including free emigration, treatment of prisoners in terms of international human rights, and observation of human rights specified by UN resolutions, among others.

Relations were damaged briefly by the American bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade in May 1999. Clinton apologized for the bombing, stating it was accidental.

On October 10, 2000, Clinton signed into law the United States–China Relations Act of 2000, which granted permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) trade status to China. The president asserted that free trade would gradually open China to democratic reform.

In encouraging Congress to approve the agreement and China&#x27;s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO), Clinton stated that more trade with China would advance America&#x27;s economic interests, saying that &quot;economically, this agreement is the equivalent of a one-way street. It requires China to open its markets—with a fifth of the world&#x27;s population, potentially the biggest markets in the world—to both our products and services in unprecedented new ways.&quot;

====Israeli-Palestinian conflict====

Clinton attempted to end the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. Secret negotiations mediated by Clinton between Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Chairman Yasser Arafat led to a historic declaration of peace in September 1993, called the Oslo Accords, which were signed at the White House on September 13. The agreement led to the Israel–Jordan peace treaty in 1994 and the Wye River Memorandum in October 1998, however, this did not end the conflict. He brought Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian Authority chairman Yasser Arafat together at Camp David for the 2000 Camp David Summit, which lasted 14 days in July. Following another attempt in December 2000 at Bolling Air Force Base, in which the president offered the Clinton Parameters, the situation broke down completely after the end of the Taba Summit and with the start of the Second Intifada.

===Judicial appointments===


Clinton appointed two justices to the Supreme Court: Ruth Bader Ginsburg in 1993 and Stephen Breyer in 1994. Both justices went on to serve until the 2020s, leaving a lasting judicial legacy for President Clinton.

Clinton was the first president in history to appoint more women and minority judges than white male judges to the federal courts. In his eight years in office, 11.6% of Clinton&#x27;s court of appeals nominees and 17.4% of his district court nominees were black; 32.8% of his court of appeals nominees and 28.5% of his district court nominees were women.

==Public opinion==
Throughout Clinton&#x27;s first term, his job approval rating fluctuated in the 40s and 50s. In his second term, his rating consistently ranged from the high-50s to the high-60s. After his impeachment proceedings in 1998 and 1999, Clinton&#x27;s rating reached its highest point. According to a CBS News/&quot;New York Times&quot; poll, Clinton left office with an approval rating of 68 percent, which matched those of Ronald Reagan and Franklin D. Roosevelt as the highest ratings for departing presidents in the modern era. Clinton&#x27;s average Gallup poll approval rating for his last quarter in office was 61 percent, the highest final quarter rating any president has received for fifty years. Forty-seven percent of the respondents identified themselves as being Clinton supporters.

As he was leaving office, a CNN/&quot;USA Today&quot;/Gallup poll revealed that 45 percent of Americans said they would miss him; 55 percent thought he &quot;would have something worthwhile to contribute and should remain active in public life&quot;; 68 percent thought he would be remembered more for his &quot;involvement in personal scandal&quot; than for &quot;his accomplishments&quot;; and 58 percent answered &quot;No&quot; to the question &quot;Do you generally think Bill Clinton is honest and trustworthy?&quot; The same percentage said he would be remembered as either &quot;outstanding&quot; or &quot;above average&quot; as a president, while 22 percent said he would be remembered as &quot;below average&quot; or &quot;poor&quot;. ABC News characterized public consensus on Clinton as, &quot;You can&#x27;t trust him, he&#x27;s got weak morals and ethics—and he&#x27;s done a heck of a good job.&quot; During his first term, roughly 7 in 10 Americans believed that the media unfairly covered Clinton&#x27;s character flaws, according to polling.

A year after he left office, a Gallup poll found that 51 percent of respondents said they approved of the overall job Clinton did as president. In May 2006, a CNN poll comparing Clinton&#x27;s job performance with that of his successor, George W. Bush, found that a strong majority of respondents said Clinton outperformed Bush in six different areas questioned. A June 2006 poll by Gallup found that 61 percent of Americans said they approved of the job Clinton did as president, a 10-point increase from the 2002 poll. Gallup polls in 2007 and 2011 showed that Clinton was regarded by 13 percent of Americans as the greatest president in U.S. history.

In 2010, 69 percent of respondents in a Gallup survey said they approved of the job Clinton did as president, including 47 percent of Republicans and 68 percent of independents. His sudden spike in popularity during this time was attributed to Americans comparing him to then-incumbent Democratic president Barack Obama, who had low approval ratings. In 2014, 18 percent of respondents in a Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll of American voters regarded Clinton as the best president since World War II, making him the third most popular among postwar presidents, behind John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan. The same poll showed that just 3 percent of American voters regarded Clinton as the worst president since World War II.

A 2015 poll by &quot;The Washington Post&quot; asked 162 scholars of the American Political Science Association to rank all the U.S. presidents in order of greatness. According to their findings, Clinton ranked eighth overall, with a rating of 70 percent.

==Public image==
Clinton was the first baby boomer president. Authors Martin Walker and Bob Woodward stated that Clinton&#x27;s innovative use of sound bite-ready dialogue, personal charisma, and public perception-oriented campaigning were a major factor in his high public approval ratings. When Clinton played the saxophone on &quot;The Arsenio Hall Show&quot;, he was described by some religious conservatives as &quot;the MTV president&quot;. Opponents sometimes referred to him as &quot;Slick Willie&quot;, a nickname which was first applied to him in 1980 by &quot;Pine Bluff Commercial&quot; journalist Paul Greenberg; Greenberg believed that Clinton was abandoning the progressive policies of previous Arkansas Governors such as Winthrop Rockefeller, Dale Bumpers and David Pryor. The claim &quot;Slick Willie&quot; would last throughout his presidency. His folksy manner led him to be nicknamed Bubba starting from the 1992 presidential election. Since 2000, he has frequently been referred to as &quot;The Big Dog&quot; or &quot;Big Dog&quot;. His prominent role in campaigning for Obama during the 2012 presidential election and his widely publicized speech at the 2012 Democratic National Convention, where he officially nominated Obama and criticized Republican nominee Mitt Romney and Republican policies in detail, earned him the nickname &quot;Explainer-in-Chief&quot;.

Clinton drew strong support from the African American community and insisted that the improvement of race relations would be a major theme of his presidency. In 1998, Nobel laureate Toni Morrison called Clinton &quot;the first black president&quot;, saying, &quot;Clinton displays almost every trope of blackness: single-parent household, born poor, working-class, saxophone-playing, McDonald&#x27;s-and-junk-food-loving boy from Arkansas&quot;. Morrison noted that Clinton&#x27;s sex life was scrutinized more than his career accomplishments, and she compared this to the stereotyping and double standards that, she said, black people typically endure. Many viewed this comparison as unfair and disparaging both to Clinton and to the African-American community.

=== Sexual assault and misconduct allegations ===

Several women have publicly accused Clinton of sexual misconduct, including rape, harassment, and sexual assault. Additionally, some commentators have characterized Clinton&#x27;s sexual relationship with former White House intern Monica Lewinsky as predatory or non-consensual, despite the fact that Lewinsky called the relationship consensual at the time. These allegations have been revisited and lent more credence in 2018, in light of the #MeToo movement, with many commentators and Democratic leaders now saying Clinton should have been compelled to resign after the Lewinsky affair.

In 1994, Paula Jones initiated a sexual harassment lawsuit against Clinton, claiming he had made unwanted advances towards her in 1991; Clinton denied the allegations. In April 1998, the case was initially dismissed by Judge Susan Webber Wright on the grounds that it lacked legal merit. Jones appealed Webber Wright&#x27;s ruling, and her suit gained traction following Clinton&#x27;s admission to having an affair with Monica Lewinsky in August 1998. In 1998, lawyers for Paula Jones released court documents that alleged a pattern of sexual harassment by Clinton when he was Governor of Arkansas. Robert S. Bennett, Clinton&#x27;s main lawyer for the case, called the filing &quot;a pack of lies&quot; and &quot;an organized campaign to smear the President of the United States&quot; funded by Clinton&#x27;s political enemies. In October 1998, Clinton&#x27;s attorneys tentatively offered $700,000 to settle the case, which was then the $800,000 which Jones&#x27; lawyers sought. Clinton later agreed to an out-of-court settlement and paid Jones $850,000. Bennett said the president made the settlement only so he could end the lawsuit for good and move on with his life. During the deposition for the Jones lawsuit, which was held at the White House, Clinton denied having sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky—a denial that became the basis for an impeachment charge of perjury.

In 1998, Kathleen Willey alleged that Clinton had groped her in a hallway in 1993. An independent counsel determined Willey gave &quot;false information&quot; to the FBI, inconsistent with sworn testimony related to the Jones allegation. On March 19, 1998, Julie Hiatt Steele, a friend of Willey, released an affidavit, accusing the former White House aide of asking her to lie to corroborate Ms. Willey&#x27;s account of being sexually groped by Clinton in the Oval Office. An attempt by Kenneth Starr to prosecute Steele for making false statements and obstructing justice ended in a mistrial and Starr declined to seek a retrial after Steele sought an investigation against the former independent counsel for prosecutorial misconduct.

Also in 1998, Juanita Broaddrick alleged that Clinton had raped her in the spring of 1978, although she said she did not remember the exact date. To support her charge, Broaddrick notes that she told multiple witnesses in 1978 she had been raped by Clinton, something these witnesses also state in interviews to the press. Broaddrick had earlier filed an affidavit denying any &quot;unwelcome sexual advances&quot; and later repeated the denial in a sworn deposition. In a 1998 NBC interview wherein she detailed the alleged rape, Broaddrick said she had denied (under oath) being raped only to avoid testifying about the ordeal publicly.

The Lewinsky scandal has had an enduring impact on Clinton&#x27;s legacy, beyond his impeachment in 1998. In the wake of the #MeToo movement (which shed light on the widespread prevalence of sexual assault and harassment, especially in the workplace), various commentators and Democratic political leaders, as well as Lewinsky herself, have revisited their view that the Lewinsky affair was consensual, and instead characterized it as an abuse of power or harassment, in light of the power differential between a president and a 22-year-old intern. In 2018, Clinton was asked in several interviews about whether he should have resigned, and he said he had made the right decision in not resigning. During the 2018 Congressional elections, &quot;The New York Times&quot; alleged that having no Democratic candidate for office asking Clinton to campaign with them was a change that attributed to the revised understanding of the Lewinsky scandal. However, former DNC interim chair Donna Brazile previously urged Clinton in November 2017 to campaign during the 2018 midterm elections, in spite of New York U.S. senator Kirsten Gillibrand&#x27;s recent criticism of the Lewinsky scandal.

=== Alleged affairs ===
Clinton admitted to having extramarital affairs with singer Gennifer Flowers and Monica Lewinsky. Actress Elizabeth Gracen, Miss Arkansas winner Sally Perdue, and Dolly Kyle Browning all claimed that they had affairs with Clinton during his time as governor of Arkansas. Browning later sued Clinton, Bruce Lindsey, Robert S. Bennett, and Jane Mayer, alleging they engaged in a conspiracy to attempt to block her from publishing a book loosely based on her relationship with Clinton and tried to defame him. However, Browning&#x27;s lawsuit was dismissed.

==Post-presidency (2001–present)==
===Activities until 2008 campaign===

In 2002, Clinton warned that pre-emptive military action against Iraq would have unwelcome consequences, and later claimed to have opposed the Iraq War from the start (though some dispute this). In 2005, Clinton criticized the Bush administration for its handling of emissions control, while speaking at the United Nations Climate Change conference in Montreal.

The William J. Clinton Presidential Center and Park in Little Rock, Arkansas, was dedicated in 2004. Clinton released a best-selling autobiography, &quot;My Life&quot;, in 2004. In 2007, he released &quot;&quot;, which also became a &quot;New York Times&quot; Best Seller and garnered positive reviews.
In the aftermath of the 2004 Asian tsunami, U.N. secretary-general Kofi Annan appointed Clinton to head a relief effort. After Hurricane Katrina, Clinton joined with fellow former president George H. W. Bush to establish the Bush-Clinton Tsunami Fund in January 2005, and the Bush-Clinton Katrina Fund in October of that year. As part of the tsunami effort, these two ex-presidents appeared in a Super Bowl XXXIX pre-game show, and traveled to the affected areas. They also spoke together at the funeral of Boris Yeltsin in April 2007.

Based on his philanthropic worldview, Clinton created the William J. Clinton Foundation to address issues of global importance. This foundation includes the Clinton Foundation HIV and AIDS Initiative (CHAI), which strives to combat that disease, and has worked with the Australian government toward that end. The Clinton Global Initiative (CGI), begun by the Clinton Foundation in 2005, attempts to address world problems such as global public health, poverty alleviation and religious and ethnic conflict. In 2005, Clinton announced through his foundation an agreement with manufacturers to stop selling sugary drinks in schools. Clinton&#x27;s foundation joined with the Large Cities Climate Leadership Group in 2006 to improve cooperation among those cities, and he met with foreign leaders to promote this initiative. The foundation has received donations from many governments all over the world, including Asia and the Middle East. In 2008, Foundation director Inder Singh announced deals to reduce the price of anti-malaria drugs by 30 percent in developing nations. Clinton also spoke in favor of California Proposition 87 on alternative energy, which was voted down.

===2008 presidential election===
During the 2008 Democratic presidential primary campaign, Clinton vigorously advocated on behalf of his wife, Hillary. Through speaking engagements and fundraisers, he was able to raise $10 million toward her campaign. Some worried that as an ex-president, he was too active on the trail, too negative to Clinton rival Barack Obama, and alienating his supporters at home and abroad. Many were especially critical of him following his remarks in the South Carolina primary, which Obama won. Later in the 2008 primaries, there was some infighting between Bill and Hillary&#x27;s staffs, especially in Pennsylvania. Considering Bill&#x27;s remarks, many thought he could not rally Hillary supporters behind Obama after Obama won the primary. Such remarks led to apprehension that the party would be split to the detriment of Obama&#x27;s election. Fears were allayed August 27, 2008, when Clinton enthusiastically endorsed Obama at the 2008 Democratic National Convention, saying all his experience as president assures him that Obama is &quot;ready to lead&quot;. After Hillary Clinton&#x27;s presidential campaign was over, Bill Clinton continued to raise funds to help pay off her campaign debt.

===After the 2008 election===
In 2009, Clinton travelled to North Korea on behalf of two American journalists imprisoned there. Euna Lee and Laura Ling had been imprisoned for illegally entering the country from China. Jimmy Carter had made a similar visit in 1994. After Clinton met with North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, Kim issued a pardon.

Since then, Clinton has been assigned many other diplomatic missions. He was named United Nations Special Envoy to Haiti in 2009 following a series of hurricanes which caused $1 billion in damages. Clinton organized a conference with the Inter-American Development Bank, where a new industrial park was discussed in an effort to &quot;build back better&quot;. In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, U.S. president Barack Obama announced that Clinton and George W. Bush would coordinate efforts to raise funds for Haiti&#x27;s recovery. Funds began pouring into Haiti, which led to funding becoming available for Caracol Industrial Park in a part of the country unaffected by the earthquake. While Hillary Clinton was in South Korea, she and Cheryl Mills worked to convince SAE-A, a large apparel subcontractor, to invest in Haiti despite the company&#x27;s deep concerns about plans to raise the minimum wage. In the summer of 2010, the South Korean company signed a contract at the U.S. State Department, ensuring that the new industrial park would have a key tenant. In 2010, Clinton announced support of, and delivered the keynote address for, the inauguration of NTR, Ireland&#x27;s first environmental foundation. At the 2012 Democratic National Convention, Clinton gave a widely praised speech nominating Barack Obama.

===2016 presidential election and after===
During the 2016 presidential election, Clinton again encouraged voters to support Hillary, and made appearances speaking on the campaign trail. In a series of tweets, then-President-elect Donald Trump criticized his ability to get people out to vote. Clinton served as a member of the electoral college for the state of New York. He voted for the Democratic ticket consisting of his wife Hillary and her running-mate Tim Kaine.

On September 7, 2017, Clinton partnered with former presidents Jimmy Carter, George H. W. Bush, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities.
In 2020, Clinton again served as a member of the United States Electoral College from New York, casting his vote for the successful Democratic ticket of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris.

Clinton was one of the first public figures to endorse Biden&#x27;s re-election campaign in 2024, with him appearing in interviews and fundraisers with various politicians and national figures. He was also one of the most notable politicians to defend Biden after his critically maligned first presidential debate on June 27, with him stating that &quot;bad debate nights happen&quot; and continued to press support for him despite increasing demand from the public and Democratic party requesting for him to drop out. After Biden withdrew his candidacy and vice president Harris replaced him on the ticket, both Bill and Hillary Clinton endorsed her and praised Biden for his work in public service. Clinton later gave a critically acclaimed speech at the 2024 DNC, where he emphasized the Democratic Party&#x27;s record on job creation and Harris&#x27; career achievements as a prosecutor, Senator, and Vice President.

He later stumped for Harris at various battleground states, where he met with supporters in small towns and at campaign stops. At a stop in Michigan, Clinton caused a backlash by criticizing Arab and Muslim Americans hesitant to support Harris due to her pro-Israeli position, stating Israel had been &quot;forced&quot; to kill civilians during its war with Hamas. His comments led the Institute for Middle East Understanding to state, &quot;Bill Clinton’s racist and ahistorical remarks were meant to justify the ethnic cleansing of Palestinians from their land. The Harris campaign is doing itself no favors attaching itself to that kind of hateful rhetoric&quot;. He expanded on his comments in an interview with CNN shortly after, stating that he was trying to appeal to both sides of the issue and highlighted his work with Arafat and Rabin in the Oslo Occords, although his response still received sharp condemnation from Muslim, Arab, and Palestinian-Americans.

After Harris lost the general election to Trump, Clinton&#x27;s remarks were brought up by critics and pundits, who stated that they were the reason why Harris lost support among Arab-American voters and why she fared poorly in the Muslim-populated cities of Dearborn and Hamtramck when compared to previous Democratic candidates. Critics also questioned his relevance to the modern Democratic Party, with pundits stating that his centrist policies and promotion of candidates who align with his views no longer work with a party that has tried to rebrand itself after losing support amongst progressive and populist supporters. After the election, he and Hillary released a statement congratulating President-elect Trump and Vice President-elect JD Vance, while stating that Harris and her running-mate Tim Walz ran a &quot;positive, forward-looking campaign to be proud of&quot;.

Clinton&#x27;s second volume of memoirs, &quot;Citizen: My Life After the White House&quot;, was published in November 2024.

===Wealth===

The Clintons incurred several million dollars in legal bills during his presidency, which were paid off four years after he left office. Bill and Hillary Clinton have each earned millions of dollars from book publishing. In 2016, &quot;Forbes&quot; reported Bill and Hillary Clinton made about $240million in the 15years from January 2001, to December 2015, (mostly from paid speeches, business consulting and book-writing). Also in 2016, CNN reported the Clintons combined to receive more than $153million in paid speeches from 2001 until spring 2015. In May 2015, &quot;The Hill&quot; reported that Bill and Hillary Clinton have made more than $25million in speaking fees since the start of 2014, and that Hillary Clinton also made $5million or more from her book, &quot;Hard Choices&quot;, during the same time period. In July 2014, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported that at the end of 2012, the Clintons were worth between $5million and $25.5million, and that in 2012 (the last year they were required to disclose the information) the Clintons made between $16 and $17million, mostly from speaking fees earned by the former president. Clinton earned more than $104million from paid speeches between 2001 and 2012. In June 2014, ABC News and &quot;The Washington Post&quot; reported that Bill Clinton has made more than $100million giving paid speeches since leaving public office, and in 2008, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that the Clintons&#x27; income tax returns show they made $109million in the eight years from January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2007, including almost $92million from his speaking and book-writing.

Bill Clinton has given dozens of paid speeches each year since leaving office in 2001, mostly to corporations and philanthropic groups in North America and Europe; he often earned $100,000 to $300,000 per speech. Russian investment bank with ties to the Kremlin paid Clinton $500,000 for a speech in Moscow. Hillary Clinton said she and Bill came out of the White House financially &quot;broke&quot; and in debt, especially due to large legal fees incurred during their years in the White House. &quot;We had no money when we got there, and we struggled to, you know, piece together the resources for mortgages, for houses, for Chelsea&#x27;s education&quot;. She added, &quot;Bill has worked really hard ... we had to pay off all our debts ... he had to make double the money because of, obviously, taxes; and then pay off the debts, and get us houses, and take care of family members&quot;.

=== Relationship with Jeffrey Epstein ===
According to Epstein&#x27;s attorney Gerald B. Lefcourt, Epstein was &quot;part of the original group that conceived of the Clinton Global Initiative&quot;. In 2002, a spokesperson for Clinton praised Epstein as &quot;a committed philanthropist&quot; with &quot;insights and generosity&quot;. While Clinton was president, Epstein visited the White House at least 17 times between 1993 and 1995. Years later, Epstein was convicted on sex trafficking charges. Clinton&#x27;s office released a statement in 2019 saying, &quot;President Clinton knows nothing about the terrible crimes Jeffrey Epstein pleaded guilty to in Florida some years ago, or those with which he has been recently charged in New York. In 2002 and 2003, President Clinton took four trips on Jeffrey Epstein&#x27;s airplane: one to Europe, one to Asia, and two to Africa, which included stops in connection with the work of the Clinton Foundation. Staff, supporters of the Foundation, and his Secret Service detail traveled on every leg of every trip. [...] He&#x27;s not spoken to Epstein in well over a decade.&quot;

In 1995 the &quot;Palm Beach Post&quot; reported that Clinton had attended a fundraising dinner for the Democratic National Committee hosted by Ron Perelman at his Palm Beach home for 14 invited guests. The guests included Epstein, singer Jimmy Buffett, actor Don Johnson, Deandra Douglas (wife of actor Michael Douglas), and others, and each guest donated $100,000.

Clinton reportedly used Epstein&#x27;s private jet to visit Little St. James Island, where Epstein resided, on multiple occasions between 2002 and 2005. Virginia Roberts, later known as Virginia Giuffre, says in a lawsuit that while working at Donald Trump&#x27;s Mar-a-Lago resort she was lured into a sex-trafficking ring run by Epstein and while traveling with Epstein she saw Clinton on the island. In a 2011 conversation with her lawyers, Roberts stated that Clinton traveled to Epstein&#x27;s retreat on Little St. James in 2002. According to Roberts, Epstein told her that Clinton &quot;owes me favors&quot; when she asked what he was doing there. She also reportedly claimed that Epstein and Clinton had dined in the presence of two girls aged approximately seventeen whom she believed Epstein had invited to have sex with Clinton, but that Clinton showed no interest in them. A Freedom of Information Act request for United States Secret Service records of visits Clinton may have made to Little St. James produced no such evidence. Epstein&#x27;s flight logs do not report Clinton flying near the U.S. Virgin Islands. In July 2019, a Clinton spokesperson issued a statement saying Clinton never visited the island. When he was personally asked by a journalist about his ties with Epstein in a rally in Laredo, Texas in November 2022, Clinton said &quot;I think the evidence is clear.&quot; According to former Clinton aide, Doug Band, Clinton visited Epstein&#x27;s island in January 2003.

== Personal life ==
At the age of 10, he was baptized at Park Place Baptist Church in Hot Springs, Arkansas. When he became president in 1993, he became a member of Foundry United Methodist Church in Washington, D.C. with his wife, a Methodist.

On October 11, 1975, in Fayetteville, Arkansas, he married Hillary Rodham, whom he met while studying at Yale University. They had Chelsea Clinton, their only child, on February 27, 1980. He is the maternal grandfather to Chelsea&#x27;s three children.

=== Health ===
In September 2004, Clinton underwent quadruple bypass surgery. In March 2005, he again underwent surgery, this time for a partially collapsed lung. On February 11, 2010, he was rushed to New York-Presbyterian/Columbia Hospital in Manhattan after complaining of chest pains, and he had two coronary stents implanted in his heart. After this procedure, Clinton adopted a plant-based whole foods (vegan) diet, which had been recommended by doctors Dean Ornish and Caldwell Esselstyn. He has since incorporated fish and lean animal flesh at the suggestion of Mark Hyman, a proponent of the pseudoscientific ethos of functional medicine. As a result, he is no longer strictly on a plant-based diet.

In October 2021, Clinton was treated for sepsis at the University of California, Irvine Medical Center. In December 2022, Clinton tested positive for COVID-19. In December 2024, Clinton was hospitalized after developing fever at the MedStar Georgetown University Hospital in Washington D.C.

==Accolades==

Various colleges and universities have awarded Clinton honorary degrees, including Doctorate of Law degrees and Doctor of Humane Letters degrees. He received an honorary degree from Georgetown University, his alma mater, and was the commencement speaker in 1980. He is an honorary fellow of University College, Oxford, which he attended as a Rhodes Scholar, although he did not complete his studies there. Schools have been named for Clinton, and statues have been built to pay him homage. U.S. states where he has been honored include Missouri, Arkansas, Kentucky, and New York. He was presented with the Medal for Distinguished Public Service by Secretary of Defense William Cohen in 2001. The Clinton Presidential Center was opened in Little Rock, Arkansas, in his honor on December 5, 2001.

Clinton has been honored in various other ways, in countries that include the Czech Republic, Papua New Guinea, Germany, and Kosovo. The Republic of Kosovo, in gratitude for his help during the Kosovo War, renamed a major street in the capital city of Pristina as Bill Clinton Boulevard and added a monumental Clinton statue.

Clinton was selected as &quot;Time&quot; &quot;Man of the Year&quot; in 1992, and again in 1998, along with Ken Starr. From a poll conducted of the American people in December 1999, Clinton was among eighteen included in Gallup&#x27;s List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century. In 2001, Clinton received the NAACP&#x27;s President&#x27;s Award. He has also been honored with a J. William Fulbright Prize for International Understanding, a TED Prize (named for the confluence of technology, entertainment and design), and was named as an Honorary GLAAD Media Award recipient for his work as an advocate for the LGBT community.

Clinton, along with Mikhail Gorbachev and Sophia Loren, received the 2003 Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for &quot;Wolf Tracks and Peter and the Wolf&quot;. The audiobook edition of his autobiography, &quot;My Life&quot;, read by Clinton himself, won the 2005 Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album, as well as the Audie Award as the Audiobook of the Year. Clinton has two more Grammy nominations for his audiobooks: &quot;&quot; in 2007 and &quot;Back to Work&quot; in 2012.

In 2011, Haitian president Michel Martelly awarded Clinton with the National Order of Honour and Merit to the rank of Grand Cross &quot;for his various initiatives in Haiti and especially his high contribution to the reconstruction of the country after the earthquake of January 12, 2010&quot;. Clinton declared at the ceremony that &quot;in the United States of America, I really don&#x27;t believe former American presidents need awards anymore, but I am very honored by this one, I love Haiti, and I believe in its promise&quot;.

President Obama awarded Clinton the Presidential Medal of Freedom on November 20, 2013.

==See also==

* Clinton family
* Clinton School of Public Service
* Efforts to impeach Bill Clinton
* Electoral history of Bill Clinton
* Gun control policy of the Clinton Administration
* List of presidents of the United States
* List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
==References==
===Citations===
==Further reading==
===Primary sources===

* Clinton, Bill. (with Al Gore). &quot;Science in the National Interest.&quot; Washington, D.C.: The White House, August 1994.
* --- (with Al Gore). &quot;The Climate Change Action Plan.&quot; Washington, D.C.: The White House, October 1993.
* Taylor Branch &quot;The Clinton Tapes: Wrestling History with the President.&quot; (2009) Simon &amp; Schuster. 
* &quot;Official Congressional Record Impeachment Set: ... Containing the Procedures for Implementing the Articles of Impeachment and the Proceedings of the Impeachment Trial of President William Jefferson Clinton.&quot; Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1999.
* &quot;Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, William J. Clinton.&quot; Washington, D.C.: Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration: For sale by the Supt. of Docs., U.S. G.P.O., 1994–2002.
* S. Daniel Abraham &quot;Peace Is Possible&quot;, foreword by Bill Clinton
===Popular books===

* Peter Baker &quot;The Breach: Inside the Impeachment and Trial of William Jefferson Clinton&quot; (2000) 
* James Bovard &quot;Feeling Your Pain: The Explosion and Abuse of Government Power in the Clinton-Gore Years&quot; (2000) 
* Joe Conason and Gene Lyons &quot;The Hunting of the President: The Ten-Year Campaign to Destroy Bill and Hillary Clinton&quot; (2003) 
* Elizabeth Drew &quot;On the Edge: The Clinton Presidency&quot; (1994) 
* David Gergen &quot;Eyewitness to Power: The Essence of Leadership.&quot; (2000) 
* Nigel Hamilton &quot;Bill Clinton: An American Journey&quot; (2003) 
* Christopher Hitchens &quot;No One Left to Lie to: The Triangulations of William Jefferson Clinton&quot; (1999) 
* Michael Isikoff &quot;Uncovering Clinton: A Reporter&#x27;s Story&quot; (1999) 
* Mark Katz &quot;Clinton and Me: A Real-Life Political Comedy&quot; (2004) 
* David Maraniss &quot;The Clinton Enigma: A Four and a Half Minute Speech Reveals This President&#x27;s Entire Life&quot; (1998) 
* Dick Morris with Eileen McGann &quot;Because He Could&quot; (2004) 
* Richard A. Posner &quot;An Affair of State: The Investigation, Impeachment, and Trial of President Clinton&quot; (1999) 
* Mark J. Rozell &quot;The Clinton Scandal and the Future of American Government&quot; (2000) 
* Timperlake, Edward, and William C. Triplett II &quot;Year of the Rat: How Bill Clinton Compromised U.S. Security for Chinese Cash&quot;. Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing, 1998. 
* Michael Waldman &quot;POTUS Speaks: Finding the Words That Defined the Clinton Presidency&quot; (2000) 
* Ivory Tower Publishing Company. Achievements of the Clinton Administration: the Complete Legislative and Executive. (1995) 
===Scholarly studies===

* Campbell, Colin, and Bert A. Rockman, eds. &quot;The Clinton Legacy&quot; (Chatham House Pub, 2000)
* 
* 
* 
* Halberstam, David. &quot;War in a time of peace: Bush, Clinton, and the generals&quot; (Simon and Schuster, 2001). online
* Harris, John F. &quot;The Survivor: Bill Clinton in the White House&quot; (2006). online
* Head, Simon. The Clinton System (January 30, 2016), &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;
* Hyland, William G. &quot;Clinton&#x27;s World: Remaking American Foreign Policy&quot; (1999) 
* 
* Laham, Nicholas, &quot;A Lost Cause: Bill Clinton&#x27;s Campaign for National Health Insurance&quot; (1996)
* Levy, Peter B. &quot;Encyclopedia of the Clinton presidency&quot; (Greenwood, 2002) online
* 
* 
* Renshon; Stanley A. &quot;The Clinton Presidency: Campaigning, Governing, and the Psychology of Leadership&quot; Westview Press, 1995 
* Romano, Flavio. &quot;Clinton and Blair: the political economy of the third way&quot; (Routledge, 2007)
* Rushefsky, Mark E. and Kant Patel. &quot;Politics, Power &amp; Policy Making: The Case of Health Care Reform in the 1990s&quot; (1998) 
* Schantz, Harvey L. &quot;Politics in an Era of Divided Government: Elections and Governance in the Second Clinton Administration&quot; (2001) 
* Troy, Gill. &quot;The Age of Clinton: America in the 1990s&quot; (2015)
* Warshaw, Shirley Anne. &quot;The Clinton Years&quot; (Infobase Publishing, 2009)
* White, Mark, ed. &quot;The Presidency of Bill Clinton: The Legacy of a New Domestic and Foreign Policy&quot; (I.B.Tauris, 2012)

===Arkansas years===
* Allen, Charles and Jonathan Portis. &quot;The Life and Career of Bill Clinton: The Comeback Kid&quot; (1992).
* Blair, Diane D. &quot;The Big Three of Late Twentieth-Century Arkansas Politics: Dale Bumpers, Bill Clinton, and David Pryor.&quot; &quot;Arkansas Historical Quarterly&quot; 54.1 (1995): 53–79. online
* Blair, Diane D. &quot;William Jefferson Clinton&quot; in &quot;The Governors of Arkansas: Essays in Political Biography&quot; ed. by Willard B. Gatewood Jr., et al. (1995)
* Brummett, John. &quot;Highwire: From the Backroads to the Beltway: The Education of Bill Clinton&quot; (Hyperion, 1994).
* Clinton, Bill. &quot; My Life: The Early Years&quot; (Random House, 2004)
* Dumas, Ernest, ed. &quot;The Clintons of Arkansas: An Introduction by Those Who Knew Them Best&quot; (University of Arkansas Press, 1993) online.
* &quot;Encyclopedia of Arkansas&quot; (2023) online
* Johnston, Phyllis F. &quot;Bill Clinton&#x27;s Public Policy for Arkansas: 1979-80&quot; (Little Rock: August House, 1982).
* Maraniss, David. &quot;First in His Class: A Biography of Bill Clinton&quot; (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1995).
* Marcus, Alan. &quot;Bill Clinton in Arkansas: generational politics, the technology of political communication and the permanent campaign.&quot; &quot;The Historian&quot; 72.2 (2010): 354–385. online
* Oakley, Meredith L. &quot;On the make: The rise of Bill Clinton&quot; (Regnery Publishing, 1994), attack from the right.
* Osborne, David. &quot;Turning around Arkansas&#x27; Schools: Bill Clinton and Education Reform.&quot; &quot;American Educator: The Professional Journal of the American Federation of Teachers&quot; 16.3 (1992): 6–17. online
* Smith, Stephen A., ed. &quot;Preface to the Presidency: Selected Speeches of Bill Clinton, 1974–1992&quot; (University of Arkansas Press, 1996).

==External links==

===Official===
* Presidential Library &amp; Museum
* Clinton Foundation
* White House biography
* Archived White House website

===Interviews, speeches, and statements===
* 
* Full audio of a number of Clinton speeches Miller Center of Public Affairs
* Oral History Interview with Bill Clinton from Oral Histories of the American South, June 1974
* &quot;The Wanderer&quot;, a profile from &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, September 2006

===Media coverage===
* 

===Other===
* Extensive essays on Bill Clinton and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
* &quot;Life Portrait of Bill Clinton&quot;, from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Presidents: Life Portraits&quot;, December 20, 1999
* &quot;Clinton&quot;  an &quot;American Experience&quot; documentary
* 
* 1992 election episode in CNN&#x27;s Race for the White House</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="0" end="25" title="Bill Clinton" label="William Jefferson Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="27" end="29" title="né" label="né"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="30" end="36" title="Bill Clinton" label="Blythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="120" end="150" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="186" end="202" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112147" start="232" end="260" title="attorney general of Arkansas" label="attorney general of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="290" end="310" title="governor of Arkansas" label="governor of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q494792" start="410" end="419" title="Third Way" label="Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="426" end="446" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345101" start="466" end="478" title="New Democrats (United States)" label="New Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="500" end="508" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="533" end="554" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="579" end="594" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="626" end="640" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Rodham"/>
<link wikidata="Q115398661" start="761" end="809" title="Governorships of Bill Clinton" label="two non-consecutive tenures as Arkansas governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="886" end="894" title="Chair (officer)" label="chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q494210" start="902" end="932" title="National Governors Association" label="National Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="971" end="984" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1010" end="1026" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="1037" end="1054" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q313697" start="1088" end="1098" title="Ross Perot" label="Ross Perot"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="1148" end="1159" title="Baby Boomer" label="Baby Boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099823" start="1179" end="1187" title="List of presidents of the United States by age" label="youngest"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="1338" end="1373" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933159" start="1382" end="1427" title="Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act" label="Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134288" start="1460" end="1487" title="Clinton health care plan of 1993" label="national health care reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302165" start="1641" end="1689" title="Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act" label="Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603105" start="1695" end="1741" title="State Children&amp;#x27;s Health Insurance Program" label="State Children&amp;#x27;s Health Insurance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="1792" end="1811" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ruth Bader Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124" start="1816" end="1830" title="Stephen Breyer" label="Stephen Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="1838" end="1856" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="1927" end="1934" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="1939" end="1949" title="Kosovo war" label="Kosovo war"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="1975" end="1997" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Peace agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367724" start="2022" end="2039" title="expansion of NATO" label="expansion of NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="2074" end="2085" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845489" start="2195" end="2214" title="Iraq Liberation Act" label="Iraq Liberation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="2248" end="2262" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49107" start="2292" end="2305" title="Oslo I Accord" label="Oslo I Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029825" start="2310" end="2327" title="2000 Camp David Summit" label="Camp David Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141816" start="2343" end="2376" title="Israeli–Palestinian peace process" label="Israeli–Palestinian peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="2395" end="2425" title="Northern Ireland peace process" label="Northern Ireland peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q659166" start="2459" end="2472" title="1996 United States presidential election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="2503" end="2511" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893430" start="2526" end="2538" title="Reform Party of the United States of America" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169287" start="2599" end="2621" title="Permanent normal trade relations" label="permanent normal trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q154234" start="2688" end="2712" title="Clinton–Lewinsky scandal" label="Clinton–Lewinsky scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="2826" end="2837" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q212659" start="2845" end="2860" title="Monica Lewinsky" label="Monica Lewinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200400" start="2935" end="2956" title="Impeachment of Bill Clinton" label="Clinton was impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2964" end="2988" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="3046" end="3060" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="3134" end="3141" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q105715892" start="3240" end="3272" title="Impeachment trial of Bill Clinton" label="Clinton&amp;#x27;s impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3286" end="3292" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125991" start="3413" end="3440" title="Congressional Budget Office" label="Congressional Budget Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="3657" end="3695" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="historical rankings of U.S. presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458799" start="3731" end="3753" title="Bill Clinton sexual assault and misconduct allegations" label="misconduct allegations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3770" end="3781" title="Bill Clinton#Relationship with Jeffrey Epstein" label="association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904131" start="3800" end="3815" title="Jeffrey Epstein" label="Jeffrey Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974620" start="3973" end="3991" title="Clinton Foundation" label="Clinton Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574548" start="4105" end="4142" title="Special Envoy of the Secretary-General" label="United Nations special envoy to Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="4154" end="4175" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="2010 Haiti earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134079" start="4197" end="4220" title="Clinton Bush Haiti Fund" label="Clinton Bush Haiti Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="4226" end="4240" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="4245" end="4257" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762559" start="4344" end="4348" title="Hillary Clinton 2008 presidential campaign" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872173" start="4353" end="4380" title="Hillary Clinton 2016 presidential campaign" label="2016 presidential campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="4392" end="4404" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131587665" start="4412" end="4417" title="Death and state funeral of Jimmy Carter" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q80008" start="4681" end="4695" title="Hope, Arkansas" label="Hope, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112404" start="4714" end="4742" title="William Jefferson Blythe Jr." label="William Jefferson Blythe Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4112334" start="4835" end="4856" title="Virginia Clinton Kelley" label="Virginia Dell Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="5105" end="5116" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="5312" end="5331" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="racially segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q182076" start="5375" end="5381" title="credit (finance)" label="credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112506" start="5475" end="5492" title="Roger Clinton Sr." label="Roger Clinton Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q786803" start="5510" end="5531" title="Car dealership" label="automobile dealership"/>
<link wikidata="Q79924" start="5535" end="5556" title="Hot Springs, Arkansas" label="Hot Springs, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326111" start="5579" end="5592" title="Earl T. Ricks" label="Earl T. Ricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031188" start="6273" end="6283" title="School segregation in the United States" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910453" start="6284" end="6307" title="Hot Springs High School (Arkansas)" label="Hot Springs High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="6416" end="6431" title="tenor saxophone" label="tenor saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636504" start="6567" end="6578" title="3 Kings (jazz trio)" label="The 3 Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292214" start="6585" end="6598" title="Randy Goodrum" label="Randy Goodrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732407" start="6714" end="6730" title="DeMolay International" label="Order of DeMolay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="6762" end="6773" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540963" start="6903" end="6910" title="My Life (Clinton autobiography)" label="My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="7037" end="7050" title="Roman Senator" label="Roman senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q75826" start="7051" end="7059" title="Catiline" label="Catiline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952674" start="7469" end="7480" title="Boys Nation" label="Boys Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="7496" end="7507" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="7526" end="7541" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="7566" end="7588" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q192341" start="7607" end="7621" title="I Have a Dream" label="I Have a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q128047" start="7811" end="7836" title="School of Foreign Service" label="School of Foreign Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="7840" end="7861" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="7895" end="7914" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744598" start="8046" end="8061" title="class president" label="class president"/>
<link wikidata="Q550255" start="8150" end="8170" title="J. William Fulbright" label="J. William Fulbright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735100" start="8232" end="8247" title="Alpha Phi Omega" label="Alpha Phi Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="8267" end="8281" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192863" start="8301" end="8316" title="Kappa Kappa Psi" label="Kappa Kappa Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="8412" end="8430" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="8434" end="8460" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838817" start="8492" end="8499" title="B.Phil." label="B.Phil."/>
<link wikidata="Q2777850" start="8503" end="8538" title="Philosophy, Politics, and Economics" label="philosophy, politics, and economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901047" start="8560" end="8567" title="Bachelor of Letters" label="B.Litt."/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="8828" end="8843" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304775" start="9051" end="9056" title="Draft lottery (1969)" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="9096" end="9107" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421703" start="9201" end="9214" title="Sara Maitland" label="Sara Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q98113859" start="9702" end="9735" title="Oxford University Men&amp;#x27;s Basketball" label="Oxford University Basketball Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="9781" end="9792" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287501" start="9861" end="9880" title="Doctor of Civil Law" label="Doctor of Civil Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="9914" end="9934" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="10412" end="10432" title="Opposition to the Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909299" start="10449" end="10485" title="Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam" label="Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="10652" end="10666" title="National Guard of the United States" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697932" start="10675" end="10709" title="Air Force Officer Training School" label="Air Force officer candidate school"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="10753" end="10790" title="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070333" start="10813" end="10835" title="University of Arkansas" label="University of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304775" start="11468" end="11475" title="Draft lottery (1969)" label="drafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="11578" end="11585" title="Colonel (United States)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189010" start="11800" end="11808" title="notarize" label="notarize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="11974" end="11986" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281204" start="12488" end="12502" title="James Carville" label="James Carville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="12806" end="12818" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548130" start="12898" end="12914" title="Lillian Goldman Law Library" label="Yale Law Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="13085" end="13100" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542316" start="13101" end="13109" title="George McGovern presidential campaign, 1972" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="13118" end="13158" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="1972 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q49800" start="13215" end="13230" title="cohabitating" label="living together"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13298" end="13332" title="1972 United States presidential election in Texas#McGovern campaign" label="moved to Texas with Rodham in 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="13415" end="13421" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726287" start="13543" end="13558" title="List of mayors of Dallas" label="mayor of Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399368" start="13559" end="13567" title="Ron Kirk" label="Ron Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q878323" start="13576" end="13593" title="List of governors of Texas" label="governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q237918" start="13594" end="13606" title="Ann Richards" label="Ann Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="13659" end="13675" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="13777" end="13792" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="13840" end="13849" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070333" start="13857" end="13879" title="University of Arkansas" label="University of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="13905" end="13929" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791707" start="13959" end="13971" title="Arkansas&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="3rd district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701364" start="14001" end="14024" title="John Paul Hammerschmidt" label="John Paul Hammerschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="14130" end="14147" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112147" start="14298" end="14323" title="Arkansas Attorney General" label="Arkansas attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="14757" end="14777" title="governor of Arkansas" label="governor of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791909" start="14781" end="14785" title="1978 Arkansas gubernatorial election" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709110" start="14828" end="14837" title="Lynn Lowe" label="Lynn Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79438" start="14853" end="14862" title="Texarkana, Arkansas" label="Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776480" start="15404" end="15419" title="Mariel boatlift" label="Mariel boatlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q56671" start="15433" end="15445" title="Fort Chaffee" label="Fort Chaffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q79417" start="15478" end="15487" title="Kingsland, Arkansas" label="Kingsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q61032" start="15491" end="15507" title="Cleveland County, Arkansas" label="Cleveland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q712035" start="15723" end="15737" title="Frank D. White" label="Frank D. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977884" start="15919" end="15932" title="Bruce Lindsey" label="Bruce Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="16303" end="16317" title="senior citizen" label="senior citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="16335" end="16344" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345101" start="16446" end="16459" title="New Democrats (United States)" label="New Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="16472" end="16481" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705326" start="16604" end="16633" title="Democratic Leadership Council" label="Democratic Leadership Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="16693" end="16706" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="16714" end="16739" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="landslide victory in 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255894" start="16876" end="16895" title="Democratic response to the State of the Union address" label="Democratic response"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582542" start="16913" end="16944" title="1985 State of the Union Address" label="1985 State of the Union Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q494210" start="16972" end="17002" title="National Governors Association" label="National Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517426" start="17333" end="17359" title="Legal Services Corporation" label="Legal Services Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747168" start="17736" end="17755" title="Arkansas General Assembly" label="legislative session"/>
<link wikidata="Q61455" start="17958" end="17967" title="Jonesboro, Arkansas" label="Jonesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791912" start="17980" end="17993" title="Woody Freeman" label="Woody Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492714" start="18006" end="18022" title="Sheffield Nelson" label="Sheffield Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074621" start="18166" end="18188" title="Whitewater controversy" label="Whitewater controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="18428" end="18441" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858810" start="18712" end="18751" title="Capital punishment in Arkansas" label="Arkansas performed its first executions"/>
<link wikidata="Q24961983" start="18840" end="18873" title="List of people executed in Arkansas" label="first four executions carried out"/>
<link wikidata="Q185639" start="18960" end="18974" title="electric chair" label="electric chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q210035" start="18988" end="19004" title="lethal injection" label="lethal injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332171" start="19178" end="19194" title="Ricky Ray Rector" label="Ricky Ray Rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q652222" start="19364" end="19376" title="Mena Intermountain Municipal Airport" label="Mena Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="19378" end="19381" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q326239" start="19388" end="19398" title="Barry Seal" label="Barry Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="19457" end="19464" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="19522" end="19540" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q15522057" start="19652" end="19661" title="Sam Smith (journalist)" label="Sam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100788" start="19742" end="19758" title="Gennifer Flowers" label="Gennifer Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908499" start="19906" end="19929" title="Bill Clinton pardon controversy" label="pardoned by his brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074621" start="20030" end="20052" title="Whitewater controversy" label="Whitewater controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861562" start="20210" end="20231" title="Arkansas State Police" label="Arkansas State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845569" start="20257" end="20275" title="Troopergate (Bill Clinton)" label="Troopergate affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q64006426" start="20282" end="20317" title="killing of Don Henry and Kevin Ives" label="killing of Don Henry and Kevin Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q68090786" start="20342" end="20361" title="Clinton body count conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="20791" end="20813" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="20814" end="20829" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584413" start="20893" end="20928" title="1988 Democratic National Convention" label="1988 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443004" start="21319" end="21330" title="Iowa caucuses" label="Iowa Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q465617" start="21381" end="21391" title="Tom Harkin" label="Tom Harkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899221" start="21421" end="21442" title="New Hampshire primary" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100788" start="21517" end="21533" title="Gennifer Flowers" label="Gennifer Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q283884" start="21588" end="21600" title="Paul Tsongas" label="Paul Tsongas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576569" start="21639" end="21654" title="Super Bowl XXVI" label="Super Bowl XXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="21699" end="21709" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892934" start="21867" end="21888" title="1992 United States presidential election in New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="22161" end="22179" title="Southern United States" label="Southern primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q846330" start="22183" end="22196" title="Super Tuesday" label="Super Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q152451" start="22271" end="22282" title="Jerry Brown" label="Jerry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="22772" end="22792" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367828" start="22847" end="22860" title="Rose Law Firm" label="Rose Law Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332171" start="23328" end="23344" title="Ricky Ray Rector" label="Ricky Ray Rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="23850" end="23868" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q220924" start="23967" end="23983" title="United States presidential approval rating" label="approval ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="24018" end="24026" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24153" end="24179" title="Read my lips: no new taxes" label="promise not to raise taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q149127" start="24542" end="24554" title="Pat Buchanan" label="Pat Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q364990" start="24559" end="24572" title="Pat Robertson" label="Pat Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587881" start="24607" end="24637" title="1992 Republican National Convention" label="Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="25047" end="25054" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161355" start="25216" end="25227" title="Fundraising" label="fund raiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q60358306" start="25258" end="25271" title="Robert Rafsky" label="Robert Rafsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="25358" end="25362" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q343047" start="25563" end="25569" title="ACT UP" label="ACT UP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185865" start="25714" end="25735" title="Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q17299006" start="25758" end="25769" title="AIDS United" label="AIDS United"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="25810" end="25836" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="25944" end="25952" title="populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q313697" start="25953" end="25963" title="Ross Perot" label="Ross Perot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="26346" end="26368" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646121" start="26475" end="26502" title="96th United States Congress" label="96th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="26514" end="26540" title="presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="presidency of Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q352959" start="26556" end="26577" title="Seymour Martin Lipset" label="Seymour Martin Lipset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27023" end="27032" title="Third Way#United States" label="third way"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27252" end="27316" title="Presidency of Bill Clinton#Legislation and programs" label="Clinton advocated for a wide variety of legislation and programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="27425" end="27460" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302165" start="27465" end="27479" title="Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act" label="welfare reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="27507" end="27515" title="centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q494792" start="27516" end="27525" title="Third Way" label="Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="27566" end="27585" title="fiscal conservatism" label="fiscal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125991" start="27733" end="27760" title="Congressional Budget Office" label="Congressional Budget Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957569" start="28513" end="28532" title="Chappaqua, New York" label="Chappaqua, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q105571909" start="28686" end="28713" title="Presidential transition of Bill Clinton" label="his presidential transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q376201" start="28727" end="28738" title="First inauguration of Bill Clinton" label="inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q135475" start="29412" end="29443" title="Don&amp;#x27;t ask, don&amp;#x27;t tell" label="Don&amp;#x27;t ask, don&amp;#x27;t tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433309" start="29846" end="29882" title="Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993" label="Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="30186" end="30197" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="30264" end="30279" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529902" start="30458" end="30474" title="Samuel L. Popkin" label="Samuel L. Popkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="30749" end="30763" title="budget deficit" label="budget deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269549" start="30820" end="30845" title="joint session of Congress" label="joint session of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q236421" start="31208" end="31218" title="Janet Reno" label="Janet Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q258873" start="31379" end="31391" title="Waco siege" label="51 day siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090361" start="31636" end="31677" title="Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993" label="Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134288" start="32091" end="32116" title="Clinton health care plan" label="a health care reform plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="32478" end="32506" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232294" start="32571" end="32585" title="John F. Harris" label="John F. Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q368920" start="32811" end="32829" title="George J. Mitchell" label="George J. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955187" start="33028" end="33038" title="Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act" label="Brady Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087682" start="33063" end="33079" title="background check" label="background check"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973556" start="33206" end="33217" title="National Instant Criminal Background Check System" label="NICS system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036463" start="33264" end="33288" title="Earned Income Tax Credit" label="Earned Income Tax Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845569" start="33394" end="33409" title="Larry Patterson" label="Larry Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231759" start="33449" end="33460" title="David Brock" label="David Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713567" start="33470" end="33492" title="The American Spectator" label="The American Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845569" start="33535" end="33546" title="Troopergate (Bill Clinton)" label="Troopergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q436955" start="33733" end="33744" title="Paula Jones" label="Paula Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q135475" start="34005" end="34036" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Ask, Don&amp;#x27;t Tell" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Ask, Don&amp;#x27;t Tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="34467" end="34478" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q946305" start="34490" end="34498" title="Sam Nunn" label="Sam Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237631" start="34520" end="34532" title="David Mixner" label="David Mixner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="35029" end="35044" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660063" start="35536" end="35552" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Ask, Don&amp;#x27;t Tell Repeal Act of 2010" label="repealed in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956766" start="36471" end="36485" title="whitehouse.gov" label="whitehouse.gov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933159" start="37227" end="37245" title="Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act" label="Omnibus Crime Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440014" start="37758" end="37777" title="Federal Assault Weapons Ban" label="assault weapons ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771218" start="37912" end="37938" title="1994 United States House of Representatives elections" label="mid-term elections in 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994921" start="38045" end="38067" title="White House Conference" label="White House Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="38268" end="38276" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="38344" end="38354" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="38394" end="38397" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="38516" end="38534" title="federal government" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="38692" end="38713" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="38860" end="38877" title="HIV/AIDS epidemic" label="HIV/AIDS epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="38949" end="38991" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q583050" start="39314" end="39350" title="highly active antiretroviral therapy" label="highly active antiretroviral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182626" start="39412" end="39435" title="Defense of Marriage Act" label="Defense of Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709291" start="39649" end="39661" title="Paul Yandura" label="Paul Yandura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329138" start="40140" end="40157" title="Richard Socarides" label="Richard Socarides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146201" start="40616" end="40628" title="Evan Wolfson" label="Evan Wolfson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893525" start="41166" end="41190" title="United States v. Windsor" label="United States v. Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374344" start="41941" end="41974" title="Employment Non-Discrimination Act" label="Employment Non-Discrimination Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253380" start="42249" end="42270" title="Human Rights Campaign" label="Human Rights Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320972" start="42397" end="42402" title="GLAAD" label="GLAAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291044" start="42464" end="42511" title="1996 United States campaign finance controversy" label="1996 United States campaign finance controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="42537" end="42542" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="42741" end="42759" title="Government of China" label="Chinese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q185367" start="42822" end="42841" title="Illegal immigration to the United States" label="illegal immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998894" start="42862" end="42921" title="Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996" label="Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42980" end="43017" title="History of laws concerning immigration and naturalization in the United States#1990s" label="U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="43230" end="43238" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="43263" end="43278" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="43380" end="43387" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q659166" start="43527" end="43553" title="1996 United States presidential election" label="1996 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074621" start="43694" end="43716" title="Whitewater controversy" label="Whitewater controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="43790" end="43805" title="approval rating" label="approval rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="44174" end="44182" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893430" start="44440" end="44452" title="Reform Party of the United States of America" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="44593" end="44602" title="landslide victory" label="a big win"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="44766" end="44781" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="45064" end="45085" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="45270" end="45281" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q381157" start="45297" end="45308" title="Orrin Hatch" label="Orrin Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603105" start="45432" end="45478" title="State Children&amp;#x27;s Health Insurance Program" label="State Children&amp;#x27;s Health Insurance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684570" start="45631" end="45661" title="Adoption and Safe Families Act" label="Adoption and Safe Families Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473648" start="45716" end="45744" title="Foster Care Independence Act" label="Foster Care Independence Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849980" start="45789" end="45816" title="Balanced Budget Act of 1997" label="Balanced Budget Act of 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613233" start="46087" end="46109" title="Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act" label="Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410030" start="46142" end="46160" title="Glass–Steagall Act" label="Glass–Steagall Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="46218" end="46228" title="Investment banking" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q848507" start="46230" end="46245" title="commercial bank" label="commercial bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234627" start="46346" end="46356" title="David Hale (Whitewater)" label="David Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="46620" end="46659" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341706" start="46899" end="46914" title="Robert B. Fiske" label="Robert B. Fiske"/>
<link wikidata="Q708241" start="46919" end="46928" title="Ken Starr" label="Ken Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994876" start="46992" end="47025" title="White House FBI files controversy" label="White House FBI files controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="47094" end="47097" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349178" start="47430" end="47440" title="Robert Ray (prosecutor)" label="Robert Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994928" start="47760" end="47797" title="White House travel office controversy" label="White House travel office controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812279" start="47887" end="47910" title="At-will employment" label="dismissed without cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q105724636" start="48708" end="48723" title="Impeachment inquiry against Bill Clinton" label="a House inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="48737" end="48746" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="48858" end="48868" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="48990" end="49004" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="49183" end="49204" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q212659" start="49215" end="49230" title="Monica Lewinsky" label="Monica Lewinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602231" start="49242" end="49254" title="Starr Report" label="Starr Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570656" start="49506" end="49524" title="United States midterm election" label="mid-term elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481662" start="49590" end="49607" title="lame-duck session" label="lame-duck session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131462" start="49636" end="49661" title="House Judiciary Committee" label="House Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134291" start="50095" end="50111" title="Clinton v. Jones" label="Jones v. Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020966" start="50529" end="50552" title="Williams &amp;amp; Connolly" label="Williams &amp;amp; Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908499" start="51482" end="51488" title="Bill Clinton pardon controversy" label="issued"/>
<link wikidata="Q706542" start="51591" end="51600" title="Marc Rich" label="Marc Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932520" start="51654" end="51665" title="Hugh Edwin Rodham" label="Hugh Rodham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779939" start="51790" end="51803" title="Mary Jo White" label="Mary Jo White"/>
<link wikidata="Q167607" start="51895" end="51906" title="James Comey" label="James Comey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074621" start="52015" end="52033" title="Whitewater Scandal" label="Whitewater Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908499" start="52035" end="52045" title="Chris Wade (real estate broker)" label="Chris Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648161" start="52047" end="52061" title="Susan McDougal" label="Susan McDougal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610554" start="52063" end="52076" title="Stephen Smith (Whitewater)" label="Stephen Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350726" start="52082" end="52098" title="Robert W. Palmer" label="Robert W. Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419581" start="52181" end="52194" title="HUD Secretary" label="HUD Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606601" start="52195" end="52209" title="Henry Cisneros" label="Henry Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824550" start="52405" end="52427" title="Clinton Administration" label="Clinton Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="52521" end="52537" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="52644" end="52660" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="52662" end="52671" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="52673" end="52683" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q254576" start="52689" end="52701" title="Judy Collins" label="Judy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q236421" start="52798" end="52808" title="Janet Reno" label="Janet Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q50608" start="52852" end="52862" title="Trent Lott" label="Trent Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="53001" end="53030" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="53271" end="53278" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q298016" start="53357" end="53370" title="Fred Thompson" label="Fred Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q160157" start="53459" end="53472" title="Joe Lieberman" label="Joe Lieberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="53477" end="53487" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="53687" end="53694" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611891" start="53706" end="53725" title="Foreign policy of the George H. W. Bush administration" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q243620" start="53767" end="53776" title="Somali Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q52226" start="54002" end="54021" title="Battle of Mogadishu (1993)" label="Battle of Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q189491" start="54023" end="54043" title="MH-60 Black Hawk" label="two U.S. helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="54062" end="54086" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="rocket-propelled grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q795064" start="54104" end="54114" title="tail rotor" label="tail rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q319160" start="54343" end="54357" title="Mohammed Aidid" label="Mohammed Aidid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="54804" end="54812" title="Rwandan genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="54826" end="54832" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q193092" start="54927" end="54932" title="Tutsi" label="Tutsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="55473" end="55486" title="Bosnian Serbs" label="Bosnian Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="55498" end="55509" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="55559" end="55573" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="55575" end="55579" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q160774" start="55704" end="55731" title="Operation Deliberate Force" label="bombed Bosnian Serb targets"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="55822" end="55833" title="Bosnian war" label="Bosnian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="55919" end="55935" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="56038" end="56054" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="56164" end="56176" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="56289" end="56296" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="56306" end="56314" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="56429" end="56440" title="Northern Ireland peace process" label="peace talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="56459" end="56480" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310192" start="56645" end="56661" title="dual containment" label="dual containment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195557" start="56720" end="56746" title="State Sponsors of Terrorism" label="state sponsor of terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="57195" end="57225" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q743060" start="57253" end="57272" title="Iran Air Flight 655" label="Iran Air Flight 655"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="57290" end="57312" title="guided missile cruiser" label="guided missile cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594001" start="57347" end="57378" title="1998 State of the Union Address" label="1998 State of the Union Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="57419" end="57433" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845489" start="57523" end="57550" title="Iraq Liberation Act of 1998" label="Iraq Liberation Act of 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327861" start="57820" end="57840" title="Operation Desert Fox" label="Operation Desert Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q19085" start="58558" end="58588" title="Killing of Osama bin Laden" label="bin Laden&amp;#x27;s death in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q13139843" start="58609" end="58621" title="Mansoor Ijaz" label="Mansoor Ijaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302857" start="58772" end="58794" title="9/11 Commission Report" label="9/11 Commission Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q876206" start="58962" end="59008" title="1998 United States embassy bombings" label="1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q837887" start="59200" end="59276" title="Operation Infinite Reach" label="ordered cruise missile strikes on terrorist targets in Afghanistan and Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q475353" start="59292" end="59323" title="Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory" label="Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="60038" end="60058" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q435792" start="60060" end="60073" title="Seymour Hersh" label="Seymour Hersh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795300" start="60075" end="60085" title="Max Taylor (psychologist)" label="Max Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193366" start="60154" end="60181" title="Kosovo Liberation Army" label="ethnic Albanian separatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="60201" end="60207" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="60215" end="60245" title="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="60356" end="60378" title="Operation Allied Force" label="Operation Allied Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="60441" end="60457" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="60503" end="60511" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q159478" start="60576" end="60588" title="Wesley Clark" label="Wesley Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640949" start="60593" end="60625" title="Supreme Allied Commander Europe" label="Supreme Allied Commander of NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q178139" start="60656" end="60703" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="60820" end="60838" title="Kosovo Force" label="peacekeeping force"/>
<link wikidata="Q171468" start="60940" end="60957" title="Boeing AH-64 Apache" label="Apache helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="61217" end="61235" title="Kosovo war" label="conflict in Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="61364" end="61416" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="61595" end="61608" title="United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo" label="UN-supervised"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386098" start="61609" end="61632" title="Judiciary of Kosovo" label="Supreme Court of Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880902" start="61658" end="61675" title="genocidal intent" label="intent to destroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="62109" end="62127" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839993" start="62192" end="62219" title="Trial of Slobodan Milošević" label="eventually brought to trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="62231" end="62288" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="62292" end="62301" title="the Hague" label="the Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="62323" end="62346" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q827518" start="62552" end="62572" title="most favoured nation" label="most favoured nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072770" start="62710" end="62722" title="Human rights in China" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418042" start="63029" end="63080" title="United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade" label="American bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863496" start="63207" end="63248" title="United States–China Relations Act of 2000" label="United States–China Relations Act of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169287" start="63264" end="63296" title="permanent normal trade relations" label="permanent normal trade relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="63499" end="63523" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="63971" end="63999" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q34060" start="64072" end="64085" title="Yitzhak Rabin" label="Yitzhak Rabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="64090" end="64123" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="64139" end="64152" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013132" start="64222" end="64234" title="Oslo Accords" label="Oslo Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q620988" start="64315" end="64341" title="Israel–Jordan peace treaty" label="Israel–Jordan peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568374" start="64358" end="64378" title="Wye River Memorandum" label="Wye River Memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q125731" start="64470" end="64480" title="Ehud Barak" label="Ehud Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="64516" end="64529" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="64542" end="64552" title="Camp David" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029825" start="64561" end="64583" title="2000 Camp David Summit" label="2000 Camp David Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q891455" start="64661" end="64683" title="Bolling Air Force Base" label="Bolling Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409717" start="64720" end="64738" title="The Clinton Parameters" label="Clinton Parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q684313" start="64797" end="64808" title="Taba Summit" label="Taba Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="64835" end="64850" title="Second Intifada" label="Second Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="64921" end="64934" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="64936" end="64955" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ruth Bader Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124" start="64968" end="64982" title="Stephen Breyer" label="Stephen Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="65769" end="65777" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="66023" end="66034" title="Gallup Organization" label="Gallup poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="66304" end="66313" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="67010" end="67018" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="68288" end="68300" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272318" start="68372" end="68411" title="Quinnipiac University Polling Institute" label="Quinnipiac University Polling Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="68739" end="68758" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="68791" end="68829" title="American Political Science Association" label="American Political Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="69014" end="69025" title="baby boomers" label="baby boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312782" start="69063" end="69075" title="Bob Woodward" label="Bob Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635030" start="69121" end="69131" title="sound bite" label="sound bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714341" start="69310" end="69331" title="The Arsenio Hall Show" label="The Arsenio Hall Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150997" start="69585" end="69599" title="Paul Greenberg (journalist)" label="Paul Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q878708" start="69712" end="69732" title="Winthrop Rockefeller" label="Winthrop Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q881361" start="69734" end="69746" title="Dale Bumpers" label="Dale Bumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q881301" start="69751" end="69762" title="David Pryor" label="David Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630669" start="69869" end="69878" title="List of nicknames of United States Presidents" label="nicknamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349295" start="69879" end="69884" title="Bubba" label="Bubba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="70084" end="70110" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104713" start="70151" end="70186" title="2012 Democratic National Convention" label="2012 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="70258" end="70269" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="70529" end="70534" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72334" start="70544" end="70557" title="Toni Morrison" label="Toni Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="70746" end="70761" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q603742" start="70952" end="70967" title="double standard" label="double standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42133786" start="71621" end="71636" title="Me Too movement" label="#MeToo movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q436955" start="71777" end="71788" title="Paula Jones" label="Paula Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134291" start="71801" end="71826" title="Clinton v. Jones" label="sexual harassment lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648516" start="71993" end="72012" title="Susan Webber Wright" label="Susan Webber Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q279813" start="72368" end="72385" title="Robert S. Bennett" label="Robert S. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q154234" start="73032" end="73062" title="Clinton–Lewinsky scandal" label="denied having sexual relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194090" start="73163" end="73178" title="Kathleen Willey" label="Kathleen Willey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072616" start="73204" end="73210" title="groping" label="groped"/>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="73463" end="73472" title="affidavit" label="affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187870" start="73907" end="73925" title="Juanita Broaddrick" label="Juanita Broaddrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="74724" end="74738" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="74743" end="74753" title="Sexual harassment" label="harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892468" start="75242" end="75270" title="2018 U.S. election" label="2018 Congressional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269048" start="75512" end="75525" title="Donna Brazile" label="Donna Brazile"/>
<link wikidata="Q22222" start="75649" end="75667" title="Kirsten Gillibrand" label="Kirsten Gillibrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100788" start="75802" end="75818" title="Gennifer Flowers" label="Gennifer Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q212659" start="75823" end="75838" title="Monica Lewinsky" label="Monica Lewinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q448579" start="75848" end="75864" title="Elizabeth Gracen" label="Elizabeth Gracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405252" start="75887" end="75899" title="Sally Perdue" label="Sally Perdue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977884" start="76042" end="76055" title="Bruce Lindsey" label="Bruce Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q279813" start="76057" end="76074" title="Robert S. Bennett" label="Robert S. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152537" start="76080" end="76090" title="Jane Mayer" label="Jane Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888355" start="76679" end="76719" title="United Nations Climate Change conference" label="United Nations Climate Change conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301926" start="76738" end="76785" title="William J. Clinton Presidential Center and Park" label="William J. Clinton Presidential Center and Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="76789" end="76810" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540963" start="76888" end="76895" title="My Life (Bill Clinton autobiography)" label="My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="76967" end="77005" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="77061" end="77079" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Asian tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="77081" end="77103" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="U.N. secretary-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="77104" end="77114" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="77164" end="77181" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q926745" start="77433" end="77449" title="Super Bowl XXXIX" label="Super Bowl XXXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="77544" end="77557" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974620" start="77632" end="77661" title="William J. Clinton Foundation" label="William J. Clinton Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974620" start="77887" end="77912" title="Clinton Foundation" label="Clinton Global Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="78011" end="78024" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="78064" end="78079" title="ethnic conflict" label="ethnic conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q485087" start="78247" end="78284" title="Large Cities Climate Leadership Group" label="Large Cities Climate Leadership Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109683" start="78541" end="78552" title="Inder Singh (philanthropist)" label="Inder Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020870" start="78679" end="78704" title="California Proposition 87 (2006)" label="California Proposition 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q25584060" start="78708" end="78726" title="energy development" label="alternative energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9062647" start="78795" end="78840" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 2008" label="2008 Democratic presidential primary campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="79103" end="79115" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034682" start="79717" end="79752" title="2008 Democratic National Convention" label="2008 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4615375" start="80091" end="80101" title="2009 imprisonment of American journalists by North Korea" label="imprisoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q433087" start="80109" end="80117" title="Euna Lee" label="Euna Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q456636" start="80122" end="80132" title="Laura Ling" label="Laura Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="80200" end="80212" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="80290" end="80301" title="Kim Jong-il" label="Kim Jong-il"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574548" start="80423" end="80436" title="Special Envoy of the Secretary-General" label="Special Envoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="80704" end="80725" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="2010 Haiti earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092756" start="81069" end="81081" title="Cheryl Mills" label="Cheryl Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093212" start="81495" end="81498" title="NTR plc" label="NTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="81708" end="81734" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="81885" end="81897" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q359888" start="82114" end="82123" title="Tim Kaine" label="Tim Kaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377199" start="82268" end="82286" title="One America Appeal" label="One America Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="82310" end="82326" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38685186" start="82331" end="82345" title="Hurricane Irma" label="Hurricane Irma"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="82353" end="82363" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="82368" end="82373" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="82390" end="82394" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="82540" end="82549" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="82554" end="82567" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="82662" end="82666" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q126919562" start="82858" end="82883" title="Joe Biden–Donald Trump 2024 presidential debate" label="first presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127688165" start="83101" end="83123" title="Withdrawal of Joe Biden from the 2024 United States presidential election" label="withdrew his candidacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844259" start="83327" end="83335" title="2024 Democratic National Convention" label="2024 DNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="83837" end="83855" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="its war with Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039498" start="83878" end="83917" title="Institute for Middle East Understanding" label="Institute for Middle East Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q430464" start="84721" end="84729" title="Dearborn, Michigan" label="Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013717" start="84734" end="84743" title="Hamtramck, Michigan" label="Hamtramck"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935729" start="85209" end="85217" title="JD Vance" label="JD Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434360" start="85266" end="85274" title="Tim Walz" label="Tim Walz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131384617" start="85392" end="85430" title="Citizen (Bill Clinton book)" label="Citizen: My Life After the White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="85721" end="85727" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="85924" end="85927" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739683" start="86057" end="86065" title="The Hill (newspaper)" label="The Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182454" start="86258" end="86270" title="Hard Choices" label="Hard Choices"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="86327" end="86350" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="87432" end="87438" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548910" start="88105" end="88123" title="Gerald B. Lefcourt" label="Gerald B. Lefcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974620" start="88192" end="88217" title="Clinton Global Initiative" label="Clinton Global Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q557049" start="89299" end="89311" title="Ron Perelman" label="Ron Perelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q726071" start="89394" end="89407" title="Jimmy Buffett" label="Jimmy Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q309788" start="89415" end="89426" title="Don Johnson" label="Don Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="89459" end="89474" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651815" start="89583" end="89606" title="Little St. James Island" label="Little St. James Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q78473599" start="89676" end="89692" title="Virginia Roberts Giuffre" label="Virginia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="89767" end="89779" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262898" start="89787" end="89797" title="Mar-a-Lago" label="Mar-a-Lago"/>
<link wikidata="Q21129531" start="89826" end="89841" title="sex-trafficking" label="sex-trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="90410" end="90436" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="90449" end="90477" title="United States Secret Service" label="United States Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="90835" end="90848" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300269" start="90957" end="90966" title="Doug Band" label="Doug Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="91092" end="91099" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q79924" start="91110" end="91131" title="Hot Springs, Arkansas" label="Hot Springs, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087446" start="91189" end="91220" title="Foundry United Methodist Church" label="Foundry United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="91224" end="91240" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="91258" end="91267" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q219526" start="91294" end="91316" title="Fayetteville, Arkansas" label="Fayetteville, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="91329" end="91343" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Rodham"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="91375" end="91390" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q229671" start="91401" end="91416" title="Chelsea Clinton" label="Chelsea Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415975" start="91726" end="91765" title="Columbia University Irving Medical Center" label="New York-Presbyterian/Columbia Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q14523941" start="91828" end="91842" title="coronary stent" label="coronary stent"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="91933" end="91938" title="vegan" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181109" start="91984" end="91995" title="Dean Ornish" label="Dean Ornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026509" start="92000" end="92018" title="Caldwell Esselstyn" label="Caldwell Esselstyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429430" start="92094" end="92104" title="Mark Hyman (doctor)" label="Mark Hyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="92125" end="92141" title="pseudoscientific" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357900" start="92151" end="92170" title="functional medicine" label="functional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="92275" end="92281" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q450401" start="92289" end="92336" title="University of California, Irvine Medical Center" label="University of California, Irvine Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="92384" end="92392" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547055" start="92467" end="92505" title="MedStar Georgetown University Hospital" label="MedStar Georgetown University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518699" start="92624" end="92640" title="Legum Doctor" label="Doctorate of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301216" start="92653" end="92677" title="Doctor of Humane Letters" label="Doctor of Humane Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="92883" end="92897" title="Rhodes Scholar" label="Rhodes Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260236" start="93147" end="93185" title="Medal for Distinguished Public Service" label="Medal for Distinguished Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="93189" end="93209" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q710721" start="93210" end="93223" title="William Cohen" label="William Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301926" start="93237" end="93264" title="Clinton Presidential Center" label="Clinton Presidential Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="93531" end="93541" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q25270" start="93589" end="93597" title="Pristina" label="Pristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908498" start="93601" end="93623" title="Bill Clinton Boulevard" label="Bill Clinton Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="93694" end="93698" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q207826" start="93711" end="93726" title="Time Person of the Year" label="Man of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q708241" start="93772" end="93781" title="Ken Starr" label="Ken Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308672" start="93885" end="93953" title="Gallup&amp;#x27;s List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century" label="Gallup&amp;#x27;s List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="93985" end="93990" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952077" start="93998" end="94020" title="NAACP Image Award – President&amp;#x27;s Award" label="President&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q189021" start="94116" end="94119" title="TED (conference)" label="TED"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266111" start="94223" end="94240" title="GLAAD Media Award" label="GLAAD Media Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="94324" end="94341" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q43252" start="94346" end="94358" title="Sophia Loren" label="Sophia Loren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542330" start="94373" end="94390" title="46th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2003 Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113382" start="94395" end="94430" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children" label="Best Spoken Word Album for Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029909" start="94441" end="94475" title="Wolf Tracks and Peter and the Wolf" label="Wolf Tracks and Peter and the Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="94487" end="94496" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540963" start="94527" end="94546" title="My Life (Clinton autobiography)" label="&amp;quot;My Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542327" start="94581" end="94598" title="47th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2005 Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593890" start="94603" end="94625" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album" label="Best Spoken Word Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819749" start="94642" end="94653" title="Audie Award" label="Audie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518357" start="94760" end="94764" title="50th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839464" start="94775" end="94787" title="Back to Work (book)" label="Back to Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q630124" start="94797" end="94801" title="55th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q57512" start="94831" end="94846" title="Michel Martelly" label="Michel Martelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q112390" start="94872" end="94906" title="National Order of Honour and Merit" label="National Order of Honour and Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="95374" end="95403" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21026250" start="95443" end="95457" title="Clinton family" label="Clinton family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495819" start="95460" end="95492" title="Clinton School of Public Service" label="Clinton School of Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q106040779" start="95495" end="95526" title="Efforts to impeach Bill Clinton" label="Efforts to impeach Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356281" start="95529" end="95562" title="Electoral history of Bill Clinton" label="Electoral history of Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618351" start="95565" end="95613" title="Gun control policy of the Clinton Administration" label="Gun control policy of the Clinton Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="95616" end="95655" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="List of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594910" start="95658" end="95720" title="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience" label="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="95818" end="95825" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981664" start="96039" end="96052" title="Taylor Branch" label="Taylor Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387435" start="96652" end="96669" title="S. Daniel Abraham" label="S. Daniel Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157381" start="96676" end="96693" title="Peace Is Possible" label="Peace Is Possible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275565" start="96857" end="96869" title="James Bovard" label="James Bovard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209168" start="96981" end="96992" title="Joe Conason" label="Joe Conason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531327" start="96997" end="97007" title="Gene Lyons" label="Gene Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462923" start="97118" end="97132" title="Elizabeth Drew" label="Elizabeth Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701575" start="97191" end="97203" title="David Gergen" label="David Gergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072642" start="97274" end="97288" title="Nigel Hamilton (author)" label="Nigel Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="97345" end="97365" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831354" start="97459" end="97474" title="Michael Isikoff" label="Michael Isikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768317" start="97541" end="97550" title="Mark Katz (speechwriter)" label="Mark Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237116" start="97618" end="97632" title="David Maraniss" label="David Maraniss"/>
<link wikidata="Q463009" start="97749" end="97760" title="Dick Morris" label="Dick Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q533583" start="97819" end="97836" title="Richard Posner" label="Richard A. Posner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="98862" end="98890" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="102102" end="102133" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="102279" end="102293" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="102462" end="102493" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="102544" end="102550" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="102564" end="102599" title="American Presidents: Life Portraits" label="American Presidents: Life Portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="102657" end="102676" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3358" wikidata="Q4922364" url="?curid=3358" title="Black-letter law">
<text>In common law legal systems, black-letter law refers to well-established legal rules that are no longer subject to reasonable dispute. Black-letter law can be contrasted with legal theory or unsettled legal issues.

==History and etymology==
In an 1831 case in the U.S. Supreme Court, &quot;Jackson ex dem. Bradstreet v. Huntington&quot;, the phrase &quot;black letter&quot; was used: &quot;It is seldom that a case in our time savours so much of the black letter; but the course of decisions in New York renders it unavoidable...&quot;. The phrase &quot;black-letter law&quot; was used in the Pennsylvania Supreme Court case &quot;Naglee v. Ingersoll,&quot; 7 Pa. 185 (1847). The phrase does not apparently come directly from association with &quot;Black&#x27;s Law Dictionary&quot;, which was first published in 1891. It may refer to the practice of setting law books and citing legal precedents in blackletter type, a tradition that survived long after the switch to Roman and italic text for other printed works. It may also be linked to the Black Book of the Admiralty published in the Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland that collates at least 1,000 years of European-based laws of the sea and an authority for the High Court of Admiralty Court and maritime cases in the early modern period. 

The phrase refers to a distillation of the common law into general and accepted legal principles. This can be seen in the quote above from the Supreme Court where the court is noting that while the black-letter law is clear, New York precedent deviates from the general principles.

In common law, the informal notion of black-letter law includes the basic principles of law generally accepted by the courts and/or embodied in the statutes of a particular jurisdiction. The letter of the law is its actual implementation, thereby demonstrating that black-letter laws are those statutes, rules, acts, laws, provisions, etc. that are or have been written down, codified, or indicated somewhere in legal texts throughout history of specific state law. This is often the case for many precedents that have been set in the common law. 

An example of such a state within the common law jurisdiction, and using the black letter legal doctrine is Canada. Canadian law is based on British law and black-letter law is the principles of law accepted by the majority of judges in most provinces and territories. Sometimes it is referred to as &quot;hornbook law&quot; meaning treatise or textbook, often relied upon as authoritative, competent, and generally accepted in the field of Canadian law. 

In lawyer lingo, hornbook law or black-letter law is a fundamental and well-accepted legal principle that does not require any further explanation, since a hornbook is a primer of basics. Law is the rule which establish that a principle, provision, references, inference, observation, etc. may not require further explanation or clarification when the very nature of them shows that they are basic and elementary.

==Similar phrases==
The phrase is nearly synonymous with the phrase &quot;hornbook law&quot;. There are a number of venerable legal sources that distill the common law on various subjects known as restatement of the Law. The specific titles will be &quot;The Restatement (First) of Contracts&quot; or &quot;The Restatement of Agency&quot;, etc. Each of these volumes is divided into sections that begin with a text in boldface that summarizes a basic rule on an aspect of the law of contracts, agency, etc. This &quot;restatement&quot; is followed by commentary and examples that expand on the principle stated.

Another synonymous term, usually used in the United Kingdom, is &quot;trite law&quot;.

==Examples==
Examples of black-letter law include that the formation of a contract requires consideration, or that the registration of a trademark requires established use in the course of trade. 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="3" end="13" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922364" start="29" end="45" title="Black-letter law" label="black-letter law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="175" end="187" title="legal theory" label="legal theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="265" end="283" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419175" start="299" end="306" title="ex dem." label="ex dem."/>
<link wikidata="Q2785145" start="594" end="620" title="Pennsylvania Supreme Court" label="Pennsylvania Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q301504" start="750" end="777" title="Black&amp;#x27;s Law Dictionary" label="Black&amp;#x27;s Law Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="901" end="912" title="blackletter" label="blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q484023" start="970" end="975" title="Roman text" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="980" end="986" title="italic font" label="italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823387" start="1046" end="1073" title="Black Book of the Admiralty" label="Black Book of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="1181" end="1196" title="Law of the sea" label="laws of the sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q583320" start="1222" end="1251" title="Admiralty court" label="High Court of Admiralty Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="1344" end="1354" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1526" end="1534" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="1702" end="1707" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="1732" end="1739" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="1757" end="1769" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="1895" end="1899" title="acts" label="acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="1996" end="2001" title="legal" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="2039" end="2044" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="2082" end="2091" title="precedent" label="precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="2171" end="2194" title="common law jurisdiction" label="common law jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192543" start="2223" end="2237" title="legal doctrine" label="legal doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="2274" end="2285" title="British law" label="British law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192543" start="2314" end="2331" title="principles of law" label="principles of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738447" start="2348" end="2366" title="majority of judges" label="majority of judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="2375" end="2384" title="provinces" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="2389" end="2400" title="Territories of Canada" label="territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935503" start="2439" end="2451" title="hornbook law" label="hornbook law"/>
<link wikidata="Q384515" start="2466" end="2474" title="treatise" label="treatise"/>
<link wikidata="Q174834" start="2509" end="2522" title="authoritative" label="authoritative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374908" start="2593" end="2605" title="Legal English" label="lawyer lingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q211364" start="2817" end="2826" title="principle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2828" end="2837" title="provision (law)" label="provision"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="2851" end="2860" title="inference" label="inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="2862" end="2873" title="observation" label="observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841917" start="3202" end="3224" title="restatement of the Law" label="restatement of the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="3780" end="3788" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="3843" end="3852" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3359" wikidata="Q2907261" url="?curid=3359" title="Blue law">
<text>Blue laws (also known as Sunday laws, Sunday trade laws, and Sunday closing laws) are laws restricting or banning certain activities on specified days, usually Sundays in the western world. The laws were adopted originally for religious reasons, specifically to promote the observance of the Christian day of worship. Since then, they have come to serve secular purposes as well.

Blue laws commonly ban certain business and recreational activities on Sundays, and impose restrictions on the retail sale of hard goods and consumables, particularly alcoholic beverages. The laws also place limitations on a range of other endeavors—including travel, fashions, hunting, professional sports, stage performances, movie showings, and gambling. While less prevalent today, blue laws continue to be enforced in parts of the United States and Canada as well as in European countries, such as Austria, Germany, Norway, and Poland, where most stores are required to close on Sundays.

In the United States, the Supreme Court has upheld blue laws as constitutional despite their religious origins if supported by secular justifications. This has resulted to the provision of a day of rest for the general population. Meanwhile, various state courts have struck down the laws as either unenforceable or in violation of their states&#x27; constitutions. In response, state legislators have re-enacted certain Sunday laws to satisfy the rulings while allowing some of the other statutes to remain on the books with no intention to enforce them.

== History ==
The Roman Emperor Constantine promulgated the first known law regarding prohibition of Sunday labour for apparent religion-associated reasons in A.D. 321:

The earliest laws in North America addressing Sunday activities and public behavior were enacted in the Jamestown Colony in 1619 by the first General Assembly of Virginia. Among the 70 laws passed by the assembly was a mandate requiring attendance by all colonists at both morning and afternoon worship services on Sundays. The laws adopted that year also included provisions addressing idleness, gambling, drunkenness, and excessive apparel. Similar laws aimed at keeping the Sabbath holy and regulating morals were soon adopted throughout the colonies.

The first known example of the phrase &quot;blue laws&quot; in print was in the March 3, 1755, edition of the &quot;New-York Mercury&quot;, in which the writer imagines a future newspaper praising the revival of &quot;our [Connecticut&#x27;s] old Blue Laws&quot;. In his 1781 book &quot;General History of Connecticut&quot;, the Reverend Samuel Peters (1735–1826) used the phrase to describe numerous laws adopted by 17th-century Puritans that prohibited various activities on Sunday, recreational as well as commercial. Beyond that, Peters&#x27; book is regarded as an unreliable account of the laws and probably was written to satirize their puritanical nature.

While the historical roots of Sunday trade laws in the United States are generally known, the origin of the term &quot;blue laws&quot; remains a mystery. According to a &quot;Time&quot; magazine editorial in 1961, the year the Supreme Court heard four cases on the issue, the color blue came to be associated with colonial laws in opposition to the red emblem of British royalty. Other explanations have been offered. One of the most widely circulated is that early blue laws adopted in Connecticut were printed on blue paper. However, no copies have been found that would support this claim and it is not deemed credible. A more plausible explanation, one that is gaining general acceptance, is that the laws adopted by Puritans were aimed at enforcing morality and thus were &quot;blue-nosed&quot;, though the term &quot;blue&quot; may have been used in the vernacular of the times as a synonym for puritanism itself, in effect, overly strict.

As Protestant moral reformers organized the Sabbath reform in 19th-century America, calls for the enactment and enforcement of stricter Sunday laws developed. Numerous Americans were arrested for working, keeping an open shop, drinking alcohol, traveling, and engaging in recreational activities on Sundays. Erwin Fahlbusch and Geoffrey William Bromiley write that throughout their existence, organizations advocating first-day Sabbatarianism, such as the Lord&#x27;s Day Alliance in North America and the Lord&#x27;s Day Observance Society in the British Isles, were supported by labor unions in lobbying &quot;to prevent secular and commercial interests from hampering freedom of worship and from exploiting workers&quot;.

In Canada, the &quot;Ligue du Dimanche&quot;, a Roman Catholic Sunday league, supported the &quot;Lord&#x27;s Day Act&quot; in 1923 and promoted first-day Sabbatarian legislation. Beginning in the 1840s, workers, Jews, Seventh Day Baptists, freethinkers, and other groups began to organize opposition. Throughout the century, Sunday laws fueled churchstate controversy, and as an issue that contributed to the emergence of modern American minority-rights politics. On the other hand, the more recent &quot;Dies Domini&quot;, written by Pope John Paul II in 1998, advocates Sunday legislation in that it protects civil servants and workers; the North Dakota Catholic Conference in 2011 likewise maintained that blue laws, in accordance with the &quot;Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church&quot;, &quot;ensure that, for reasons of economic productivity, citizens are not denied time for rest and divine worship&quot;. Similarly, Chief Justice Earl Warren, while recognizing the partial religious origin of blue laws, acknowledged the &quot;secular purpose they served by providing a benefit to workers at the same time that they enhanced labor productivity&quot;.

== Laws by jurisdiction ==
=== Europe ===
==== Germany ====
The (&quot;shop closing law&quot;) on Sundays and public holidays have been in effect since 1956.

==== Denmark ====
In Denmark the closing laws restricting retail trade on Sundays were effectively abolished on October 1, 2012. Retail trade is only restricted on public holidays (New Year&#x27;s Day, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, Easter Monday, Day of Prayer, Ascension Day, Whit Sunday, Whit Monday, Christmas Day and Boxing Day) and on Constitution Day, Christmas Eve and New Year&#x27;s Eve (on New Year&#x27;s Eve from 3 pm only). On these days almost all shops will remain closed. Exempt are bakeries, DIYs, garden centres, gas stations and smaller supermarkets.

==== England and Wales ====
===== Before 1994 =====
Prior to 1994, trading laws forbade sale of certain products on a Sunday; the distinction between those that could and could not be sold was increasingly seen as arbitrary, and the laws were inadequately enforced and widely flouted. For example, some supermarkets would treat the relatively modest fines arising as a business cost and open nonetheless.

===== Since 1994 =====
The Sunday Trading Act 1994 relaxed restrictions on Sunday trading. This produced vocal opposition from bodies such as the Keep Sunday Special campaign, and the Lord&#x27;s Day Observance Society: on religious grounds, on the grounds that it would increase consumerism, and that it would reduce shop assistants&#x27; weekend leisure time.

The legislation permits large shops (those with a relevant floor area in excess of 280 square metres; 3000 sq. ft.) to open for up to six hours on Sunday. Small shops, those with an area of below 280 square metres (3000 sq. ft.), are free to set their own Sunday trading times. Some large shops, such as off-licences, service stations and garages, are exempt from the restrictions.

Some very large shops (e.g. department stores) open for longer than six hours on a Sunday by allowing customers in to browse 30 minutes prior to allowing them to make a purchase, since the six-hour restriction only applies to time during which the shop may make sales.

Christmas Day and Easter Sunday are non-trading days. This applies even to garden centres, which earlier had been trading over Easter, but not to small shops (those with an area of below 280 square metres; 3000 sq. ft.).

==== Netherlands ====
Prior to 1996, shops were generally closed on Sundays. A new law () regarding opening times changed that and leaves that decision mostly up to local municipalities. This law was changed several times since. 

The &quot;Zondagswet&quot; (“”), a law on Sabbath desecration, is mainly to ensure that church services remain undisturbed on Sundays and Christian holidays. It forbids public festivities on a Sunday before 13:00, as well as making noise that carries farther than , but activities that are unlikely to disturb church services are exempt.

==== Northern Ireland ====
Prior to 2008, no football was permitted to be played on Sundays by clubs affiliated to the Irish Football Association in Northern Ireland.

Shops with a floor area of over may only open from 1 to 6pm on Sundays.

In Belfast, public playgrounds were closed on Sundays until 1965. Swings in public parks were tied up and padlocked to prevent their use. Similar laws formerly applied to cinemas, pubs and parks.

==== Poland ====
Since 2007, blue laws were enacted and resulted in stores closing on the 13 state holidays in Poland – these are both religious and secular days of rest. In 2014, an initiative by the Law and Justice party failed to pass the reading in the Sejm to ban trading on Sundays and state holidays. However, since 2018, the ruling government and the President of Poland has signed a law that restricts store trading from March 1, 2018, to the first and last Sunday of the month, Palm Sunday, the 3rd and 4th Advent Sundays, as well as trading until 14.00 for Easter Saturday and Christmas Eve. 

In 2019, the restriction was extended, and trading was permitted solely on the last Sunday of the month, as well as Palm Sunday, the 3rd and 4th Advent Sundays, as well as trading until 14.00 for Easter Saturday and Christmas Eve. From 2020, stores may only be open on seven Sundays in the year: Palm Sunday, the 3rd and 4th Advent Sundays, the last Sunday of January, April, June and August as well as trading until 14.00 for Easter Saturday and Christmas Eve. As a result of restrictions in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2nd Advent Sunday was later added as a shopping day.

=== North America ===
==== Canada ====
The &quot;Lord&#x27;s Day Act&quot;, which since 1906 had prohibited business transactions from taking place on Sundays, was declared unconstitutional in the 1985 case &quot;R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd.&quot; Calgary police officers witnessed several transactions at the Big M Drug Mart, all of which occurred on a Sunday. Big M was charged with a violation of the &quot;Lord&#x27;s Day Act&quot;. A provincial court ruled that the &quot;Lord&#x27;s Day Act&quot; was unconstitutional, but the Crown proceeded to appeal all the way to the Supreme Court of Canada. In a unanimous 6–0 decision, the &quot;Lord&#x27;s Day Act&quot; was ruled an infringement of the freedom of conscience and religion defined in section 2(a) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.

A Toronto referendum in 1950 allowed only team sports to be played professionally on Sunday. Theatre performances, movie screenings, and horse racing were not permitted until the 1960s.

The Supreme Court later concluded, in &quot;R. v. Edwards Books and Art Ltd.&quot; [1986] (2 S.C.R. 713), that Ontario&#x27;s &quot;Retail Business Holiday Act&quot;, which required some Sunday closings, did not violate the Charter because it did not have a religious purpose. Nonetheless, as of today, virtually all provincial Sunday closing laws have ceased to exist. Some were struck down by provincial courts, but most were simply abrogated, often due to competitive reasons where out-of-province or foreign merchants were open.

==== United States ====
In the United States, judges have defended blue laws &quot;in terms of their secular benefit to workers&quot;, holding that &quot;the laws were essential to social well-being&quot;. In 1896, Supreme Court Justice Stephen Johnson Field, opined with regard to Sunday blue laws:

Many states prohibit selling alcohol for on and off-premises sales in one form or another on Sundays at some restricted time, under the idea that people should be in church on Sunday morning, or at least not drinking.

Many blue laws in the United States restrict the purchase of particular items on Sundays. Some of these laws restrict the ability to buy cars, groceries, office supplies, and housewares among other things. Though most of these laws have been relaxed or repealed in most states, they are still enforced in some other states.

In Texas, for example, blue laws prohibited selling housewares such as pots, pans, and washing machines on Sunday until 1985. In Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota, Missouri, Oklahoma, New Jersey, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, car dealerships continue to operate under blue-law prohibitions in which an automobile may not be purchased or traded on a Sunday. Maryland permits Sunday automobile sales only in the counties of Charles, Prince George&#x27;s, Montgomery, and Howard; similarly, Michigan restricts Sunday sales to only those counties with a population of less than 130,000. Texas and Utah prohibit car dealerships from operating over consecutive weekend days. In some cases, these laws were created or retained with the support of those whom they affected, to allow them a day off each week without fear of their competitors still being open.

Blue laws may also prohibit retail activity on days other than Sunday. In Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Maine, for example, blue laws prohibit most retail stores, including grocery stores, from opening on Thanksgiving and Christmas.

Research regarding the effect of the repeal of blue laws has been conducted, with Professor Elesha Coffman of Baylor University writing:
===== Court cases =====
Beginning in the mid-19th century, religious and ethno-cultural minorities arrested for violating state and local blue laws appealed their convictions to state supreme courts. In &quot;Specht v. Commonwealth&quot; (Pa. 1848), for example, German Seventh Day Baptists in Pennsylvania employed attorney Thaddeus Stevens to challenge the constitutionality of Pennsylvania&#x27;s Sunday law. As in cases in other states, litigants pointed to the provisions of state constitutions protecting religious liberty and maintained that Sunday laws were a blatant violation. Though typically unsuccessful (most state supreme courts upheld the constitutionality of Sunday laws), these constitutional challenges helped set a pattern by which subsequent minorities would seek to protect religious freedom and minority rights.

The Supreme Court of the United States held in its landmark case, &quot;McGowan v. Maryland&quot; (1961), that Maryland&#x27;s blue laws violated neither the Free Exercise Clause nor the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. It approved the state&#x27;s blue law restricting commercial activities on Sunday, noting that while such laws originated to encourage attendance at Christian churches, the contemporary Maryland laws were intended to serve &quot;to provide a uniform day of rest for all citizens&quot; on a secular basis and to promote the secular values of &quot;health, safety, recreation, and general well-being&quot; through a common day of rest. That this day coincides with Christian Sabbath is not a bar to the state&#x27;s secular goals; it neither reduces its effectiveness for secular purposes nor prevents adherents of other religions from observing their own holy days.

&quot;McGowan&quot; was but one of four Sunday closing cases decided together by the Court in May 1961. In &quot;Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market of Mass., Inc.&quot;, the Court ruled against a Kosher deli that closed on Saturday but was open on Sunday. The other two cases were &quot;Braunfeld v. Brown&quot;, and &quot;Two Guys from Harrison-Allentown, Inc. v. McGinley&quot;. Chief Justice Earl Warren declared that &quot;the State seeks to set one day apart from all others as a day of rest, repose, recreation and tranquility--a day which all members of the family and community have the opportunity to spend and enjoy together, a day on which there exists relative quiet and disassociation from the everyday intensity of commercial activities, a day on which people may visit friends and relatives who are not available during working days&quot;.

In March 2006, Texas judges upheld the state blue law that requires car dealerships to close either Saturday or Sunday each weekend.

=== Oceania ===
==== Cook Islands and Niue ====
Blue laws also exist in the Polynesian islands of Cook Islands and Niue. In the Cook Islands, these were the first written legislation, enacted by the London Missionary Society in 1827, with the consent of the &quot;ariki&quot; (chiefs). Laws in Niue ban certain activities on Sunday, reflecting the country&#x27;s history of observing the Christian Sabbath tradition.

==== Tonga ====
In the Kingdom of Tonga, the Vavaʻu Code (1839) was a form of blue law inspired by the teachings of Methodist missionaries. With the inauguration of the Tongan Constitution on June 4, 1875, the sixth clause stipulates: &quot;The Sabbath Day shall be kept holy in Tonga and no person shall practise his trade or profession or conduct any commercial undertaking on the Sabbath Day except according to law; and any agreement made or witnessed on that day shall be null and void and of no legal effect.&quot;

== See also ==
* Desuetude
* Dry county
* Neo-prohibitionism
* Raines law
* Religious law
* Sunday shopping

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* Algeo, Matthew (2006). &quot;Last Team Standing&quot;. Philadelphia: Da Capo Press. 
* Ruck, Rob; with Patterson, Maggie Jones and Weber, Michael P. (2010). &quot;Rooney: A Sporting Life&quot;. Lincoln, Neb.: University of Nebraska Press. 
* Sarna, Jonathan D. and Dalin, David G. (1997). &quot;Religion and State in the American Jewish Experience&quot;. Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press. 
* Volk, Kyle G. (2014). &quot;Minorities and the Making of American Democracy&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press. .
* Westcott, Rich (2001). &quot;A Century of Philadelphia Sports&quot;. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 

== External links ==
* Red, White, but Mostly Blue: The Validity of Modern Sunday Closing Laws Under the Establishment Clause - Vanderbilt Law Review (2007)
* Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture – Blue Laws
* The Massachusetts Blue Laws
* Blue Law - Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois newspaper)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="0" end="9" title="Blue law" label="Blue laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="25" end="36" title="Blue law" label="Sunday laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="38" end="55" title="Blue law" label="Sunday trade laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="61" end="80" title="Blue law" label="Sunday closing laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="160" end="166" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="175" end="188" title="western world" label="western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="227" end="236" title="Religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="292" end="301" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514663" start="309" end="316" title="worship" label="worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="354" end="361" title="secular" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q11541377" start="492" end="503" title="retail stores" label="retail sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184715" start="507" end="517" title="hard goods" label="hard goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681365" start="522" end="533" title="consumables" label="consumables"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="548" end="567" title="alcoholic beverages" label="alcoholic beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q61509" start="641" end="647" title="travel" label="travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="649" end="656" title="fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="659" end="666" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="668" end="687" title="professional sports" label="professional sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="689" end="707" title="theatre" label="stage performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="709" end="723" title="motion pictures" label="movie showings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="835" end="841" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="884" end="891" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="893" end="900" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="902" end="908" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="914" end="920" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="1001" end="1014" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="1039" end="1053" title="Constitution of the United States" label="constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="1564" end="1575" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="1806" end="1822" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="1844" end="1872" title="General Assembly of Virginia" label="General Assembly of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929345" start="2501" end="2514" title="Blue Laws (Connecticut)" label="old Blue Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412388" start="2596" end="2609" title="Samuel Peters (clergyman)" label="Samuel Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3098" end="3102" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="3410" end="3421" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322950" start="3914" end="3921" title="Sabbath" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431688" start="4288" end="4312" title="first-day Sabbatarianism" label="first-day Sabbatarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646625" start="4326" end="4350" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day Alliance" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242861" start="4376" end="4410" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day Observance Society" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day Observance Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="4451" end="4463" title="labor unions" label="labor unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="4694" end="4713" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day Act (Canada)" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142143" start="4815" end="4835" title="Seventh Day Baptists" label="Seventh Day Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167756" start="5102" end="5113" title="Dies Domini" label="Dies Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="5132" end="5149" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990400" start="5346" end="5393" title="Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church" label="Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="5547" end="5558" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="5949" end="5956" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="6109" end="6128" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q106333" start="6130" end="6145" title="Maundy Thursday" label="Maundy Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="6147" end="6158" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="6160" end="6173" title="Easter" label="Easter Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q209663" start="6175" end="6188" title="Easter Monday" label="Easter Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q51638" start="6205" end="6218" title="Feast of the Ascension" label="Ascension Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446130" start="6220" end="6231" title="Whitsun" label="Whit Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512993" start="6233" end="6244" title="Whit Monday" label="Whit Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="6246" end="6259" title="Christmas" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="6264" end="6274" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q327835" start="6283" end="6299" title="Constitution Day" label="Constitution Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="6301" end="6314" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="6319" end="6338" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571933" start="6947" end="6970" title="Sunday Trading Act 1994" label="Sunday Trading Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383087" start="7066" end="7085" title="Keep Sunday Special" label="Keep Sunday Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242861" start="7104" end="7138" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day Observance Society" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day Observance Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632011" start="7587" end="7599" title="Off-licence" label="off-licences"/>
<link wikidata="Q123269416" start="8431" end="8450" title="Sabbath desecration" label="Sabbath desecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714034" start="8770" end="8819" title="Sunday football in Northern Ireland" label="no football was permitted to be played on Sundays"/>
<link wikidata="Q620280" start="8847" end="8873" title="Irish Football Association" label="Irish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="8972" end="8979" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q188688" start="9035" end="9041" title="Swing (seat)" label="Swings"/>
<link wikidata="Q242049" start="9256" end="9273" title="Public holidays in Poland" label="13 state holidays"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="9277" end="9283" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="9367" end="9382" title="Law and Justice" label="Law and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="9423" end="9427" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q42236" start="9654" end="9665" title="Palm Sunday" label="Palm Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="9683" end="9689" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327538" start="9734" end="9749" title="Easter Saturday" label="Easter Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q42236" start="9887" end="9898" title="Palm Sunday" label="Palm Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="9916" end="9922" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327538" start="9967" end="9982" title="Easter Saturday" label="Easter Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q42236" start="10067" end="10078" title="Palm Sunday" label="Palm Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="10096" end="10102" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327538" start="10198" end="10213" title="Easter Saturday" label="Easter Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="10284" end="10301" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274181" start="10574" end="10600" title="R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd." label="R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="10937" end="10960" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="11126" end="11156" title="Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274211" start="11390" end="11422" title="R. v. Edwards Books and Art Ltd." label="R. v. Edwards Books and Art Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q1234235" start="12117" end="12138" title="Stephen Johnson Field" label="Stephen Johnson Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="12210" end="12217" title="alcoholic beverage" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="12854" end="12862" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="12864" end="12872" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="12874" end="12881" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="12883" end="12887" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="12889" end="12898" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="12900" end="12905" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="12907" end="12916" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="12918" end="12926" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="12928" end="12936" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="12938" end="12948" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="12950" end="12962" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="12964" end="12976" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="12982" end="12991" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="13124" end="13132" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q501319" start="13189" end="13196" title="Charles County, Maryland" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="13198" end="13218" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="13220" end="13230" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q398939" start="13236" end="13242" title="Howard County, Maryland" label="Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="13255" end="13263" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="13360" end="13364" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="13694" end="13707" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="13709" end="13721" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="13727" end="13732" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="13828" end="13840" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="13967" end="13984" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142143" start="14264" end="14284" title="Seventh Day Baptists" label="Seventh Day Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353767" start="14319" end="14335" title="Thaddeus Stevens" label="Thaddeus Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="14834" end="14868" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801406" start="14902" end="14921" title="McGowan v. Maryland" label="McGowan v. Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="14941" end="14949" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499816" start="14988" end="15008" title="Free Exercise Clause" label="Free Exercise Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308297" start="15017" end="15037" title="Establishment Clause" label="Establishment Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="15045" end="15094" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188412" start="15231" end="15263" title="church attendance" label="attendance at Christian churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116511" start="15559" end="15576" title="Christian Sabbath" label="Christian Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518838" start="15875" end="15928" title="Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market of Mass., Inc." label="Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market of Mass., Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4958270" start="16053" end="16071" title="Braunfeld v. Brown" label="Braunfeld v. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q19108397" start="16089" end="16139" title="Two Guys from Harrison-Allentown, Inc. v. McGinley" label="Two Guys from Harrison-Allentown, Inc. v. McGinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="16161" end="16172" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="16854" end="16866" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="16871" end="16875" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="16955" end="16980" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726594" start="17020" end="17025" title="Aliʻi" label="ariki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356111" start="17100" end="17126" title="history of Niue" label="the country&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="17197" end="17213" title="Tonga" label="Kingdom of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981469" start="17219" end="17230" title="Vavaʻu Code" label="Vavaʻu Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="17290" end="17299" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="17300" end="17312" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164236" start="17343" end="17362" title="Constitution of Tonga" label="Tongan Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376418" start="17713" end="17722" title="Desuetude" label="Desuetude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261535" start="17725" end="17735" title="Dry county" label="Dry county"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991809" start="17738" end="17756" title="Neo-prohibitionism" label="Neo-prohibitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284853" start="17759" end="17769" title="Raines law" label="Raines law"/>
<link wikidata="Q670732" start="17772" end="17785" title="Religious law" label="Religious law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253380" start="17788" end="17803" title="Sunday shopping" label="Sunday shopping"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3360" wikidata="Q183503" url="?curid=3360" title="Bar">
<text>Bar or BAR may refer to:

== Food and drink ==
* Bar (establishment), selling alcoholic beverages
* Candy bar
** Chocolate bar
*Protein bar

==Science and technology==
* Bar (river morphology), a deposit of sediment
* Bar (tropical cyclone), a layer of cloud
* Bar (galaxy), a feature of many spiral galaxies
* Bar (unit), a unit of pressure
* BAR domain, a protein domain
* Bar stock, of metal
* Sandbar

===Computing===
* Bar (computer science), a placeholder
* Base Address Register in PCI
* Bar, a mobile phone form factor
* Bar, a type of graphical control element

==Typography==
* Fraction bar
* Overbar, a line over a formula or segment of text
* Underbar, a line under a formula or segment of text
* Vertical bar

==Law==
* Bar (law), the legal profession
* Bar association
* Bar examination

==Media and entertainment==
* &quot;Bar&quot; (Croatian TV series)
* Bar (Czech TV series)
* Bar (dance), Turkey
* Bar (music), a segment
* Bar (Polish TV series)
* Bar (Slovenian TV series)
* &quot;Bay Area Reporter&quot;, a newspaper
* &quot;Biblical Archaeology Review&quot;, a magazine
* &quot;Bar&quot; (song), by Tini and L-Gante
* &quot;B.A.R. (Bay Area Representatives)&quot;, 2014 album by Lil Wyte and Frayser Boy

==Places==

=== France ===

* Bar (river)
* Bar, Corrèze, a commune
* Bar-le-Duc, a commune formerly known as &quot;Bar&quot;
* Bar-sur-Aube, a commune
* Bar-sur-Seine, a commune

=== Iran ===

* Bar, Bushehr, a village
* Bar, Hormozgan, a village
* Bar, Razavi Khorasan, a city

=== Elsewhere ===
* Bar (Martian crater)
* Bar, Rutog County, Tibet, China
* Bár, Hungary, a village
* Bar Municipality, Montenegro
** Bar, Montenegro, a town
* Bar Region, Punjab, Pakistan
* Bar, Republic of Buryatia, Russia
* Bar, Vinnytsia Oblast, Ukraine, a town
* Duchy of Bar, part of the Holy Roman Empire
* Barbados, IOC and UNDP country code BAR

==Language==
* Bar (diacritic), a line through a letter
* Bavarian language (ISO 639-3: bar)
* Vertical bar, a punctuation symbol
* X-bar theory, in linguistics

==Transportation==
* Bangor and Aroostook Railroad, US, reporting mark
* Barstow station, US, station code
* California Bureau of Automotive Repair, a consumer protection agency
* Qionghai Bo&#x27;ao Airport, IATA code

==Firearms==
* M1918 Browning automatic rifle
* Browning BAR, a Belgian rifle

==Other uses==
* &quot;Bar&quot; (Aramaic), a patronymic prefix in Aramaic
* Bar (heraldry), a band across a shield
* Bar (name)
* Bar Confederation, an 18th-century Polish association
* Bar Mitzvah, a Jewish coming of age ceremony
* Blaauwberg Armoured Regiment, South African Army
* British Archaeological Reports
* British American Racing, a Formula One constructor
* Chin-up bar, playground equipment
* Horizontal bar, a gymnastic apparatus
* Medal bar, additional award
* Space bar, on a keyboard
* Historical gatehouse
* Bennett acceptance ratio in thermodynamics
* BlackArts Racing Team, a motor racing team from Hong Kong
* Business Analysis and Reporting in the Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination

==See also==
* The Bar (disambiguation)
* Barr (disambiguation)
* Barre (disambiguation)
* Bars (disambiguation)
* Bär (disambiguation)
* FUBAR
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183503" start="0" end="3" title="Bar" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183503" start="7" end="10" title="Bar" label="BAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="49" end="68" title="Bar (establishment)" label="Bar (establishment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11312555" start="100" end="109" title="Candy bar" label="Candy bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361086" start="113" end="126" title="Chocolate bar" label="Chocolate bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251457" start="128" end="139" title="Protein bar" label="Protein bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q478251" start="170" end="192" title="Bar (river morphology)" label="Bar (river morphology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857866" start="218" end="240" title="Bar (tropical cyclone)" label="Bar (tropical cyclone)"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="261" end="273" title="Bar (galaxy)" label="Bar (galaxy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q103510" start="311" end="321" title="Bar (unit)" label="Bar (unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24771942" start="344" end="354" title="BAR domain" label="BAR domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231940" start="375" end="384" title="Bar stock" label="Bar stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="397" end="404" title="Sandbar" label="Sandbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q860" start="424" end="446" title="Bar (computer science)" label="Bar (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046157" start="464" end="485" title="Base Address Register" label="Base Address Register"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="502" end="526" title="mobile phone form factor#Bar" label="mobile phone form factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q605117" start="544" end="569" title="graphical control element" label="graphical control element"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="588" end="600" title="Fraction bar" label="Fraction bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q334025" start="603" end="610" title="Overbar" label="Overbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11199" start="655" end="663" title="Underbar" label="Underbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132051" start="709" end="721" title="Vertical bar" label="Vertical bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015569" start="733" end="742" title="Bar (law)" label="Bar (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865205" start="767" end="782" title="Bar association" label="Bar association"/>
<link wikidata="Q907666" start="785" end="800" title="Bar examination" label="Bar examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219953" start="832" end="868" title="Bar (Croatian TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Bar&amp;quot; (Croatian TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857860" start="871" end="892" title="Bar (Czech TV series)" label="Bar (Czech TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857863" start="895" end="906" title="Bar (dance)" label="Bar (dance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="917" end="928" title="Bar (music)" label="Bar (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857861" start="942" end="964" title="Bar (Polish TV series)" label="Bar (Polish TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857862" start="967" end="992" title="Bar (Slovenian TV series)" label="Bar (Slovenian TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q812061" start="1001" end="1018" title="Bay Area Reporter" label="Bay Area Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903261" start="1046" end="1073" title="Biblical Archaeology Review" label="Biblical Archaeology Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q109918302" start="1094" end="1116" title="Bar (song)" label="&amp;quot;Bar&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242909" start="1146" end="1179" title="B.A.R. (Bay Area Representatives)" label="B.A.R. (Bay Area Representatives)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817620" start="1257" end="1268" title="Bar (river)" label="Bar (river)"/>
<link wikidata="Q470315" start="1271" end="1283" title="Bar, Corrèze" label="Bar, Corrèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="1297" end="1307" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q209093" start="1355" end="1367" title="Bar-sur-Aube" label="Bar-sur-Aube"/>
<link wikidata="Q328309" start="1381" end="1394" title="Bar-sur-Seine" label="Bar-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938216" start="1423" end="1435" title="Bar, Bushehr" label="Bar, Bushehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q392820" start="1449" end="1463" title="Bar, Hormozgan" label="Bar, Hormozgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417114" start="1477" end="1497" title="Bar, Razavi Khorasan" label="Bar, Razavi Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423517" start="1527" end="1547" title="Bar (Martian crater)" label="Bar (Martian crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634439" start="1550" end="1567" title="Bar, Rutog County" label="Bar, Rutog County"/>
<link wikidata="Q853333" start="1584" end="1587" title="Bár" label="Bár"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604068" start="1610" end="1626" title="Bar Municipality" label="Bar Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q115276" start="1642" end="1657" title="Bar, Montenegro" label="Bar, Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056721" start="1668" end="1678" title="Bar Region" label="Bar Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q18404531" start="1699" end="1724" title="Bar, Republic of Buryatia" label="Bar, Republic of Buryatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q737925" start="1735" end="1756" title="Bar, Vinnytsia Oblast" label="Bar, Vinnytsia Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="1776" end="1788" title="Duchy of Bar" label="Duchy of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="1822" end="1830" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813741" start="1878" end="1893" title="Bar (diacritic)" label="Bar (diacritic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29540" start="1921" end="1938" title="Bavarian language" label="Bavarian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132051" start="1958" end="1970" title="Vertical bar" label="Vertical bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861110" start="1995" end="2007" title="X-bar theory" label="X-bar theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q806540" start="2046" end="2075" title="Bangor and Aroostook Railroad" label="Bangor and Aroostook Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474214" start="2098" end="2113" title="Barstow station" label="Barstow station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020289" start="2134" end="2172" title="California Bureau of Automotive Repair" label="California Bureau of Automotive Repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267894" start="2205" end="2232" title="Qionghai Bo&amp;#x27;ao Airport" label="Qionghai Bo&amp;#x27;ao Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q60642" start="2260" end="2290" title="M1918 Browning automatic rifle" label="M1918 Browning automatic rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976556" start="2293" end="2305" title="Browning BAR" label="Browning BAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q110874" start="2341" end="2366" title="Bar (Aramaic)" label="&amp;quot;Bar&amp;quot; (Aramaic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857865" start="2401" end="2415" title="Bar (heraldry)" label="Bar (heraldry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28605818" start="2442" end="2452" title="Bar (name)" label="Bar (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q874784" start="2455" end="2472" title="Bar Confederation" label="Bar Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="2511" end="2522" title="Bar Mitzvah" label="Bar Mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308381" start="2558" end="2586" title="Blaauwberg Armoured Regiment" label="Blaauwberg Armoured Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21451558" start="2609" end="2639" title="British Archaeological Reports" label="British Archaeological Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q171320" start="2642" end="2665" title="British American Racing" label="British American Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048487" start="2695" end="2706" title="Chin-up bar" label="Chin-up bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q623270" start="2731" end="2745" title="Horizontal bar" label="Horizontal bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537204" start="2771" end="2780" title="Medal bar" label="Medal bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072900" start="2801" end="2810" title="Space bar" label="Space bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q277760" start="2839" end="2848" title="gatehouse" label="gatehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889759" start="2851" end="2875" title="Bennett acceptance ratio" label="Bennett acceptance ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224189" start="2896" end="2917" title="BlackArts Racing Team" label="BlackArts Racing Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885018" start="2995" end="3042" title="Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination" label="Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q22928178" start="3059" end="3083" title="The Bar (disambiguation)" label="The Bar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q436830" start="3086" end="3107" title="Barr (disambiguation)" label="Barr (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q292933" start="3110" end="3132" title="Barre (disambiguation)" label="Barre (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q236289" start="3135" end="3156" title="Bars (disambiguation)" label="Bars (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019005" start="3159" end="3179" title="Bär (disambiguation)" label="Bär (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218260" start="3182" end="3187" title="FUBAR" label="FUBAR"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3363" wikidata="Q44" url="?curid=3363" title="Beer">
<text>Beer is an alcoholic beverage produced by the brewing and fermentation of starches from cereal grain—most commonly malted barley, although wheat, maize (corn), rice, and oats are also used. The grain is mashed to convert starch in the grain to sugars, which dissolve in water to form wort. Fermentation of the wort by yeast produces ethanol and carbonation in the beer. Beer is one of the oldest alcoholic drinks in the world, the most widely consumed, and the third most popular drink after water and tea. Most modern beer is brewed with hops, which add bitterness and other flavours and act as a natural preservative and stabilising agent. Other flavouring agents, such as gruit, herbs, or fruits, may be included or used instead of hops. In commercial brewing, natural carbonation is often replaced with forced carbonation.

Beer is distributed in bottles and cans, and is commonly available on draught in pubs and bars. The brewing industry is a global business, consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries. The strength of modern beer is usually around 4% to 6% alcohol by volume (ABV).

Some of the earliest writings mention the production and distribution of beer: the Code of Hammurabi (1750 BC) included laws regulating it, while &quot;The Hymn to Ninkasi&quot;, a prayer to the Mesopotamian goddess of beer, contains a recipe for it. Beer forms part of the culture of many nations and is associated with social traditions such as beer festivals, as well as activities like pub games.

==Etymology==


In early forms of English and in the Scandinavian languages, the usual word for beer was the word whose Modern English form is &quot;ale&quot;. The modern word &quot;beer&quot; comes into present-day English from Old English , itself from Common Germanic, it is found throughout the West Germanic and North Germanic dialects (modern Dutch and German , Old Norse ). The earlier etymology of the word is debated: the three main theories are that the word originates in Proto-Germanic (putatively from Proto-Indo-European ), meaning &quot;brewer&#x27;s yeast, beer dregs&quot;; that it is related to the word &quot;barley&quot;, or that it was somehow borrowed from Latin &quot;to drink&quot;.

Christine Fell, in &quot;Leeds Studies in English&quot; (1975), suggests that the Old English/Norse word &quot;bēor&quot; did not originally denote ale or beer, but a strong, sweet drink rather like mead or cider. Whatever the case, the meaning of &quot;bēor&quot; expanded to cover the meaning of &quot;ale&quot;. When hopped ale from Europe was imported into Britain in the late Middle Ages, it was described as &quot;beer&quot; to differentiate it from the British unhopped ale, later acquiring a broader meaning.

== History ==

=== Prehistory ===

Beer is one of the world&#x27;s oldest prepared alcoholic drinks. The earliest archaeological evidence of fermentation consists of 13,000 year-old residues of a beer with the consistency of gruel, used by the semi-nomadic Natufians for ritual feasting, at the Raqefet Cave in the Carmel Mountains near Haifa in northern Israel. There is evidence that beer was produced at Göbekli Tepe during the Pre-Pottery Neolithic (around 8500 BC to 5500 BC). The earliest clear chemical evidence of beer produced from barley dates to about 3500–3100 BC, from the site of Godin Tepe in the Zagros Mountains of western Iran.

=== Early civilisations ===

Beer is recorded in the written history of ancient Egypt, and archaeologists speculate that beer was instrumental in the formation of civilizations. Approximately 5000 years ago, workers in the city of Uruk (modern day Iraq) were paid by their employers with volumes of beer. During the building of the Egyptian pyramids, each worker got a daily ration of four to five litres of beer, which served as both nutrition and refreshment and was crucial to the pyramids&#x27; construction.

Some of the earliest Sumerian writings contain references to beer; examples include a prayer to the goddess Ninkasi, known as &quot;The Hymn to Ninkasi&quot;, which served as both a prayer and a method of remembering the recipe for beer in a culture with few literate people, and the ancient advice (&quot;Fill your belly. Day and night make merry&quot;) to Gilgamesh, recorded in the &quot;Epic of Gilgamesh&quot; by the alewife Siduri, may, at least in part, have referred to the consumption of beer. The Ebla tablets, discovered in 1974 in Ebla, Syria, show that beer was produced in the city in 2500 BC. A fermented drink using rice and fruit was made in China around 7000 BC. Unlike sake, mould was not used to saccharify the rice (amylolytic fermentation); the rice was probably prepared for fermentation by chewing or malting. During the Vedic period in Ancient India, there are records of the consumption of the beer-like &quot;sura&quot;. Xenophon noted that during his travels, beer was being produced in Armenia.

=== Medieval ===

Beer was spread through Europe by Germanic and Celtic tribes as far back as 3000 BC, and it was mainly brewed on a domestic scale. The product that the early Europeans drank might not be recognised as beer by most people today. Alongside the basic starch source, the early European beers may have contained fruits, honey, numerous types of plants, spices, and other substances such as narcotic herbs. This mixture was called gruit, where if some were improperly heated could cause hallucinations. The mixture of gruit was different from every brewer. What they did not contain was hops, as that was a later addition, first mentioned in Europe around 822 by a Carolingian Abbot and again in 1067 by abbess Hildegard of Bingen. 

In 1516, William IV, Duke of Bavaria adopted the &quot;Reinheitsgebot&quot; (purity law), perhaps the oldest food-quality regulation still in use in the 21st century, according to which the only allowed ingredients of beer are water, hops, and barley-malt. Beer produced before the Industrial Revolution was made and sold on a domestic scale, although by the 7th century AD, beer was also being produced and sold by European monasteries. During the Industrial Revolution, the production of beer moved from artisanal to industrial manufacture, while domestic production ceased to be significant by the end of the 19th century.

=== Modern ===

In 1912, brown bottles began to be used by the Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in the United States. This innovation has since been accepted worldwide as it prevents light rays from degrading the quality and stability of beer. The brewing industry is a global business, consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers, ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries. As of 2006, more than of beer are sold per year, producing global revenues of US$294.5 billion. In 2010, China&#x27;s beer consumption hit , or nearly twice that of the United States, but only 5 per cent sold were premium beers, compared with 50 per cent in France and Germany. Beer is the most widely consumed of all alcoholic drinks. A widely publicised study in 2018 suggested that sudden decreases in barley production due to extreme drought and heat could in the future cause substantial volatility in the availability and price of beer.

== Brewing ==

=== Process ===

The process of making beer is brewing. It converts the grain into a sugary liquid called wort and then ferments this into beer using yeast. The first step, mixing malted barley with hot water in a mash tun, is &quot;mashing&quot;. The starches are converted to sugars, and the sweet wort is drained off. The grains are washed to extract as much fermentable liquid from the grains as possible. The sweet wort is put into a kettle, or &quot;copper&quot;, and boiled. Hops are added as a source of bitterness, flavour, and aroma. The longer the hops are boiled, the more bitterness they contribute, but the less hop flavour and aroma remain. The wort is cooled and the yeast is added. The wort is then fermented, often for a week or longer. The yeast settles, leaving the beer clear. During fermentation, most of the carbon dioxide is allowed to escape through a trap. The carbonation is often increased either by transferring the beer to a pressure vessel and introducing pressurised carbon dioxide or by transferring it before the fermentation is finished so that carbon dioxide pressure builds up inside the container.

=== Ingredients ===

The basic ingredients of beer are water; a starch source, usually malted barley; a brewer&#x27;s yeast to produce the fermentation; and a flavouring such as hops. A mixture of starch sources may be used, with a secondary carbohydrate source, such as maize (corn), rice, wheat, or sugar, often termed an adjunct, especially when used alongside malted barley. Less widely used starch sources include millet, sorghum, and cassava root in Africa; potato in Brazil; and agave in Mexico.

Water is the main ingredient, accounting for 93% of beer&#x27;s weight. The level of dissolved bicarbonate influences beer&#x27;s finished taste. Due to the mineral properties of each region&#x27;s water, specific areas were originally the sole producers of certain types of beer, each identifiable by regional characteristics. Dublin&#x27;s hard water is well-suited to making stout, such as Guinness, while the Plzeň Region&#x27;s soft water is ideal for brewing Pilsner, such as Pilsner Urquell. The waters of Burton in England contain gypsum, which benefits making pale ale to such a degree that brewers of pale ale add gypsum in a process known as Burtonisation.

The starch source provides the fermentable material and determines the strength and flavour of the beer. The most common starch source used in beer is malted grain. Grain is malted by soaking it in water, allowing it to begin germination, and then drying the partially germinated grain in a kiln. Malting produces enzymes that convert starches into fermentable sugars. Different roasting times and temperatures produce different colours of malt from the same grain. Darker malts produce darker beers. Nearly all beers use barley malt for most of the starch, as its fibrous hull remains attached to the grain during threshing. After malting, barley is milled, which finally removes the hull, breaking it into large pieces. These pieces remain with the grain during the mash and act as a filter bed during lautering, when sweet wort is separated from insoluble grain material. Other grains, including wheat, rice, oats, and rye, and less frequently, corn and sorghum may be used. Some brewers have produced gluten-free beer, made with sorghum, for those who cannot consume gluten-containing grains like wheat, barley, and rye.

Flavouring beer is the sole commercial use of hops. The flower of the hop vine acts as a flavouring and preservative agent in nearly all beer made today. The flowers themselves are often called &quot;hops&quot;. The first historical mention of the use of hops in beer dates from 822 AD in monastery rules written by Adalard of Corbie, though widespread cultivation of hops for use in beer began in the thirteenth century. Before then, beer was flavoured with other plants such as grains of paradise or &#x27;alehoof&#x27;. Combinations of aromatic herbs, berries, and even wormwood were combined into aflavouring mixture known as gruit. Some beers today, such as Fraoch&#x27; by the Scottish Heather Ales company use plants other than hops for flavouring. and Cervoise Lancelot by the French Brasserie-Lancelot company, 

Hops contribute a bitterness that balances the sweetness of the malt; the bitterness of beers is measured on the International Bitterness Units scale. Hops further contribute floral, citrus, and herbal aromas and flavours. They have an antibiotic effect that favours the activity of brewer&#x27;s yeast over less desirable microorganisms, and aids in &quot;head retention&quot;, the length of time that a foamy head created by carbonation will last. The acidity of hops is a preservative.

Yeast is the microorganism responsible for fermenting beer. It metabolises the sugars, producing ethanol and carbon dioxide, and thereby turns wort into beer. In addition, yeast influences the character and flavour. The dominant types of beer yeast are top-fermenting &quot;Saccharomyces cerevisiae&quot; and bottom-fermenting &quot;Saccharomyces pastorianus&quot;. &quot;Brettanomyces&quot; ferments lambics, and &quot;Torulaspora delbrueckii&quot; ferments Bavarian weissbier. Before the role of yeast in fermentation was understood, fermentation involved wild or airborne yeasts. A few styles, such as lambics, rely on this method today, but most modern fermentation adds pure yeast cultures.

Some brewers add clarifying agents or finings to beer, which typically precipitate (collect as a solid) out along with protein solids, and are found only in trace amounts in the finished product. This process makes the beer appear bright and clean, rather than the cloudy appearance of ethnic and older styles such as wheat beers. Clarifying agents include isinglass, from the swimbladders of fish; Irish moss, a seaweed; kappa carrageenan, from the seaweed &quot;Kappaphycus cottonii&quot;; Polyclar (artificial); and gelatin. Beer marked &quot;suitable for vegans&quot; is clarified either with seaweed or with artificial agents.
=== Industry ===

In the 21st century, larger breweries have repeatedly absorbed smaller breweries. In 2002, South African Breweries bought the North American Miller Brewing Company to found SABMiller, becoming the second-largest brewery after North American Anheuser-Busch. In 2004, the Belgian Interbrew was the third-largest brewery by volume, and the Brazilian AmBev was the fifth-largest. They merged into InBev, becoming the largest brewery. In 2007, SABMiller surpassed InBev and Anheuser-Busch when it acquired Royal Grolsch, the brewer of Dutch brand Grolsch. In 2008, when InBev (the second-largest) bought Anheuser-Busch (the third-largest), the new Anheuser-Busch InBev company became again the largest brewer in the world.
, according to the market research firm Technavio, AB InBev was the largest brewing company in the world, with Heineken second, CR Snow third, Carlsberg fourth, and Molson Coors fifth.

A &quot;microbrewery&quot;, or &quot;craft brewery&quot;, produces a limited amount of beer. The maximum amount of beer a brewery can produce and still be classed as a &#x27;microbrewery&#x27; varies by region and by authority; in the US, it is a year. A &quot;brewpub&quot; is a type of microbrewery that incorporates a pub or other drinking establishment. The highest density of breweries in the world, most of them microbreweries, exists in Franconia, Germany, especially in the district of Upper Franconia, which has about 200 breweries. The Benedictine Weihenstephan brewery in Bavaria, Germany, can trace its roots to the year 768, as a document from that year refers to a hop garden in the area paying a tithe to the monastery. It claims to be the oldest working brewery in the world.

== Varieties ==

=== Top-fermented beers ===

Top-fermented beers are most commonly produced with &quot;Saccharomyces cerevisiae&quot;, a top-fermenting yeast which clumps and rises to the surface, typically between . At these temperatures, yeast produces significant amounts of esters and other secondary flavour and aroma products, and the result is often a beer with slightly &quot;fruity&quot; compounds resembling apple, pear, pineapple, banana, plum, or prune, among others. After the introduction of hops into England from Flanders in the 15th century, &quot;ale&quot; came to mean an unhopped fermented brew, while &quot;beer&quot; meant a brew with an infusion of hops. The term &#x27;real ale&#x27; was coined by the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) in 1973 for &quot;beer brewed from traditional ingredients, matured by secondary fermentation in the container from which it is dispensed, and served without the use of extraneous carbon dioxide&quot;. It is applied to both bottle conditioned and cask conditioned beers. 

As for the types of top-fermented beers, pale ale predominantly uses pale malt. It is one of the world&#x27;s major beer styles and includes India pale ale (IPA). Mild ale has a predominantly malty palate. It is usually dark, with an abv of 3% to 3.6%. Wheat beer is brewed with a large proportion of wheat although it often also contains a significant proportion of malted barley. Wheat beers are usually top-fermented. Stout is a dark beer made using roasted barley, and typically brewed with slow fermenting yeast. There are a number of variations including dry stout (such as Guinness), sweet stout, and Imperial (or Russian) stout. Stout was originally the strongest variety of porter, a dark brown beer popular with the street and river porters of eighteenth century London.

=== Bottom-fermented beers ===

Lager is cool-fermented beer. Pale lagers are the most commonly drunk beers in the world. Many are of the &quot;pilsner&quot; type. The name &quot;lager&quot; comes from the German &quot;lagern&quot; for &quot;to store&quot;, as brewers in Bavaria stored beer in cool cellars during the warm summer months, allowing the beers to continue to ferment, and to clear any sediment. Lager yeast is a cool bottom-fermenting yeast (&quot;Saccharomyces pastorianus&quot;). Lager typically undergoes primary fermentation at , and then a long secondary fermentation at (the lagering phase). During the secondary stage, the lager clears and mellows. The cooler conditions inhibit the natural production of esters and other byproducts, resulting in a &quot;cleaner&quot;-tasting beer. With improved modern yeast strains, most lager breweries use only short periods of cold storage, typically no more than 2 weeks. Some traditional lagers are still stored for several months.

=== Lambic ===

Lambic, a beer of Belgium, is naturally fermented using wild yeasts, rather than cultivated. Many of these are not strains of brewer&#x27;s yeast (&quot;Saccharomyces cerevisiae&quot;) and may have significant differences in aroma and sourness. Yeast varieties such as &quot;Brettanomyces bruxellensis&quot; and &quot;Brettanomyces lambicus&quot; are common in lambics. In addition, other organisms such as &quot;Lactobacillus&quot; bacteria produce acids which contribute to the sourness.

=== Non-barley beers ===

Around the world, many traditional and ancient starch-based drinks are classed as beer. In Africa, there are ethnic beers made from sorghum or millet, such as Oshikundu in Namibia and Tella in Ethiopia. Kyrgyzstan also has a beer made from millet; it is a low alcohol, somewhat porridge-like drink called &quot;Bozo&quot;. Bhutan, Nepal, Tibet and Sikkim also use millet in Chhaang, a popular semi-fermented rice/millet drink in the eastern Himalayas. 

The Andes in South America has Chicha, made from germinated maize (corn); while the indigenous peoples in Brazil have Cauim, a traditional drink made since pre-Columbian times by chewing manioc so that an enzyme (amylase) present in human saliva can break down the starch into fermentable sugars; this is similar to Masato in Peru.

Beers made from bread, among the earliest forms of the drink, are Sahti in Finland, Kvass in Russia and Ukraine, and Bouza in Sudan. 4000 years ago fermented bread was used in Mesopotamia. Food waste activists got inspired by these ancient recipes and use leftover bread to replace a third of the malted barley that would otherwise be used for brewing their craft ale.

== Measurement ==

Beer is measured and assessed by colour, by strength and by bitterness. The strength of modern beer is usually around 4% to 6%, measured as alcohol by volume (ABV). The perceived bitterness is measured by the International Bitterness Units scale (IBU), defined in co-operation between the American Society of Brewing Chemists and the European Brewery Convention. The international scale was a development of the European Bitterness Units scale, often abbreviated as EBU, and the bitterness values should be identical.

=== Colour ===

Beer colour is determined by the malt. The most common colour is a pale amber produced from using pale malts. &quot;Pale lager&quot; and &quot;pale ale&quot; are terms used for beers made from malt dried and roasted with the fuel coke. Coke was first used for roasting malt in 1642, but it was not until around 1703 that the term &quot;pale ale&quot; was used.

In terms of sales volume, most of today&#x27;s beer is based on the pale lager brewed in 1842 in the city of Plzeň in the present-day Czech Republic. The modern pale lager is light in colour due to use of coke for kilning, which gives off heat with little smoke.

Dark beers are usually brewed from a pale malt or lager malt base with a small proportion of darker malt added to achieve the desired shade. Other colourants—such as caramel—are also widely used to darken beers. Very dark beers, such as stout, use dark or patent malts that have been roasted longer. Some have roasted unmalted barley.

=== Strength ===

Beer ranges from less than 3% alcohol by volume (abv) to around 14% abv, though this strength can be increased to around 20% by re-pitching with champagne yeast, and to 55% ABVby the freeze-distilling process. The alcohol content of beer varies by local practice or beer style. The pale lagers that most consumers are familiar with fall in the range of 4–6%, with a typical ABVof 5%. The customary strength of British ales is quite low, with many session beers being around 4% abv. In Belgium, some beers, such as table beer are of such low alcohol content (1%–4%) that they are served instead of soft drinks in some schools. The weakest beers are described as &#x27;alcohol-free&#x27;, typically containing 0.05% ABV; this compares to low alcohol beers which may contain 1.2% ABV or less, and conventional beers which average 4.4% ABV.
The strength of beers has climbed during the later years of the 20th century. Vetter 33, a 10.5% ABV (33 degrees Plato, hence Vetter &quot;33&quot;) doppelbock, was listed in the 1994 &quot;Guinness Book of World Records&quot; as the strongest beer at that time, though Samichlaus, by the Swiss brewer Hürlimann, had also been listed by the &quot;Guinness Book of World Records&quot; as the strongest at 14% |BV. Since then, some brewers have used champagne yeasts to increase the alcohol content of their beers. Samuel Adams reached 20% ABVwith &quot;Millennium&quot;, and then surpassed that amount to 25.6% ABV with Utopias. The strongest beer brewed in Britain was Baz&#x27;s Super Brew by Parish Brewery, a 23% ABVbeer. In September 2011, the Scottish brewery BrewDog produced Ghost Deer, which, at 28%, they claim to be the world&#x27;s strongest beer produced by fermentation alone.

The product claimed to be the strongest beer made is Schorschbräu&#x27;s 2011 &quot;Schorschbock 57&quot; with 57,5% ABV. It was preceded by &quot;The End of History&quot;, a 55% Belgian ale, made by BrewDog in 2010. The same company had previously made &quot;Sink The Bismarck!&quot;, a 41% ABV IPA, and &quot;Tactical Nuclear Penguin&quot;, a 32% ABV Imperial stout. Each of these beers are made using the eisbock method of fractional freezing, in which a strong ale is partially frozen and the ice is repeatedly removed, until the desired strength is reached, a process that may class the product as spirits rather than beer. The German brewery Schorschbräu&#x27;s &quot;Schorschbock&quot;, a 31% ABV eisbock, and Hair of the Dog&#x27;s &quot;Dave&quot;, a 29% abv barley wine made in 1994, used the same fractional freezing method. A 60% ABV blend of beer with whiskey was jokingly claimed as the strongest beer by a Dutch brewery in July 2010.

== Serving ==

===Draught ===

Draught (also spelled &quot;draft&quot;) beer from a pressurised keg using a lever-style dispenser and a spout is the most common method of dispensing in bars around the world. A metal keg is pressurised with carbon dioxide (CO2) gas which drives the beer to the dispensing tap or faucet. Some beers may be served with a nitrogen/carbon dioxide mixture. Nitrogen produces fine bubbles, resulting in a dense head and a creamy mouthfeel. In the 1980s, Guinness introduced the beer widget, a nitrogen-pressurised ball inside a can which creates a moderately dense, tight head. This approximates the effect of serving from a keg, at least for a British-style beer which does not have a specially large head. 

Cask-conditioned ales (or cask ales) are unfiltered and unpasteurised beers. These beers are termed &quot;real ale&quot; by the CAMRA organisation. When a cask arrives in a pub, it is placed horizontally on a &quot;stillage&quot; frame, designed to hold it steady and at the right angle, and then allowed to cool to cellar temperature (typically between ), before being tapped and vented—a tap is driven through a rubber bung at the bottom of one end, and a hard spile is used to open a hole in the uppermost side of the cask. The act of stillaging and then venting a beer in this manner typically disturbs all the sediment, so it must be left for a suitable period of hours to days to &quot;drop&quot; (clear) again, as well as to fully condition the beer. At this point the beer is ready to sell, either being pulled through a beer line with a hand pump, or simply being &quot;gravity-fed&quot; directly into the glass.

Draught beer&#x27;s environmental impact can be 68% lower than bottled beer due to packaging differences. A life cycle study of one beer brand, including grain production, brewing, bottling, distribution and waste management, shows that the CO2 emissions from a 6-pack of micro-brew beer is about 3 kilograms (6.6 pounds). The loss of natural habitat potential from the 6-pack of micro-brew beer is estimated to be 2.5 square metres (26 square feet). Downstream emissions from distribution, retail, storage and disposal of waste can be over 45% of a bottled micro-brew beer&#x27;s CO2 emissions. Where legal, the use of a refillable jug, reusable bottle or other reusable containers to transport draught beer from a store or a bar, rather than buying pre-bottled beer, can reduce the environmental impact of beer consumption.

=== Packaging ===

Most beers are cleared of yeast by filtering when packaged in bottles and cans. However, bottle conditioned beers retain some yeast—either by being unfiltered, or by being filtered and then reseeded with fresh yeast. 

Many beers are sold in cans, though there is considerable variation in the proportion between different countries. In Sweden in 2001, 63.9% of beer was sold in cans. People either drink from the can or pour the beer into a glass. A technology developed by Crown Holdings for the 2010 FIFA World Cup is the &#x27;full aperture&#x27; can, so named because the entire lid is removed during the opening process, turning the can into a drinking cup. Cans protect the beer from light (thereby preventing spoilage) and have a seal less prone to leaking over time than bottles. Cans were initially viewed as a technological breakthrough for maintaining the quality of a beer, then became commonly associated with less expensive, mass-produced beers, even though the quality of storage in cans is much like bottles. Plastic (PET) bottles are used by some breweries.

=== Temperature ===

The temperature of a beer has an influence on a drinker&#x27;s experience; warmer temperatures reveal the range of flavours in a beer but cooler temperatures are more refreshing. Most drinkers prefer pale lager to be served chilled, a low- or medium-strength pale ale to be served cool, while a strong barley wine or imperial stout to be served at room temperature.

Beer writer Michael Jackson proposed a five-level scale for serving temperatures: well chilled () for &quot;light&quot; beers (pale lagers); chilled () for Berliner Weisse and other wheat beers; lightly chilled () for all dark lagers, altbier and German wheat beers; cellar temperature () for regular British ale, stout and most Belgian specialities; and room temperature () for strong dark ales (especially trappist beer) and barley wine.

Drinking chilled beer began with the development of artificial refrigeration and by the 1870s, was spread in those countries that concentrated on brewing pale lager. Chilling beer makes it more refreshing, though below 15.5 °C (60 °F) the chilling starts to reduce taste awareness and reduces it significantly below . Beer served unchilled—either cool or at room temperature—reveal more of their flavours. Cask Marque, a non-profit UK beer organisation, has set a temperature standard range of 12°–14 °C (53°–57 °F) for cask ales to be served.

=== Vessels ===

Beer is consumed out of a variety of vessels, such as a glass, a beer stein, a mug, a pewter tankard, a beer bottle or a can; or at music festivals and some bars and nightclubs, from a plastic cup. The shape of the glass from which beer is consumed can influence the perception of the beer and can define and accent the character of the style. Breweries offer branded glassware intended only for their own beers as a marketing promotion, as this increases sales of their product.

The pouring process has an influence on a beer&#x27;s presentation. The rate of flow from the tap or other serving vessel, tilt of the glass, and position of the pour (in the centre or down the side) into the glass all influence the result, such as the size and longevity of the head, lacing (the pattern left by the head as it moves down the glass as the beer is drunk), and the release of carbonation.

A beer tower or portable beer tap is sometimes used in bars and restaurants to allow a group of customers to serve themselves. The device consists of a tall container with a cooling mechanism and a beer tap at its base.

==Chemistry==
Beer contains the phenolic acids 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid, vanillic acid, caffeic acid, syringic acid, &quot;p&quot;-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, and sinapic acid. Alkaline hydrolysis experiments show that most of the phenolic acids are present as bound forms and only a small portion can be detected as free compounds. Hops, and beer made with it, contain 8-prenylnaringenin which is a potent phytoestrogen. Hop also contains myrcene, humulene, xanthohumol, isoxanthohumol, myrcenol, linalool, tannins, and resin. The alcohol 2M2B is a component of hops brewing.

Barley, in the form of malt, brings the condensed tannins prodelphinidins B3, B9 and C2 into beer. Tryptophol, tyrosol, and phenylethanol are aromatic higher alcohols (congeners) produced by yeast during the brewing process. as secondary products of alcoholic fermentation

=== Nutrition ===

Beers vary in their nutritional content. The ingredients used to make beer, including the yeast, provide a rich source of nutrients; therefore beer may contain nutrients including magnesium, selenium, potassium, phosphorus, biotin, chromium and B vitamins. Beer is sometimes referred to as &quot;liquid bread&quot;, though beer is not a meal in itself.

==Health effects==

A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis found that moderate ethanol consumption brought no mortality benefit compared with lifetime abstention from ethanol consumption. Some studies have concluded that drinking small quantities of alcohol (less than one drink in women and two in men, per day) is associated with a &quot;decreased&quot; risk of heart disease, stroke, diabetes mellitus, and early death. Some of these studies combined former ethanol drinkers and lifelong abstainers into a single group of nondrinkers, which hides the health benefits of lifelong abstention from ethanol. The long-term health effects of continuous, moderate or heavy alcohol consumption include the risk of developing alcoholism and alcoholic liver disease. Alcoholism, also known as &quot;alcohol use disorder&quot;, is a broad term for any drinking of alcohol that results in problems. It was previously divided into two types: alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence. In a medical context, alcoholism is said to exist when two or more of the following conditions are present: a person drinks large amounts over a long time period, has difficulty cutting down, acquiring and drinking alcohol takes up a great deal of time, alcohol is strongly desired, usage results in not fulfilling responsibilities, usage results in social problems, usage results in health problems, usage results in risky situations, withdrawal occurs when stopping, and alcohol tolerance has occurred with use. Alcoholism reduces a person&#x27;s life expectancy by around ten years and alcohol use is the third leading cause of early death in the United States. No professional medical association recommends that people who are nondrinkers should start drinking alcoholic beverages. In the United States, a total of 3.3 million deaths per year (5.9% of all deaths) are believed to be due to alcohol.

Overeating and lack of muscle tone is the main cause of a beer belly, rather than beer consumption, though a 2004 study found a link between binge drinking and a beer belly. Several diet books quote beer as having an undesirably high glycemic index of 110, the same as maltose; however, the maltose in beer undergoes metabolism by yeast during fermentation so that beer consists mostly of water, hop oils and only trace amounts of sugars, including maltose.

The multi-step process of beer production is effective at removing pesticide residues from grain. At each step (e.g. mashing or malting) pesticide levels are typically reduced by 50-90%, varying with the particular process and pesticide&#x27;s chemical properties.

A 2013 study found that the flavour of beer alone could provoke dopamine activity in the brain of the male participants, who wanted to drink more as a result. The 49 men in the study were subject to positron emission tomography scans, while a computer-controlled device sprayed minute amounts of beer, water and a sports drink onto their tongues. Compared with the taste of the sports drink, the taste of beer significantly increased the participants desire to drink. Test results indicated that the flavour of the beer triggered a dopamine release, even though alcohol content in the spray was insufficient for the purpose of becoming intoxicated.

== Society and culture ==


Some of the earliest writings mention the production and distribution of beer: the 1750 BC Babylonian Code of Hammurabi included laws regulating it, while &quot;The Hymn to Ninkasi&quot;, a 1800 BC prayer to the Mesopotamian goddess of beer, a recipe for it.

In many societies, beer is the most popular alcoholic drink. Various social traditions and activities are associated with beer drinking, such as playing cards, darts, or other pub games; attending beer festivals; engaging in zythology (the study of beer); visiting a series of pubs in one evening; visiting breweries; beer-oriented tourism; or rating beer. Drinking games, such as beer pong, accompany the drinking of beer. Even having a &quot;shower beer&quot; has developed a following. A relatively new profession is that of the beer sommelier, who informs restaurant patrons about beers and food pairings. Some breweries have developed beers to pair with food. Wine writer Malcolm Gluck disputed the need to pair beer with food, while beer writers Roger Protz and Melissa Cole contested that claim.

Beer is considered to be a social lubricant, and is consumed in countries all over the world. There are breweries in Middle Eastern countries such as Syria, and in some African countries. Sales of beer are four times those of wine, which is the second most popular alcoholic drink.

== See also ==



==References==

=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="0" end="4" title="Beer" label="Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="11" end="29" title="alcoholic beverage" label="alcoholic beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="46" end="53" title="brewing" label="brewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950796" start="58" end="70" title="Fermentation (food)" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="74" end="80" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="88" end="94" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="115" end="119" title="malt" label="malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="122" end="128" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="139" end="144" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="146" end="151" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="160" end="164" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="170" end="173" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="221" end="227" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="244" end="249" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14404476" start="284" end="288" title="wort" label="wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="318" end="323" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="333" end="340" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="345" end="356" title="carbonation" label="carbonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="396" end="412" title="alcoholic drinks" label="alcoholic drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="502" end="505" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="539" end="543" title="hops" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q274579" start="606" end="618" title="preservative" label="preservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q910592" start="623" end="640" title="stabilizing agent" label="stabilising agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432348" start="675" end="680" title="gruit" label="gruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q107185729" start="836" end="847" title="Beer distribution" label="distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397576" start="898" end="905" title="Draught beer" label="draught"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="998" end="1021" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational companies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1075" end="1083" title="Microbrewery#Brewpub" label="brewpubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="1087" end="1105" title="regional brewery" label="regional breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="1162" end="1179" title="alcohol by volume" label="alcohol by volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="1271" end="1288" title="Code of Hammurabi" label="Code of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088421" start="1352" end="1359" title="Ninkasi" label="Ninkasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1383" end="1394" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919327" start="1535" end="1548" title="beer festival" label="beer festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257249" start="1578" end="1586" title="pub game" label="pub game"/>
<link wikidata="Q208385" start="1739" end="1742" title="ale" label="ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1819" end="1830" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="1845" end="1860" title="Common Germanic" label="Common Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="1889" end="1902" title="West Germanic" label="West Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="1907" end="1921" title="North Germanic" label="North Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1958" end="1967" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="2105" end="2124" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="2142" end="2161" title="brewer&amp;#x27;s yeast" label="brewer&amp;#x27;s yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="2218" end="2224" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664404" start="2298" end="2312" title="Christine Fell" label="Christine Fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516109" start="2323" end="2347" title="Leeds Studies in English" label="Leeds Studies in English"/>
<link wikidata="Q184442" start="2497" end="2501" title="mead" label="mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="2505" end="2510" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q733489" start="3073" end="3081" title="Natufian" label="Natufian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581163" start="3111" end="3123" title="Raqefet Cave" label="Raqefet Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="3131" end="3147" title="Carmel Mountains" label="Carmel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="3153" end="3158" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q214944" start="3223" end="3235" title="Göbekli Tepe" label="Göbekli Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190360" start="3247" end="3268" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="3357" end="3363" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q774339" start="3410" end="3420" title="Godin Tepe" label="Godin Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="3428" end="3444" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="3535" end="3548" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="3694" end="3698" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q175582" start="3795" end="3812" title="Egyptian pyramids" label="Egyptian pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088421" start="4085" end="4092" title="Ninkasi" label="Ninkasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q159709" start="4335" end="4344" title="Gilgamesh" label="Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8272" start="4368" end="4385" title="Epic of Gilgamesh" label="Epic of Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550671" start="4407" end="4413" title="Siduri" label="Siduri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918565" start="4484" end="4496" title="Ebla tablets" label="Ebla tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743" start="4520" end="4524" title="Ebla" label="Ebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="4665" end="4669" title="sake" label="sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q827742" start="4791" end="4798" title="Mastication" label="chewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395224" start="4802" end="4809" title="malting" label="malting"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="4822" end="4834" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="4838" end="4851" title="Ancient India" label="Ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446400" start="4913" end="4917" title="Sura (alcoholic drink)" label="sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="4925" end="4933" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="5054" end="5062" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="5067" end="5073" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="5405" end="5413" title="narcotic" label="narcotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="5601" end="5605" title="hops" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="5718" end="5724" title="abbess" label="abbess"/>
<link wikidata="Q70991" start="5725" end="5744" title="Hildegard of Bingen" label="Hildegard of Bingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60936" start="5757" end="5784" title="William IV, Duke of Bavaria" label="William IV, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q167255" start="5803" end="5817" title="Reinheitsgebot" label="Reinheitsgebot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="5982" end="5986" title="hops" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="5999" end="6003" title="malt" label="malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="6030" end="6051" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="6173" end="6184" title="Monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294787" start="6254" end="6261" title="artisan" label="artisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="6267" end="6289" title="Manufacturing" label="industrial manufacture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286885" start="6438" end="6468" title="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company" label="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118639" start="6472" end="6492" title="Beer in Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="6794" end="6801" title="brewpub" label="brewpub"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="6806" end="6824" title="regional brewery" label="regional breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q14404476" start="7491" end="7495" title="wort" label="wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="7535" end="7540" title="Brewer&amp;#x27;s yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276781" start="7599" end="7607" title="mash tun" label="mash tun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276781" start="7618" end="7625" title="mashing" label="mashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="7867" end="7871" title="Hops" label="Hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="8216" end="8230" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q665580" start="8262" end="8266" title="trap (plumbing)" label="trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q740460" start="8340" end="8355" title="pressure vessel" label="pressure vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="8609" end="8613" title="malt" label="malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="8616" end="8622" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="8626" end="8645" title="brewer&amp;#x27;s yeast" label="brewer&amp;#x27;s yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="8700" end="8704" title="hops" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683189" start="8846" end="8853" title="adjunct (beer)" label="adjunct"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="8941" end="8947" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="8949" end="8956" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="8962" end="8969" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q155874" start="9008" end="9013" title="agave" label="agave"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="9026" end="9031" title="Water" label="Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="9183" end="9190" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="9210" end="9216" title="region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="9354" end="9360" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22988272" start="9368" end="9378" title="hard water" label="hard water"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="9404" end="9409" title="stout" label="stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q194297" start="9419" end="9427" title="Guinness" label="Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q46070" start="9439" end="9451" title="Plzeň Region" label="Plzeň Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q152281" start="9491" end="9498" title="Pilsner" label="Pilsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q331630" start="9508" end="9523" title="Pilsner Urquell" label="Pilsner Urquell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065172" start="9539" end="9545" title="Burton Bridge Brewery" label="Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="9565" end="9571" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271859" start="9595" end="9603" title="pale ale" label="pale ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962708" start="9679" end="9692" title="Burtonisation" label="Burtonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="9921" end="9932" title="germination" label="germination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276781" start="10463" end="10467" title="Mashing" label="mash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116234" start="10499" end="10508" title="lautering" label="lautering"/>
<link wikidata="Q14404476" start="10521" end="10525" title="wort" label="wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="10607" end="10611" title="oats" label="oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="10617" end="10620" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q656235" start="10700" end="10716" title="gluten-free beer" label="gluten-free beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188251" start="10766" end="10772" title="gluten" label="gluten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="10867" end="10871" title="hops" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q104212" start="10891" end="10899" title="Humulus lupulus" label="hop vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q348198" start="11137" end="11154" title="Adalard of Corbie" label="Adalard of Corbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503476" start="11301" end="11319" title="grains of paradise" label="grains of paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q162544" start="11329" end="11336" title="alehoof" label="alehoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q25686" start="11394" end="11402" title="Absinth Wormwood" label="wormwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432348" start="11451" end="11456" title="gruit" label="gruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q878975" start="11756" end="11792" title="International Bitterness Units scale" label="International Bitterness Units scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="11879" end="11889" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879988" start="12000" end="12004" title="Head (beer)" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="12146" end="12159" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="12196" end="12207" title="metabolism" label="metabolises"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="12230" end="12237" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="12242" end="12256" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="12386" end="12400" title="Top-fermenting yeast" label="top-fermenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="12407" end="12431" title="Saccharomyces cerevisiae" label="Saccharomyces cerevisiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="12442" end="12459" title="bottom-fermenting" label="bottom-fermenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q726782" start="12466" end="12491" title="Saccharomyces pastorianus" label="Saccharomyces pastorianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411973" start="12505" end="12518" title="Brettanomyces" label="Brettanomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q526314" start="12534" end="12540" title="lambic" label="lambic"/>
<link wikidata="Q733643" start="12553" end="12576" title="Torulaspora delbrueckii" label="Torulaspora delbrueckii"/>
<link wikidata="Q131413" start="12601" end="12610" title="weissbier" label="weissbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q526314" start="12738" end="12745" title="lambics" label="lambics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125312" start="12819" end="12827" title="Microbiological culture" label="cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q383832" start="12868" end="12875" title="finings" label="finings"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="12901" end="12912" title="precipitate" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967500" start="13061" end="13067" title="Bright beer" label="bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q131413" start="13148" end="13158" title="wheat beer" label="wheat beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255331" start="13187" end="13196" title="isinglass" label="isinglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q206732" start="13207" end="13218" title="swimbladder" label="swimbladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963539" start="13229" end="13239" title="Chondrus crispus" label="Irish moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q421991" start="13258" end="13269" title="carrageenan" label="carrageenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983870" start="13294" end="13314" title="Kappaphycus cottonii" label="Kappaphycus cottonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003746" start="13322" end="13330" title="Polyclar" label="Polyclar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="13349" end="13356" title="gelatin" label="gelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565435" start="13571" end="13594" title="South African Breweries" label="South African Breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="13621" end="13643" title="Miller Brewing Company" label="Miller Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4995" start="13653" end="13662" title="SABMiller" label="SABMiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="13721" end="13735" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272191" start="13758" end="13767" title="Interbrew" label="Interbrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142669" start="13827" end="13832" title="AmBev" label="AmBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416717" start="13873" end="13878" title="InBev" label="InBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q153075" start="13981" end="13994" title="Royal Grolsch" label="Royal Grolsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q180855" start="14309" end="14317" title="Heineken N.V." label="Heineken"/>
<link wikidata="Q21158111" start="14326" end="14333" title="CR Snow" label="CR Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q113215" start="14341" end="14350" title="Carlsberg Group" label="Carlsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319685" start="14363" end="14375" title="Molson Coors" label="Molson Coors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="14392" end="14404" title="microbrewery" label="microbrewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="14705" end="14708" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="14718" end="14740" title="bar (establishment)" label="drinking establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q150907" start="14828" end="14837" title="Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10554" start="14878" end="14893" title="Upper Franconia" label="Upper Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="14930" end="14941" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q812294" start="14942" end="14955" title="Bayerische Staatsbrauerei Weihenstephan" label="Weihenstephan"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="14967" end="14974" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="15281" end="15305" title="Saccharomyces cerevisiae" label="Saccharomyces cerevisiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="15315" end="15335" title="top-fermenting yeast" label="top-fermenting yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051005" start="15342" end="15348" title="Yeast flocculation" label="clumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="15456" end="15461" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564161" start="15620" end="15626" title="Banana beer" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751476" start="15871" end="15879" title="real ale" label="real ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q925258" start="15904" end="15925" title="Campaign for Real Ale" label="Campaign for Real Ale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16005" end="16027" title="Brewing#Secondary fermentation" label="secondary fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="16103" end="16128" title="carbonation" label="extraneous carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="16158" end="16176" title="bottle conditioned" label="bottle conditioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751476" start="16181" end="16197" title="cask conditioned" label="cask conditioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271859" start="16248" end="16256" title="pale ale" label="pale ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543214" start="16348" end="16362" title="India pale ale" label="India pale ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318025" start="16370" end="16378" title="Mild ale" label="Mild ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="16441" end="16444" title="Alcohol by volume" label="abv"/>
<link wikidata="Q131413" start="16460" end="16470" title="Wheat beer" label="Wheat beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="16574" end="16587" title="malted barley" label="malted barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="16613" end="16626" title="top-fermented" label="top-fermented"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="16628" end="16633" title="Stout" label="Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q194297" start="16787" end="16795" title="Guinness" label="Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q954166" start="16890" end="16896" title="Porter (beer)" label="porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509714" start="16950" end="16957" title="Porter (carrier)" label="porters"/>
<link wikidata="Q253481" start="17021" end="17026" title="Lager" label="Lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709638" start="17051" end="17061" title="Pale lager" label="Pale lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q152281" start="17133" end="17140" title="pilsner" label="pilsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q726782" start="17451" end="17476" title="Saccharomyces pastorianus" label="Saccharomyces pastorianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="17715" end="17720" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q526314" start="18000" end="18006" title="Lambic" label="Lambic"/>
<link wikidata="Q348229" start="18018" end="18025" title="Belgian beers" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q117098" start="18275" end="18301" title="Brettanomyces bruxellensis" label="Brettanomyces bruxellensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q117098" start="18318" end="18340" title="Brettanomyces lambicus" label="Brettanomyces lambicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061596" start="18413" end="18426" title="Lactobacillus" label="Lactobacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="18649" end="18656" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="18660" end="18666" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651276" start="18676" end="18685" title="Oshikundu" label="Oshikundu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919628" start="18701" end="18706" title="Tella" label="Tella"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="18720" end="18730" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="18840" end="18846" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="18855" end="18860" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="18865" end="18871" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736566" start="18891" end="18898" title="Chhaang" label="Chhaang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="18958" end="18966" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="18975" end="18980" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q516592" start="19002" end="19008" title="Chicha" label="Chicha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="19055" end="19083" title="indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="indigenous peoples in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943094" start="19089" end="19094" title="Cauim" label="Cauim"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="19158" end="19164" title="manioc" label="manioc"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153" start="19184" end="19191" title="amylase" label="amylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850661" start="19287" end="19293" title="Masato (beverage)" label="Masato"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="19297" end="19301" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q54914145" start="19304" end="19325" title="Beer from bread" label="Beers made from bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042275" start="19370" end="19375" title="Sahti" label="Sahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q173773" start="19388" end="19393" title="Kvass" label="Kvass"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="19408" end="19415" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454522" start="19421" end="19426" title="Bouza (beer)" label="Bouza"/>
<link wikidata="Q18919" start="19493" end="19503" title="Food waste" label="Food waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="19833" end="19850" title="alcohol by volume" label="alcohol by volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="19872" end="19882" title="bitter (taste)" label="bitterness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745050" start="19982" end="20018" title="American Society of Brewing Chemists" label="American Society of Brewing Chemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273909" start="20027" end="20054" title="European Brewery Convention" label="European Brewery Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="20458" end="20462" title="Coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="20699" end="20704" title="Plzeň" label="Plzeň"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749013" start="20724" end="20738" title="Czech beer" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="21091" end="21096" title="stout" label="stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="21238" end="21255" title="alcohol by volume" label="alcohol by volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709638" start="21490" end="21500" title="pale lager" label="pale lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068248" start="21655" end="21667" title="session beer" label="session beer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21722" end="21732" title="Belgian beer#Table beer" label="table beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="21805" end="21815" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q524679" start="21869" end="21893" title="dealcoholized beer" label="&amp;#x27;alcohol-free&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q878975" start="22150" end="22163" title="Plato scale" label="degrees Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q687737" start="22194" end="22204" title="doppelbock" label="doppelbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="22235" end="22265" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="22315" end="22325" title="Samichlaus" label="Samichlaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21286736" start="22558" end="22570" title="Samuel Adams (beer)" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q894558" start="22664" end="22671" title="Utopias (beer)" label="Utopias"/>
<link wikidata="Q911367" start="22810" end="22817" title="BrewDog" label="BrewDog"/>
<link wikidata="Q348229" start="23115" end="23126" title="Belgian ale" label="Belgian ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543214" start="23232" end="23235" title="India pale ale" label="IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="23289" end="23303" title="Imperial stout" label="Imperial stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q687737" start="23344" end="23351" title="eisbock" label="eisbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489476" start="23362" end="23381" title="fractional freezing" label="fractional freezing"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="23539" end="23546" title="Distilled drink" label="spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639517" start="23653" end="23668" title="Hair of the Dog Brewing Company" label="Hair of the Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q808329" start="23704" end="23715" title="barley wine" label="barley wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533470" start="23782" end="23808" title="beer cocktail" label="blend of beer with whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q947211" start="23982" end="23985" title="keg" label="keg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="24126" end="24140" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q147268" start="24191" end="24194" title="beer tap" label="tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="24271" end="24279" title="Nitrogen" label="Nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879988" start="24324" end="24328" title="Beer head" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952715" start="24342" end="24351" title="mouthfeel" label="mouthfeel"/>
<link wikidata="Q360625" start="24391" end="24402" title="Widget (beer)" label="beer widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751476" start="24729" end="24737" title="real ale" label="real ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q925258" start="24751" end="24756" title="Campaign for Real Ale" label="CAMRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406546" start="24838" end="24846" title="stillage" label="stillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q43894327" start="25086" end="25091" title="spile" label="spile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25361" end="25379" title="Brewing#Conditioning" label="condition the beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449242" start="26427" end="26436" title="filtered beer" label="filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="26481" end="26499" title="bottle conditioning" label="bottle conditioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189378" start="26867" end="26881" title="Crown Holdings" label="Crown Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="26895" end="26909" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q145863" start="27427" end="27430" title="Polyethylene terephthalate" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709638" start="27690" end="27700" title="pale lager" label="pale lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271859" start="27749" end="27757" title="pale ale" label="pale ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q808329" start="27792" end="27803" title="barley wine" label="barley wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="27807" end="27821" title="imperial stout" label="imperial stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q167877" start="27869" end="27884" title="Michael Jackson (writer)" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q584161" start="28013" end="28028" title="Berliner Weisse" label="Berliner Weisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q44924" start="28092" end="28099" title="altbier" label="altbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q208385" start="28166" end="28169" title="ale" label="ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="28171" end="28176" title="stout" label="stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q348229" start="28186" end="28206" title="Belgian beer" label="Belgian specialities"/>
<link wikidata="Q505815" start="28265" end="28278" title="trappist beer" label="trappist beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q808329" start="28284" end="28295" title="barley wine" label="barley wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="28361" end="28374" title="refrigeration" label="refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751476" start="28704" end="28715" title="Cask Marque" label="Cask Marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412822" start="28925" end="28935" title="beer stein" label="beer stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q852372" start="28946" end="28952" title="pewter" label="pewter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446398" start="28953" end="28960" title="tankard" label="tankard"/>
<link wikidata="Q868557" start="28992" end="29006" title="music festival" label="music festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q147268" start="29435" end="29438" title="beer tap" label="tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="29732" end="29743" title="carbonation" label="carbonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016678" start="29748" end="29758" title="beer tower" label="beer tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637160" start="30014" end="30040" title="4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid" label="4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419672" start="30042" end="30055" title="vanillic acid" label="vanillic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q414116" start="30057" end="30069" title="caffeic acid" label="caffeic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q408428" start="30071" end="30084" title="syringic acid" label="syringic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q99374" start="30086" end="30113" title="p-Coumaric acid" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-coumaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q417362" start="30115" end="30127" title="ferulic acid" label="ferulic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q417527" start="30133" end="30145" title="sinapic acid" label="sinapic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="30147" end="30166" title="Alkaline hydrolysis" label="Alkaline hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="30303" end="30307" title="Hops" label="Hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644281" start="30340" end="30358" title="8-prenylnaringenin" label="8-prenylnaringenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q414496" start="30377" end="30390" title="phytoestrogen" label="phytoestrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q424577" start="30410" end="30417" title="myrcene" label="myrcene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995108" start="30419" end="30427" title="humulene" label="humulene"/>
<link wikidata="Q408088" start="30429" end="30440" title="xanthohumol" label="xanthohumol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086616" start="30442" end="30456" title="isoxanthohumol" label="isoxanthohumol"/>
<link wikidata="Q411500" start="30458" end="30466" title="myrcenol" label="myrcenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q410932" start="30468" end="30476" title="linalool" label="linalool"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="30491" end="30496" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209428" start="30510" end="30514" title="2-Methyl-2-butanol" label="2M2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="30598" end="30604" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634382" start="30606" end="30624" title="prodelphinidin B3" label="prodelphinidins B3"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634381" start="30626" end="30628" title="Prodelphinidin B9" label="B9"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634380" start="30633" end="30635" title="Prodelphinidin C2" label="C2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479351" start="30647" end="30657" title="Tryptophol" label="Tryptophol"/>
<link wikidata="Q402607" start="30659" end="30666" title="tyrosol" label="tyrosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q209463" start="30672" end="30685" title="phenethyl alcohol" label="phenylethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160401" start="30716" end="30725" title="congener (alcohol)" label="congeners"/>
<link wikidata="Q851986" start="30798" end="30820" title="alcoholic fermentation" label="alcoholic fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30931" end="30936" title="Yeast#Beer" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="31021" end="31030" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="31032" end="31040" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="31042" end="31051" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="31053" end="31063" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181354" start="31065" end="31071" title="biotin" label="biotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="31073" end="31081" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183206" start="31086" end="31096" title="B vitamins" label="B vitamins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="31144" end="31149" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="31563" end="31576" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="31578" end="31584" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="31586" end="31603" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340700" start="31810" end="31834" title="Long-term effects of alcohol consumption" label="long-term health effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="31919" end="31929" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q558404" start="31934" end="31957" title="alcoholic liver disease" label="alcoholic liver disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="31959" end="31969" title="Alcoholism" label="Alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="32055" end="32062" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331102" start="32131" end="32144" title="alcohol abuse" label="alcohol abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713263" start="32149" end="32167" title="alcohol dependence" label="alcohol dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914873" start="32605" end="32615" title="Alcohol withdrawal syndrome" label="withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713312" start="32642" end="32659" title="alcohol tolerance" label="alcohol tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140549" start="33132" end="33142" title="beer belly" label="beer belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521260" start="33215" end="33229" title="binge drinking" label="binge drinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q273924" start="33308" end="33322" title="glycemic index" label="glycemic index"/>
<link wikidata="Q170002" start="33343" end="33350" title="maltose" label="maltose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="33391" end="33401" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="33600" end="33609" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="33827" end="33834" title="Flavour (taste)" label="flavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="33863" end="33871" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="33998" end="34026" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q949948" start="34113" end="34125" title="sports drink" label="sports drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="34331" end="34339" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="34579" end="34596" title="Code of Hammurabi" label="Code of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088421" start="34650" end="34657" title="Ninkasi" label="Ninkasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919327" start="34934" end="34947" title="beer festival" label="beer festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000218" start="35004" end="35018" title="pub crawl" label="series of pubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880037" start="35081" end="35092" title="rating beer" label="rating beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140722" start="35094" end="35107" title="Drinking game" label="Drinking game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064959" start="35118" end="35127" title="beer pong" label="beer pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q124309554" start="35181" end="35192" title="shower beer" label="shower beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q858000" start="35269" end="35283" title="beer sommelier" label="beer sommelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076442" start="35386" end="35400" title="Foodpairing" label="pair with food"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742330" start="35414" end="35427" title="Malcolm Gluck" label="Malcolm Gluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358808" start="35489" end="35500" title="Roger Protz" label="Roger Protz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551231" start="35568" end="35584" title="social lubricant" label="social lubricant"/>
<link wikidata="Q471947" start="35593" end="35614" title="Beer consumption by country" label="consumed in countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880020" start="35691" end="35696" title="Beer in Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879984" start="35710" end="35727" title="Beer in Africa" label="African countries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3364" wikidata="Q8805" url="?curid=3364" title="Bit">
<text>The bit is the most basic unit of information in computing and digital communication. The name is a portmanteau of binary digit. The bit represents a logical state with one of two possible values. These values are most commonly represented as either , but other representations such as &quot;true&quot;/&quot;false&quot;, &quot;yes&quot;/&quot;no&quot;, &quot;on&quot;/&quot;off&quot;, or &quot;+&quot;/&quot;−&quot; are also widely used.

The relation between these values and the physical states of the underlying storage or device is a matter of convention, and different assignments may be used even within the same device or program. It may be physically implemented with a two-state device.

A contiguous group of binary digits is commonly called a &quot;bit string&quot;, a bit vector, or a single-dimensional (or multi-dimensional) &quot;bit array&quot;.
A group of eight bits is called one &quot;byte&quot;, but historically the size of the byte is not strictly defined. Frequently, half, full, double and quadruple words consist of a number of bytes which is a low power of two. A string of four bits is usually a &quot;nibble&quot;.

In information theory, one bit is the information entropy of a random binary variable that is 0 or 1 with equal probability, or the information that is gained when the value of such a variable becomes known. As a unit of information or negentropy, the bit is also known as a &quot;shannon&quot;, named after Claude E. Shannon. As a measure of the length of a digital string that is encoded as symbols over a 0-1 (binary) alphabet, the bit has been called a binit, but this usage is now rare.

In data compression, the goal is to find a shorter representation for a string, so that it requires fewer bits during storage or transmission — but it must be &quot;compressed&quot; before doing so, and then &quot;decompressed&quot; after. The field of Algorithmic Information Theory is devoted to the study of the &quot;irreducible information content&quot; of a string (i.e. its shortest-possible representation length, in bits), under the assumption that the receiver has minimal &quot;a priori&quot; knowledge of the method used to compress the string. In error detection and correction, the goal is to add redundant data to a string, to enable the detection and/or correction of errors during storage or transmission — but the redundant data has to be computed before doing so, and then &quot;checked&quot; or &quot;corrected&quot; after.

The symbol for the binary digit is either &quot;bit&quot;, per the IEC 80000-13:2008 standard, or the lowercase character &quot;b&quot;, per the IEEE 1541-2002 standard. Use of the latter may create confusion with the capital &quot;B&quot; which is the international standard symbol for the byte.

== History ==

Ralph Hartley suggested the use of a logarithmic measure of information in 1928. Claude E. Shannon first used the word &quot;bit&quot; in his seminal 1948 paper &quot;A Mathematical Theory of Communication&quot;. He attributed its origin to John W. Tukey, who had written a Bell Labs memo on 9 January 1947 in which he contracted &quot;binary information digit&quot; to simply &quot;bit&quot;.

== Physical representation ==

A bit can be stored by a digital device or other physical system that exists in either of two possible distinct states. These may be the two stable states of a flip-flop, two positions of an electrical switch, two distinct voltage or current levels allowed by a circuit, two distinct levels of light intensity, two directions of magnetization or polarization, the orientation of reversible double stranded DNA, etc.

Perhaps the earliest example of a binary storage device was the punched card invented by Basile Bouchon and Jean-Baptiste Falcon (1732), developed by Joseph Marie Jacquard (1804), and later adopted by Semyon Korsakov, Charles Babbage, Herman Hollerith, and early computer manufacturers like IBM. A variant of that idea was the perforated paper tape. In all those systems, the medium (card or tape) conceptually carried an array of hole positions; each position could be either punched through or not, thus carrying one bit of information. The encoding of text by bits was also used in Morse code (1844) and early digital communications machines such as teletypes and stock ticker machines (1870).

The first electrical devices for discrete logic (such as elevator and traffic light control circuits, telephone switches, and Konrad Zuse&#x27;s computer) represented bits as the states of electrical relays which could be either &quot;open&quot; or &quot;closed&quot;. When relays were replaced by vacuum tubes, starting in the 1940s, computer builders experimented with a variety of storage methods, such as pressure pulses traveling down a mercury delay line, charges stored on the inside surface of a cathode-ray tube, or opaque spots printed on glass discs by photolithographic techniques.

In the 1950s and 1960s, these methods were largely supplanted by magnetic storage devices such as magnetic-core memory, magnetic tapes, drums, and disks, where a bit was represented by the polarity of magnetization of a certain area of a ferromagnetic film, or by a change in polarity from one direction to the other. The same principle was later used in the magnetic bubble memory developed in the 1980s, and is still found in various magnetic strip items such as metro tickets and some credit cards.

In modern semiconductor memory, such as dynamic random-access memory or a solid-state drive, the two values of a bit are represented by two levels of electric charge stored in a capacitor or a floating-gate MOSFET. In certain types of programmable logic arrays and read-only memory, a bit may be represented by the presence or absence of a conducting path at a certain point of a circuit. In optical discs, a bit is encoded as the presence or absence of a microscopic pit on a reflective surface. In one-dimensional bar codes and two-dimensional QR codes, bits are encoded as lines or squares which may be either black or white.

In modern digital computing, bits are transformed in Boolean logic gates.

=== Transmission and processing ===
Bits are transmitted one at a time in serial transmission. By contrast, multiple bits are transmitted simultaneously in a parallel transmission. A serial computer processes information in either a bit-serial or a byte-serial fashion. From the standpoint of data communications, a byte-serial transmission is an 8-way parallel transmission with binary signalling.

In programming languages such as C, a bitwise operation operates on binary strings as though they are vectors of bits, rather than interpreting them as binary numbers.

Data transfer rates are usually measured in decimal SI multiples. For example, a channel capacity may be specified as 8 kbit/s = 8 kb/s = 1 kB/s.

=== Storage ===

File sizes are often measured in (binary) IEC multiples of bytes, for example 1 KiB = 1024 bytes = 8192 bits. Confusion may arise in cases where (for historic reasons) filesizes are specified with binary multipliers using the ambiguous prefixes K, M, and G rather than the IEC standard prefixes Ki, Mi, and Gi.

Mass storage devices are usually measured in decimal SI multiples, for example 1 TB = formula_1 bytes. 

Confusingly, the storage capacity of a directly-addressable memory device, such as a DRAM chip, or an assemblage of such chips on a memory module, is specified as a binary multiple -- using the ambiguous prefix G rather than the IEC recommended Gi prefix. For example, a DRAM chip that is specified (and advertised) as having &quot;1 GB&quot; of capacity has formula_2 bytes of capacity. As at 2022, the difference between the popular understanding of a memory system with &quot;8 GB&quot; of capacity, and the SI-correct meaning of &quot;8 GB&quot; was still causing difficulty to software designers.

== Unit and symbol ==
The bit is not defined in the International System of Units (SI). However, the International Electrotechnical Commission issued standard IEC 60027, which specifies that the symbol for binary digit should be &#x27;bit&#x27;, and this should be used in all multiples, such as &#x27;kbit&#x27;, for kilobit. However, the lower-case letter &#x27;b&#x27; is widely used as well and was recommended by the IEEE 1541 Standard (2002). In contrast, the upper case letter &#x27;B&#x27; is the standard and customary symbol for byte.

=== Multiple bits ===
Multiple bits may be expressed and represented in several ways. For convenience of representing commonly reoccurring groups of bits in information technology, several units of information have traditionally been used. The most common is the unit byte, coined by Werner Buchholz in June 1956, which historically was used to represent the group of bits used to encode a single character of text (until UTF-8 multibyte encoding took over) in a computer and for this reason it was used as the basic addressable element in many computer architectures. By 1993, the trend in hardware design had converged on the 8-bit byte. However, because of the ambiguity of relying on the underlying hardware design, the unit octet was defined to explicitly denote a sequence of eight bits.

Computers usually manipulate bits in groups of a fixed size, conventionally named &quot;words&quot;. Like the byte, the number of bits in a word also varies with the hardware design, and is typically between 8 and 80 bits, or even more in some specialized computers. In the early 21st century, retail personal or server computers have a word size of 32 or 64 bits.

The International System of Units defines a series of decimal prefixes for multiples of standardized units which are commonly also used with the bit and the byte. The prefixes kilo (103) through yotta (1024) increment by multiples of one thousand, and the corresponding units are the kilobit (kbit) through the yottabit (Ybit).

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (quantum bit)
* 
* (Trinary digit)

== References ==
== External links ==

* Bit Calculator – a tool providing conversions between bit, byte, kilobit, kilobyte, megabit, megabyte, gigabit, gigabyte
* BitXByteConverter – a tool for computing file sizes, storage capacity, and digital information in various units</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="4" end="7" title="Bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550873" start="26" end="45" title="Units of information" label="unit of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="49" end="58" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="71" end="84" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="100" end="111" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="115" end="127" title="Bit" label="binary digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="150" end="163" title="truth value" label="logical state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196827" start="189" end="195" title="value (computer science)" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="516" end="523" title="Data storage device" label="storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="527" end="533" title="computing device" label="device"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="630" end="637" title="computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992074" start="761" end="771" title="bit string" label="bit string"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992074" start="846" end="855" title="bit array" label="bit array"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="905" end="909" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q740943" start="1130" end="1136" title="nibble" label="nibble"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="1148" end="1166" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q204570" start="1183" end="1202" title="information entropy" label="information entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="1215" end="1221" title="Binary number" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550873" start="1358" end="1377" title="unit of information" label="unit of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q252552" start="1381" end="1391" title="negentropy" label="negentropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15551713" start="1426" end="1433" title="shannon (unit)" label="shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="1453" end="1470" title="Claude E. Shannon" label="Claude E. Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="1641" end="1657" title="data compression" label="data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757543" start="1891" end="1921" title="Algorithmic Information Theory" label="Algorithmic Information Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="2198" end="2228" title="error detection and correction" label="error detection and correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q568496" start="2550" end="2562" title="IEC 80000-13" label="IEC 80000-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788482" start="2628" end="2642" title="IEEE 1541-2002" label="IEEE 1541-2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q529886" start="2796" end="2809" title="Ralph Hartley" label="Ralph Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="2877" end="2894" title="Claude E. Shannon" label="Claude E. Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q724029" start="2963" end="3001" title="A Mathematical Theory of Communication" label="A Mathematical Theory of Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q382207" start="3037" end="3050" title="John W. Tukey" label="John W. Tukey"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="3334" end="3340" title="state (computer science)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="3382" end="3391" title="Flip-flop (electronics)" label="flip-flop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="3413" end="3430" title="Switch" label="electrical switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="3445" end="3452" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="3456" end="3463" title="electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="3484" end="3491" title="electrical circuit" label="circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="3516" end="3531" title="Irradiance" label="light intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="3551" end="3564" title="magnetism" label="magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="3568" end="3580" title="electrical polarity" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="3628" end="3631" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="3703" end="3715" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886850" start="3728" end="3742" title="Basile Bouchon" label="Basile Bouchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310833" start="3789" end="3810" title="Joseph Marie Jacquard" label="Joseph Marie Jacquard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094924" start="3840" end="3855" title="Semyon Korsakov" label="Semyon Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="3857" end="3872" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="3874" end="3890" title="Herman Hollerith" label="Herman Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="3930" end="3933" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="3977" end="3987" title="paper tape" label="paper tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="4224" end="4234" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="4292" end="4301" title="Teleprinter" label="teletypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424449" start="4306" end="4326" title="stock ticker machine" label="stock ticker machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="4394" end="4402" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="4407" end="4420" title="traffic light" label="traffic light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="4429" end="4437" title="Electronic circuit" label="circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="4439" end="4457" title="telephone switches" label="telephone switches"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="4526" end="4542" title="electrical relay" label="electrical relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="4635" end="4646" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778158" start="4779" end="4797" title="mercury delay line" label="mercury delay line"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="4841" end="4857" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q234870" start="4886" end="4897" title="optical disc" label="glass discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q622938" start="4901" end="4918" title="photolithographic" label="photolithographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364527" start="4997" end="5013" title="magnetic storage" label="magnetic storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="5030" end="5050" title="magnetic-core memory" label="magnetic-core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q193663" start="5052" end="5065" title="magnetic tape" label="magnetic tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q908463" start="5068" end="5073" title="magnetic drum" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="5079" end="5084" title="Disk storage" label="disks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="5133" end="5146" title="magnetism" label="magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="5170" end="5183" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752093" start="5291" end="5313" title="magnetic bubble memory" label="magnetic bubble memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907797" start="5368" end="5382" title="magnetic strip" label="magnetic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="5397" end="5402" title="Rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="5420" end="5431" title="credit card" label="credit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143031" start="5445" end="5465" title="semiconductor memory" label="semiconductor memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="5475" end="5503" title="dynamic random-access memory" label="dynamic random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="5509" end="5526" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="5585" end="5600" title="electric charge" label="electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="5613" end="5622" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="5628" end="5648" title="floating-gate MOSFET" label="floating-gate MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112217" start="5670" end="5694" title="programmable logic array" label="programmable logic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="5700" end="5716" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q234870" start="5827" end="5839" title="optical disc" label="optical disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q38456" start="5891" end="5902" title="microscopic" label="microscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="5951" end="5959" title="bar code" label="bar code"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203" start="5981" end="5989" title="QR codes" label="QR codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="6126" end="6136" title="logic gate" label="logic gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q518280" start="6214" end="6233" title="serial transmission" label="serial transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q763575" start="6298" end="6319" title="parallel transmission" label="parallel transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501344" start="6323" end="6338" title="serial computer" label="serial computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="6573" end="6574" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q879126" start="6578" end="6595" title="bitwise operation" label="bitwise operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="6692" end="6705" title="binary number" label="binary number"/>
<link wikidata="Q870845" start="6790" end="6806" title="channel capacity" label="channel capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="7375" end="7379" title="Dynamic Random Access Memory" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="7945" end="7974" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="7994" end="8035" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="International Electrotechnical Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234414" start="8052" end="8061" title="IEC 60027" label="IEC 60027"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788482" start="8315" end="8340" title="IEEE 1541-2002" label="IEEE 1541 Standard (2002)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550873" start="8628" end="8648" title="units of information" label="units of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="8707" end="8711" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q121866" start="8723" end="8738" title="Werner Buchholz" label="Werner Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="8836" end="8845" title="character (computing)" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="8861" end="8866" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="8956" end="8967" title="address space" label="addressable"/>
<link wikidata="Q173212" start="8984" end="9005" title="computer architecture" label="computer architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="9073" end="9077" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q851872" start="9168" end="9173" title="Octet (computing)" label="octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="9322" end="9327" title="Word (computer architecture)" label="words"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="9604" end="9633" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q107428" start="9776" end="9780" title="kilo-" label="kilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="9795" end="9800" title="yotta-" label="yotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="9884" end="9891" title="kilobit" label="kilobit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="9911" end="9919" title="yottabit" label="yottabit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3365" wikidata="Q8799" url="?curid=3365" title="Byte">
<text>The byte is a unit of digital information that most commonly consists of eight bits. Historically, the byte was the number of bits used to encode a single character of text in a computer and for this reason it is the smallest addressable unit of memory in many computer architectures. To disambiguate arbitrarily sized bytes from the common 8-bit definition, network protocol documents such as the Internet Protocol () refer to an 8-bit byte as an octet. Those bits in an octet are usually counted with numbering from 0 to 7 or 7 to 0 depending on the bit endianness.

The size of the byte has historically been hardware-dependent and no definitive standards existed that mandated the size. Sizes from 1 to 48 bits have been used. The six-bit character code was an often-used implementation in early encoding systems, and computers using six-bit and nine-bit bytes were common in the 1960s. These systems often had memory words of 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 48, or 60 bits, corresponding to 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, or 10 six-bit bytes, and persisted, in legacy systems, into the twenty-first century. In this era, bit groupings in the instruction stream were often referred to as &quot;syllables&quot; or &quot;slab&quot;, before the term &quot;byte&quot; became common.

The modern &quot;de facto&quot; standard of eight bits, as documented in ISO/IEC 2382-1:1993, is a convenient power of two permitting the binary-encoded values 0 through 255 for one byte, as 2 to the power of 8 is 256. The international standard IEC 80000-13 codified this common meaning. Many types of applications use information representable in eight or fewer bits and processor designers commonly optimize for this usage. The popularity of major commercial computing architectures has aided in the ubiquitous acceptance of the 8-bit byte. Modern architectures typically use 32- or 64-bit words, built of four or eight bytes, respectively.

The unit symbol for the byte was designated as the upper-case letter B by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). Internationally, the unit &quot;octet&quot; explicitly defines a sequence of eight bits, eliminating the potential ambiguity of the term &quot;byte&quot;. The symbol for octet, &#x27;o&#x27;, also conveniently eliminates the ambiguity in the symbol &#x27;B&#x27; between byte and bel.

== Etymology and history ==
The term &quot;byte&quot; was coined by Werner Buchholz in June 1956, during the early design phase for the IBM Stretch computer, which had addressing to the bit and variable field length (VFL) instructions with a byte size encoded in the instruction. It is a deliberate respelling of &quot;bite&quot; to avoid accidental mutation to &quot;bit&quot;.

Another origin of &quot;byte&quot; for bit groups smaller than a computer&#x27;s word size, and in particular groups of four bits, is on record by Louis G. Dooley, who claimed he coined the term while working with Jules Schwartz and Dick Beeler on an air defense system called SAGE at MIT Lincoln Laboratory in 1956 or 1957, which was jointly developed by Rand, MIT, and IBM. Later on, Schwartz&#x27;s language JOVIAL actually used the term, but the author recalled vaguely that it was derived from AN/FSQ-31.

Early computers used a variety of four-bit binary-coded decimal (BCD) representations and the six-bit codes for printable graphic patterns common in the U.S. Army (FIELDATA) and Navy. These representations included alphanumeric characters and special graphical symbols. These sets were expanded in 1963 to seven bits of coding, called the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) as the Federal Information Processing Standard, which replaced the incompatible teleprinter codes in use by different branches of the U.S. government and universities during the 1960s. ASCII included the distinction of upper- and lowercase alphabets and a set of control characters to facilitate the transmission of written language as well as printing device functions, such as page advance and line feed, and the physical or logical control of data flow over the transmission media. During the early 1960s, while also active in ASCII standardization, IBM simultaneously introduced in its product line of System/360 the eight-bit Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code (EBCDIC), an expansion of their six-bit binary-coded decimal (BCDIC) representations used in earlier card punches.
The prominence of the System/360 led to the ubiquitous adoption of the eight-bit storage size, while in detail the EBCDIC and ASCII encoding schemes are different.

In the early 1960s, AT&amp;T introduced digital telephony on long-distance trunk lines. These used the eight-bit μ-law encoding. This large investment promised to reduce transmission costs for eight-bit data.

In Volume 1 of &quot;The Art of Computer Programming&quot; (first published in 1968), Donald Knuth uses &quot;byte&quot; in his hypothetical MIX computer to denote a unit which &quot;contains an &quot;unspecified&quot; amount of information ... capable of holding at least 64 distinct values ... &quot;at most&quot; 100 distinct values. On a binary computer a byte must therefore be composed of six bits&quot;. He notes that &quot;Since 1975 or so, the word &quot;byte&quot; has come to mean a sequence of precisely eight binary digits...When we speak of bytes in connection with MIX we shall confine ourselves to the former sense of the word, harking back to the days when bytes were not yet standardized.&quot;

The development of eight-bit microprocessors in the 1970s popularized this storage size. Microprocessors such as the Intel 8080, the direct predecessor of the 8086, could also perform a small number of operations on the four-bit pairs in a byte, such as the decimal-add-adjust (DAA) instruction. A four-bit quantity is often called a nibble, also &quot;nybble&quot;, which is conveniently represented by a single hexadecimal digit.

The term &quot;octet&quot; unambiguously specifies a size of eight bits. It is used extensively in protocol definitions.

Historically, the term &quot;octad&quot; or &quot;octade&quot; was used to denote eight bits as well at least in Western Europe; however, this usage is no longer common. The exact origin of the term is unclear, but it can be found in British, Dutch, and German sources of the 1960s and 1970s, and throughout the documentation of Philips mainframe computers.

== Unit symbol ==
The unit symbol for the byte is specified in IEC 80000-13, IEEE 1541 and the Metric Interchange Format as the upper-case character B.

In the International System of Quantities (ISQ), B is also the symbol of the &quot;bel&quot;, a unit of logarithmic power ratio named after Alexander Graham Bell, creating a conflict with the IEC specification. However, little danger of confusion exists, because the bel is a rarely used unit. It is used primarily in its decadic fraction, the decibel (dB), for signal strength and sound pressure level measurements, while a unit for one-tenth of a byte, the decibyte, and other fractions, are only used in derived units, such as transmission rates.

The lowercase letter o for octet is defined as the symbol for octet in IEC 80000-13 and is commonly used in languages such as French and Romanian, and is also combined with metric prefixes for multiples, for example ko and Mo.

== Multiple-byte units ==

More than one system exists to define unit multiples based on the byte. Some systems are based on powers of 10, following the International System of Units (SI), which defines for example the prefix &quot;kilo&quot; as 1000 (103); other systems are based on powers of two. Nomenclature for these systems has led to confusion. Systems based on powers of 10 use standard SI prefixes (&quot;kilo&quot;, &quot;mega&quot;, &quot;giga&quot;, ...) and their corresponding symbols (k, M, G, ...). Systems based on powers of 2, however, might use binary prefixes (&quot;kibi&quot;, &quot;mebi&quot;, &quot;gibi&quot;, ...) and their corresponding symbols (Ki, Mi, Gi, ...) or they might use the prefixes K, M, and G, creating ambiguity when the prefixes M or G are used.

While the difference between the decimal and binary interpretations is relatively small for the kilobyte (about 2% smaller than the kibibyte), the systems deviate increasingly as units grow larger (the relative deviation grows by 2.4% for each three orders of magnitude). For example, a power-of-10-based terabyte is about 9% smaller than power-of-2-based tebibyte.

=== Units based on powers of 10 ===
Definition of prefixes using powers of 10—in which 1 &quot;kilobyte&quot; (symbol kB) is defined to equal 1,000 bytes—is recommended by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). The IEC standard defines eight such multiples, up to 1 yottabyte (YB), equal to 10008 bytes. The additional prefixes &quot;ronna-&quot; for 10009 and &quot;quetta-&quot; for 100010 were adopted by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) in 2022.

This definition is most commonly used for data-rate units in computer networks, internal bus, hard drive and flash media transfer speeds, and for the capacities of most storage media, particularly hard drives, flash-based storage, and DVDs. Operating systems that use this definition include macOS, iOS, Ubuntu, and Debian. It is also consistent with the other uses of the SI prefixes in computing, such as CPU clock speeds or measures of performance.

Prior art, the IBM System 360 and the related tape systems set the byte at 8 bits. Early 5.25&quot; disks used decimal even though they used 128 byte and 256 byte sectors. Hard disks used mostly 256 byte and then 512 byte before 4096 byte blocks became standard. RAM was always sold in powers of 2.

=== Units based on powers of 2 ===
A system of units based on powers of 2 in which 1 kibibyte (KiB) is equal to 1,024 (i.e., 210) bytes is defined by international standard IEC 80000-13 and is supported by national and international standards bodies (BIPM, IEC, NIST). The IEC standard defines eight such multiples, up to 1 yobibyte (YiB), equal to 10248 bytes. The natural binary counterparts to &quot;ronna-&quot; and &quot;quetta-&quot; were given in a consultation paper of the International Committee for Weights and Measures&#x27; Consultative Committee for Units (CCU) as &quot;robi-&quot; (Ri, 10249) and &quot;quebi-&quot; (Qi, 102410), but have not yet been adopted by the IEC or ISO.

An alternative system of nomenclature for the same units (referred to here as the &quot;customary convention&quot;), in which 1 &quot;kilobyte&quot; (KB) is equal to 1,024 bytes, 1 &quot;megabyte&quot; (MB) is equal to 10242 bytes and 1 &quot;gigabyte&quot; (GB) is equal to 10243 bytes is mentioned by a 1990s JEDEC standard. Only the first three multiples (up to GB) are mentioned by the JEDEC standard, which makes no mention of TB and larger. While confusing and incorrect, the customary convention is used by the Microsoft Windows operating system and random-access memory capacity, such as main memory and CPU cache size, and in marketing and billing by telecommunication companies, such as Vodafone, AT&amp;T, Orange and Telstra.

For storage capacity, the customary convention was used by macOS and iOS through Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard and iOS 10, after which they switched to units based on powers of 10.

=== Parochial units ===

Various computer vendors have coined terms for data of various sizes, sometimes with different sizes for the same term even within a single vendor. These terms include &quot;double word&quot;, &quot;half word&quot;, &quot;long word&quot;, &quot;quad word&quot;, &quot;slab&quot;, &quot;superword&quot; and &quot;syllable&quot;. There are also informal terms. e.g., &quot;half byte&quot; and &quot;nybble&quot; for 4 bits, &quot;octal K&quot; for .

=== History of the conflicting definitions ===
Contemporary computer memory has a binary architecture making a definition of memory units based on powers of 2 most practical. The use of the metric prefix &quot;kilo&quot; for binary multiples arose as a convenience, because is approximately . This definition was popular in early decades of personal computing, with products like the Tandon 5-inch DD floppy format (holding bytes) being advertised as &quot;360 KB&quot;, following the -byte convention. It was not universal, however. The Shugart SA-400 5-inch floppy disk held 109,375 bytes unformatted, and was advertised as &quot;110 Kbyte&quot;, using the 1000 convention. Likewise, the 8-inch DEC RX01 floppy (1975) held bytes formatted, and was advertised as &quot;256k&quot;. Some devices were advertised using a &quot;mixture&quot; of the two definitions: most notably, floppy disks advertised as &quot;1.44 MB&quot; have an actual capacity of , the equivalent of 1.47 MB or 1.41 MiB.

In 1995, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry&#x27;s (IUPAC) Interdivisional Committee on Nomenclature and Symbols attempted to resolve this ambiguity by proposing a set of binary prefixes for the powers of 1024, including kibi (kilobinary), mebi (megabinary), and gibi (gigabinary).

In December 1998, the IEC addressed such multiple usages and definitions by adopting the IUPAC&#x27;s proposed prefixes (kibi, mebi, gibi, etc.) to unambiguously denote powers of 1024. Thus one kibibyte (1 KiB) is 10241 bytes = 1024 bytes, one mebibyte (1 MiB) is 10242 bytes = bytes, and so on.

In 1999, Donald Knuth suggested calling the kibibyte a &quot;large kilobyte&quot; (&quot;KKB&quot;).

=== Modern standard definitions ===
The IEC adopted the IUPAC proposal and published the standard in January 1999. The IEC prefixes are part of the International System of Quantities. The IEC further specified that the kilobyte should only be used to refer to bytes.

=== Lawsuits over definition ===
Lawsuits arising from alleged consumer confusion over the binary and decimal definitions of multiples of the byte have generally ended in favor of the manufacturers, with courts holding that the legal definition of gigabyte or GB is 1 GB = (109) bytes (the decimal definition), rather than the binary definition (230, i.e., ). Specifically, the United States District Court for the Northern District of California held that &quot;the U.S. Congress has deemed the decimal definition of gigabyte to be the &#x27;preferred&#x27; one for the purposes of &#x27;U.S. trade and commerce&#x27; [...] The California Legislature has likewise adopted the decimal system for all &#x27;transactions in this state.

Earlier lawsuits had ended in settlement with no court ruling on the question, such as a lawsuit against drive manufacturer Western Digital. Western Digital settled the challenge and added explicit disclaimers to products that the usable capacity may differ from the advertised capacity. Seagate was sued on similar grounds and also settled.

=== Practical examples ===
== Common uses ==
Many programming languages define the data type &quot;byte&quot;.

The C and C++ programming languages define &quot;byte&quot; as an &quot;addressable unit of data storage large enough to hold any member of the basic character set of the execution environment&quot; (clause 3.6 of the C standard). The C standard requires that the integral data type &quot;unsigned char&quot; must hold at least 256 different values, and is represented by at least eight bits (clause 5.2.4.2.1). Various implementations of C and C++ reserve 8, 9, 16, 32, or 36 bits for the storage of a byte. In addition, the C and C++ standards require that there be no gaps between two bytes. This means every bit in memory is part of a byte.

Java&#x27;s primitive data type &quot;byte&quot; is defined as eight bits. It is a signed data type, holding values from −128 to 127.

.NET programming languages, such as C#, define &quot;byte&quot; as an unsigned type, and the &quot;sbyte&quot; as a signed data type, holding values from 0 to 255, and −128 to 127, respectively.

In data transmission systems, the byte is used as a contiguous sequence of bits in a serial data stream, representing the smallest distinguished unit of data. For asynchronous communication a full transmission unit usually additionally includes a start bit, 1 or 2 stop bits, and possibly a parity bit, and thus its size may vary from seven to twelve bits for five to eight bits of actual data. For synchronous communication the error checking usually uses bytes at the end of a frame.

== See also ==
* Data
* Data hierarchy
* Nibble
* Octet (computing)
* Primitive data type
* Tryte
* Word (computer architecture)

== Notes ==
 


== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Ashley Taylor. &quot;Bits and Bytes&quot;. Stanford. https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs101/bits-bytes.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="4" end="8" title="Byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550873" start="14" end="41" title="units of information" label="unit of digital information"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="79" end="82" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="155" end="164" title="character (computing)" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="226" end="237" title="address space" label="addressable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="246" end="252" title="Computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q173212" start="261" end="282" title="computer architecture" label="computer architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="341" end="346" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="359" end="366" title="Computer network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="398" end="415" title="Internet Protocol" label="Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q851872" start="448" end="453" title="Octet (computing)" label="octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885225" start="552" end="566" title="bit numbering" label="bit endianness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="612" end="620" title="Computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485669" start="735" end="757" title="six-bit character code" label="six-bit character code"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="915" end="927" title="Word (computer architecture)" label="memory words"/>
<link wikidata="Q25208574" start="1173" end="1182" title="Syllable (computing)" label="syllables"/>
<link wikidata="Q385853" start="1270" end="1299" title="de facto standard" label="&amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136880" start="1369" end="1381" title="power of two" label="power of two"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="1397" end="1411" title="binary number" label="binary-encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q568496" start="1505" end="1517" title="IEC 80000-13" label="IEC 80000-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="1982" end="2023" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="International Electrotechnical Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="2034" end="2083" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q851872" start="2124" end="2129" title="Octet (computing)" label="octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="2372" end="2375" title="decibel" label="bel"/>
<link wikidata="Q121866" start="2446" end="2461" title="Werner Buchholz" label="Werner Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q984038" start="2514" end="2525" title="IBM 7030" label="IBM Stretch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918888" start="2697" end="2701" title="bite" label="bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="2746" end="2749" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q740943" start="2878" end="2887" title="Nibble (computing)" label="four bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q18926788" start="2972" end="2986" title="Jules Schwartz" label="Jules Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509830" start="3035" end="3039" title="Experimental SAGE Subsector" label="SAGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138607" start="3043" end="3065" title="MIT Lincoln Laboratory" label="MIT Lincoln Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="3114" end="3118" title="Rand Corporation" label="Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277803" start="3169" end="3175" title="JOVIAL" label="JOVIAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652850" start="3257" end="3266" title="AN/FSQ-31" label="AN/FSQ-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="3312" end="3332" title="binary-coded decimal" label="binary-coded decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485669" start="3363" end="3370" title="Sixbit" label="six-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3422" end="3431" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411578" start="3433" end="3441" title="FIELDATA" label="FIELDATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3447" end="3451" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="3608" end="3658" title="American Standard Code for Information Interchange" label="American Standard Code for Information Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q917824" start="3674" end="3713" title="Federal Information Processing Standard" label="Federal Information Processing Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q617945" start="3930" end="3947" title="control character" label="control character"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="4273" end="4283" title="System/360" label="System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q627945" start="4298" end="4344" title="Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code" label="Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876917" start="4377" end="4405" title="six-bit binary-coded decimal" label="six-bit binary-coded decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="4645" end="4653" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="4665" end="4682" title="digital telephony" label="digital telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020782" start="4700" end="4710" title="trunk line" label="trunk line"/>
<link wikidata="Q311989" start="4738" end="4752" title="μ-law algorithm" label="μ-law encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q82438" start="4856" end="4887" title="The Art of Computer Programming" label="The Art of Computer Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="4921" end="4933" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q371805" start="4976" end="4979" title="MIX (abstract machine)" label="MIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="5568" end="5577" title="eight-bit" label="eight-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="5578" end="5592" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q324610" start="5666" end="5676" title="Intel 8080" label="Intel 8080"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="5708" end="5712" title="Intel 8086" label="8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q229932" start="5769" end="5777" title="4bit" label="four-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q740943" start="5883" end="5889" title="nibble" label="nibble"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="5962" end="5973" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q851872" start="5997" end="6002" title="Octet (computing)" label="octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="6081" end="6089" title="Protocol (computing)" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="6433" end="6440" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q568496" start="6526" end="6538" title="IEC 80000-13" label="IEC 80000-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788482" start="6540" end="6549" title="IEEE 1541" label="IEEE 1541"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6558" end="6583" title="Metric Interchange Format" label="Metric Interchange Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203461" start="6623" end="6657" title="International System of Quantities" label="International System of Quantities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="6699" end="6702" title="bel (acoustics)" label="bel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="6756" end="6777" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="6960" end="6967" title="decibel" label="decibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105794" start="6978" end="6993" title="signal strength" label="signal strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068172" start="6998" end="7018" title="sound pressure level" label="sound pressure level"/>
<link wikidata="Q851872" start="7194" end="7199" title="Octet (computing)" label="octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7293" end="7299" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="7304" end="7312" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q810225" start="7460" end="7473" title="unit multiple" label="unit multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q184611" start="7520" end="7532" title="power of 10" label="powers of 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="7548" end="7577" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q107428" start="7627" end="7631" title="kilo-" label="kilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136880" start="7680" end="7693" title="Power of two" label="powers of two"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="7791" end="7800" title="SI prefix" label="SI prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q107428" start="7810" end="7814" title="Kilo-" label="kilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q107205" start="7828" end="7832" title="Mega-" label="mega"/>
<link wikidata="Q108483" start="7846" end="7850" title="Giga-" label="giga"/>
<link wikidata="Q229478" start="8978" end="9022" title="International Bureau of Weights and Measures" label="International Bureau of Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="9082" end="9097" title="data-rate units" label="data-rate units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="9101" end="9117" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="9209" end="9222" title="storage media" label="storage media"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="9237" end="9247" title="hard drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="9250" end="9255" title="Flash memory" label="flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="9275" end="9278" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="9281" end="9297" title="Operating system" label="Operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="9332" end="9337" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="9339" end="9342" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="9344" end="9350" title="Ubuntu" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="9356" end="9362" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="9413" end="9422" title="SI prefix" label="SI prefix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9447" end="9463" title="Hertz#Computers" label="CPU clock speeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q188768" start="9467" end="9490" title="FLOPS" label="measures of performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136880" start="9855" end="9866" title="powers of 2" label="powers of 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q229478" start="10044" end="10048" title="BIPM" label="BIPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="10050" end="10053" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="10055" end="10059" title="NIST" label="NIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073508" start="10800" end="10805" title="JEDEC" label="JEDEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="11007" end="11024" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="11046" end="11066" title="random-access memory" label="random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="11101" end="11110" title="CPU cache" label="CPU cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="11186" end="11194" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="11196" end="11204" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431486" start="11206" end="11212" title="Orange S.A." label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q721162" start="11217" end="11224" title="Telstra" label="Telstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="11231" end="11238" title="Computer data storage" label="storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q844824" start="11957" end="11976" title="Binary addressing" label="binary architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="12216" end="12234" title="personal computing" label="personal computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980779" start="12259" end="12265" title="Tandon Corporation" label="Tandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251401" start="12273" end="12275" title="double density" label="DD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344715" start="12413" end="12420" title="Shugart Associates" label="Shugart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="12435" end="12446" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="12572" end="12575" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="12881" end="12930" title="International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry" label="International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="13058" end="13073" title="binary prefixes" label="binary prefixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="13192" end="13195" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="13476" end="13488" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q568496" start="13717" end="13751" title="IEC 80000-13" label="International System of Quantities"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="14696" end="14711" title="Western Digital" label="Western Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="14965" end="14985" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="14998" end="15007" title="data type" label="data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="15031" end="15032" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="15037" end="15040" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512911" start="15316" end="15324" title="signedness" label="unsigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="15673" end="15684" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622213" start="15808" end="15812" title=".NET" label=".NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="15844" end="15846" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q232577" start="15976" end="15987" title="two&amp;#x27;s complement" label="−128 to 127"/>
<link wikidata="Q752739" start="16167" end="16193" title="asynchronous communication" label="asynchronous communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q625502" start="16295" end="16305" title="parity bit" label="parity bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375695" start="16403" end="16428" title="synchronous communication" label="synchronous communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324888" start="16483" end="16488" title="Frame (networking)" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="16508" end="16512" title="Data" label="Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227303" start="16515" end="16529" title="Data hierarchy" label="Data hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q740943" start="16532" end="16538" title="Nibble" label="Nibble"/>
<link wikidata="Q851872" start="16541" end="16558" title="Octet (computing)" label="Octet (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188648" start="16561" end="16580" title="Primitive data type" label="Primitive data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056486" start="16583" end="16588" title="Tryte" label="Tryte"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="16591" end="16619" title="Word (computer architecture)" label="Word (computer architecture)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3370" wikidata="Q410193" url="?curid=3370" title="Boron nitride">
<text>Boron nitride is a thermally and chemically resistant refractory compound of boron and nitrogen with the chemical formula BN. It exists in various crystalline forms that are isoelectronic to a similarly structured carbon lattice. The hexagonal form corresponding to graphite is the most stable and soft among BN polymorphs, and is therefore used as a lubricant and an additive to cosmetic products. The cubic (zincblende aka sphalerite structure) variety analogous to diamond is called c-BN; it is softer than diamond, but its thermal and chemical stability is superior. The rare wurtzite BN modification is similar to lonsdaleite but slightly softer than the cubic form.

Because of excellent thermal and chemical stability, boron nitride ceramics are used in high-temperature equipment and metal casting. Boron nitride has potential use in nanotechnology.

== History ==
Boron nitride was discovered by chemistry teacher of the Liverpool Institute in 1842 via reduction of boric acid with charcoal in the presence of potassium cyanide. Boron Nitride is now used to make nanotubes, and used for mechanical insulation, and other nanomaterials used in the industry and occasionally pharmaceutical purposes, as well as recent development in electronics. 
==Structure==
Boron nitride exists in multiple forms that differ in the arrangement of the boron and nitrogen atoms, giving rise to varying bulk properties of the material.

=== Amorphous form (a-BN) ===
The amorphous form of boron nitride (a-BN) is non-crystalline, lacking any long-distance regularity in the arrangement of its atoms. It is analogous to amorphous carbon.

All other forms of boron nitride are crystalline.

=== Hexagonal form (h-BN) ===
The most stable crystalline form is the hexagonal one, also called h-BN, α-BN, g-BN, graphitic boron nitride and &quot;white graphene&quot;. Hexagonal boron nitride (point group = D3h; space group = P63/mmc) has a layered structure similar to graphite. Within each layer, boron and nitrogen atoms are bound by strong covalent bonds, whereas the layers are held together by weak van der Waals forces. The interlayer &quot;registry&quot; of these sheets differs, however, from the pattern seen for graphite, because the atoms are eclipsed, with boron atoms lying over and above nitrogen atoms. This registry reflects the local polarity of the B–N bonds, as well as interlayer N-donor/B-acceptor characteristics. Likewise, many metastable forms consisting of differently stacked polytypes exist. Therefore, h-BN and graphite are very close neighbors, and the material can accommodate carbon as a substituent element to form BNCs. BC6N hybrids have been synthesized, where carbon substitutes for some B and N atoms. Hexagonal boron nitride monolayer is analogous to graphene, having a honeycomb lattice structure of nearly the same dimensions. Unlike graphene, which is black and an electrical conductor, h-BN monolayer is white and an insulator. It has been proposed for use as an atomic flat insulating substrate or a tunneling dielectric barrier in 2D electronics. .

=== Cubic form (c-BN) ===
Cubic boron nitride has a crystal structure analogous to that of diamond. Consistent with diamond being less stable than graphite, the cubic form is less stable than the hexagonal form, but the conversion rate between the two is negligible at room temperature, as it is for diamond. The cubic form has the sphalerite crystal structure (space group = F3m), the same as that of diamond (with ordered B and N atoms), and is also called β-BN or c-BN.

=== Wurtzite form (w-BN) ===
The wurtzite form of boron nitride (w-BN; point group = C6v; space group = P63mc) has the same structure as lonsdaleite, a rare hexagonal polymorph of carbon. As in the cubic form, the boron and nitrogen atoms are grouped into tetrahedra. In the wurtzite form, the boron and nitrogen atoms are grouped into 6-membered rings. In the cubic form all rings are in the chair configuration, whereas in w-BN the rings between &#x27;layers&#x27; are in boat configuration. Earlier optimistic reports predicted that the wurtzite form was very strong, and was estimated by a simulation as potentially having a strength 18% stronger than that of diamond. Since only small amounts of the mineral exist in nature, this has not yet been experimentally verified. Its hardness is 46 GPa, slightly harder than commercial borides but softer than the cubic form of boron nitride.

== Properties ==

===Physical===
The partly ionic structure of BN layers in h-BN reduces covalency and electrical conductivity, whereas the interlayer interaction increases resulting in higher hardness of h-BN relative to graphite. The reduced electron-delocalization in hexagonal-BN is also indicated by its absence of color and a large band gap. Very different bonding – strong covalent within the basal planes (planes where boron and nitrogen atoms are covalently bonded) and weak between them – causes high anisotropy of most properties of h-BN.

For example, the hardness, electrical and thermal conductivity are much higher within the planes than perpendicular to them. On the contrary, the properties of c-BN and w-BN are more homogeneous and isotropic.

Those materials are extremely hard, with the hardness of bulk c-BN being slightly smaller and w-BN even higher than that of diamond. Polycrystalline c-BN with grain sizes on the order of 10 nm is also reported to have Vickers hardness comparable or higher than diamond. Because of much better stability to heat and transition metals, c-BN surpasses diamond in mechanical applications, such as machining steel. The thermal conductivity of BN is among the highest of all electric insulators (see table).

Boron nitride can be doped p-type with beryllium and n-type with boron, sulfur, silicon or if co-doped with carbon and nitrogen. Both hexagonal and cubic BN are wide-gap semiconductors with a band-gap energy corresponding to the UV region. If voltage is applied to h-BN or c-BN, then it emits UV light in the range 215–250 nm and therefore can potentially be used as light-emitting diodes (LEDs) or lasers.

Little is known on melting behavior of boron nitride. It degrades at 2973 °C, but melts at elevated pressure.

===Thermal stability===
Hexagonal and cubic BN (and probably w-BN) show remarkable chemical and thermal stabilities. For example, h-BN is stable to decomposition at temperatures up to 1000 °C in air, 1400 °C in vacuum, and 2800 °C in an inert atmosphere. The reactivity of h-BN and c-BN is relatively similar, and the data for c-BN are summarized in the table below. 

Thermal stability of c-BN can be summarized as follows:
* In air or oxygen: protective layer prevents further oxidation to ~1300 °C; no conversion to hexagonal form at 1400 °C.
* In nitrogen: some conversion to h-BN at 1525 °C after 12 h.
* In vacuum (): conversion to h-BN at 1550–1600 °C.

===Chemical stability===
Boron nitride is not attacked by the usual acids, but it is soluble in alkaline molten salts and nitrides, such as LiOH, KOH, NaOH-, , , , ,  or , which are therefore used to etch BN.

===Thermal conductivity===
The theoretical thermal conductivity of hexagonal boron nitride nanoribbons (BNNRs) can approach 1700–2000 W/(m⋅K), which has the same order of magnitude as the experimental measured value for graphene, and can be comparable to the theoretical calculations for graphene nanoribbons. Moreover, the thermal transport in the BNNRs is anisotropic. The thermal conductivity of zigzag-edged BNNRs is about 20% larger than that of armchair-edged nanoribbons at room temperature.

=== Mechanical properties ===
BN nanosheets consist of hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN). They are stable up to 800°C in air. The structure of monolayer BN is similar to that of graphene, which has exceptional strength, a high-temperature lubricant, and a substrate in electronic devices.

The anisotropy of Young&#x27;s modulus and Poisson&#x27;s ratio depends on the system size. h-BN also exhibits strongly anisotropic strength and toughness, and maintains these over a range of vacancy defects, showing that the anisotropy is independent to the defect type.

==Natural occurrence==
In 2009, cubic form (c-BN) was reported in Tibet, and the name qingsongite proposed. The substance was found in dispersed micron-sized inclusions in chromium-rich rocks. In 2013, the International Mineralogical Association affirmed the mineral and the name.

==Synthesis==
===Preparation and reactivity of hexagonal BN===
Hexagonal boron nitride is obtained by the treating boron trioxide () or boric acid () with ammonia () or urea () in an inert atmosphere:

: (&quot;T&quot; = 900 °C)
: (&quot;T&quot; = 900 °C)
: (&quot;T&quot; &gt; 1000 °C)
: (&quot;T&quot; &gt; 1500 °C)

The resulting disordered (amorphous) material contains 92–95% BN and 5–8% . The remaining can be evaporated in a second step at temperatures in order to achieve BN concentration &gt;98%. Such annealing also crystallizes BN, the size of the crystallites increasing with the annealing temperature.

h-BN parts can be fabricated inexpensively by hot-pressing with subsequent machining. The parts are made from boron nitride powders adding boron oxide for better compressibility. Thin films of boron nitride can be obtained by chemical vapor deposition from borazine. ZYP Coatings also has developed boron nitride coatings that may be painted on a surface. Combustion of boron powder in nitrogen plasma at 5500 °C yields ultrafine boron nitride used for lubricants and toners.

Boron nitride reacts with iodine fluoride to give in low yield.
Boron nitride reacts with nitrides of lithium, alkaline earth metals and lanthanides to form nitridoborates. For example:

===Intercalation of hexagonal BN===

Various species intercalate into hexagonal BN, such as intercalate or alkali metals. 

===Preparation of cubic BN===
c-BN is prepared analogously to the preparation of synthetic diamond from graphite. Direct conversion of hexagonal boron nitride to the cubic form has been observed at pressures between 5 and 18 GPa and temperatures between 1730 and 3230 °C, that is similar parameters as for direct graphite-diamond conversion. The addition of a small amount of boron oxide can lower the required pressure to 4–7 GPa and temperature to 1500 °C. As in diamond synthesis, to further reduce the conversion pressures and temperatures, a catalyst is added, such as lithium, potassium, or magnesium, their nitrides, their fluoronitrides, water with ammonium compounds, or hydrazine. Other industrial synthesis methods, again borrowed from diamond growth, use crystal growth in a temperature gradient, or explosive shock wave. The shock wave method is used to produce material called heterodiamond, a superhard compound of boron, carbon, and nitrogen.

Low-pressure deposition of thin films of cubic boron nitride is possible. As in diamond growth, the major problem is to suppress the growth of hexagonal phases (h-BN or graphite, respectively). Whereas in diamond growth this is achieved by adding hydrogen gas, boron trifluoride is used for c-BN. Ion beam deposition, plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition, pulsed laser deposition, reactive sputtering, and other physical vapor deposition methods are used as well.

===Preparation of wurtzite BN===
Wurtzite BN can be obtained via static high-pressure or dynamic shock methods. The limits of its stability are not well defined. Both c-BN and w-BN are formed by compressing h-BN, but formation of w-BN occurs at much lower temperatures close to 1700 °C.

===Production statistics===
Whereas the production and consumption figures for the raw materials used for BN synthesis, namely boric acid and boron trioxide, are well known (see boron), the corresponding numbers for the boron nitride are not listed in statistical reports. An estimate for the 1999 world production is 300 to 350 metric tons. The major producers and consumers of BN are located in the United States, Japan, China and Germany. In 2000, prices varied from about $75–120/kg for standard industrial-quality h-BN and were about up to $200–400/kg for high purity BN grades.

==Applications==
===Hexagonal BN===

Hexagonal BN (h-BN) is the most widely used polymorph. It is a good lubricant at both low and high temperatures (up to 900 °C, even in an oxidizing atmosphere). h-BN lubricant is particularly useful when the electrical conductivity or chemical reactivity of graphite (alternative lubricant) would be problematic. In internal combustion engines, where graphite could be oxidized and turn into carbon sludge, h-BN with its superior thermal stability can be added to engine lubricants. As with all nano-particle suspensions, Brownian-motion settlement is a problem. Settlement can clog engine oil filters, which limits solid lubricant applications in a combustion engine to automotive racing, where engine re-building is common. Since carbon has appreciable solubility in certain alloys (such as steels), which may lead to degradation of properties, BN is often superior for high temperature and/or high pressure applications. Another advantage of h-BN over graphite is that its lubricity does not require water or gas molecules trapped between the layers. Therefore, h-BN lubricants can be used in vacuum, such as space applications. The lubricating properties of fine-grained h-BN are used in cosmetics, paints, dental cements, and pencil leads.

Hexagonal BN was first used in cosmetics around 1940 in Japan. Because of its high price, h-BN was abandoned for this application. Its use was revitalized in the late 1990s with the optimization h-BN production processes, and currently h-BN is used by nearly all leading producers of cosmetic products for foundations, make-up, eye shadows, blushers, kohl pencils, lipsticks and other skincare products.

Because of its excellent thermal and chemical stability, boron nitride ceramics and coatings are used high-temperature equipment. h-BN can be included in ceramics, alloys, resins, plastics, rubbers, and other materials, giving them self-lubricating properties. Such materials are suitable for construction of e.g. bearings and in steelmaking. Many quantum devices use multilayer h-BN as a substrate material. It can also be used as a dielectric in resistive random access memories.

Hexagonal BN is used in xerographic process and laser printers as a charge leakage barrier layer of the photo drum. In the automotive industry, h-BN mixed with a binder (boron oxide) is used for sealing oxygen sensors, which provide feedback for adjusting fuel flow. The binder utilizes the unique temperature stability and insulating properties of h-BN.

Parts can be made by hot pressing from four commercial grades of h-BN. Grade HBN contains a boron oxide binder; it is usable up to 550–850 °C in oxidizing atmosphere and up to 1600 °C in vacuum, but due to the boron oxide content is sensitive to water. Grade HBR uses a calcium borate binder and is usable at 1600 °C. Grades HBC and HBT contain no binder and can be used up to 3000 °C.

Boron nitride nanosheets (h-BN) can be deposited by catalytic decomposition of borazine at a temperature ~1100 °C in a chemical vapor deposition setup, over areas up to about 10 cm2. Owing to their hexagonal atomic structure, small lattice mismatch with graphene (~2%), and high uniformity they are used as substrates for graphene-based devices. BN nanosheets are also excellent proton conductors. Their high proton transport rate, combined with the high electrical resistance, may lead to applications in fuel cells and water electrolysis.

h-BN has been used since the mid-2000s as a bullet and bore lubricant in precision target rifle applications as an alternative to molybdenum disulfide coating, commonly referred to as &quot;moly&quot;. It is claimed to increase effective barrel life, increase intervals between bore cleaning and decrease the deviation in point of impact between clean bore first shots and subsequent shots.

h-BN is used as a release agent in molten metal and glass applications. For example, ZYP Coatings developed and currently produces a line of paintable h-BN coatings that are used by manufacturers of molten aluminium, non-ferrous metal, and glass. Because h-BN is nonwetting and lubricious to these molten materials, the coated surface (i.e. mold or crucible) does not stick to the material.

===Cubic BN===
Cubic boron nitride (CBN or c-BN) is widely used as an abrasive. Its usefulness arises from its insolubility in iron, nickel, and related alloys at high temperatures, whereas diamond is soluble in these metals. Polycrystalline c-BN (PCBN) abrasives are therefore used for machining steel, whereas diamond abrasives are preferred for aluminum alloys, ceramics, and stone. When in contact with oxygen at high temperatures, BN forms a passivation layer of boron oxide. Boron nitride binds well with metals due to formation of interlayers of metal borides or nitrides. Materials with cubic boron nitride crystals are often used in the tool bits of cutting tools. For grinding applications, softer binders such as resin, porous ceramics and soft metals are used. Ceramic binders can be used as well. Commercial products are known under names &quot;Borazon&quot; (by Hyperion Materials &amp; Technologies), and &quot;Elbor&quot; or &quot;Cubonite&quot; (by Russian vendors).

Contrary to diamond, large c-BN pellets can be produced in a simple process (called sintering) of annealing c-BN powders in nitrogen flow at temperatures slightly below the BN decomposition temperature. This ability of c-BN and h-BN powders to fuse allows cheap production of large BN parts.

Similar to diamond, the combination in c-BN of highest thermal conductivity and electrical resistivity is ideal for heat spreaders.

As cubic boron nitride consists of light atoms and is very robust chemically and mechanically, it is one of the popular materials for X-ray membranes: low mass results in small X-ray absorption, and good mechanical properties allow usage of thin membranes, further reducing the absorption.

===Amorphous BN===
Layers of amorphous boron nitride (a-BN) are used in some semiconductor devices, e.g. MOSFETs. They can be prepared by chemical decomposition of trichloroborazine with caesium, or by thermal chemical vapor deposition methods. Thermal CVD can be also used for deposition of h-BN layers, or at high temperatures, c-BN.

==Other forms of boron nitride==
=== Atomically thin boron nitride ===

Hexagonal boron nitride can be exfoliated to mono or few atomic layer sheets. Due to its analogous structure to that of graphene, atomically thin boron nitride is sometimes called &quot;white graphene&quot;.

====Mechanical properties====
Atomically thin boron nitride is one of the strongest electrically insulating materials. Monolayer boron nitride has an average Young&#x27;s modulus of 0.865TPa and fracture strength of 70.5GPa, and in contrast to graphene, whose strength decreases dramatically with increased thickness, few-layer boron nitride sheets have a strength similar to that of monolayer boron nitride.

====Thermal conductivity====
Atomically thin boron nitride has one of the highest thermal conductivity coefficients (751 W/mK at room temperature) among semiconductors and electrical insulators, and its thermal conductivity increases with reduced thickness due to less intra-layer coupling.

====Thermal stability====
The air stability of graphene shows a clear thickness dependence: monolayer graphene is reactive to oxygen at 250 °C, strongly doped at 300 °C, and etched at 450 °C; in contrast, bulk graphite is not oxidized until 800 °C. Atomically thin boron nitride has much better oxidation resistance than graphene. Monolayer boron nitride is not oxidized till 700 °C and can sustain up to 850 °C in air; bilayer and trilayer boron nitride nanosheets have slightly higher oxidation starting temperatures. The excellent thermal stability, high impermeability to gas and liquid, and electrical insulation make atomically thin boron nitride potential coating materials for preventing surface oxidation and corrosion of metals and other two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as black phosphorus.

====Better surface adsorption====
Atomically thin boron nitride has been found to have better surface adsorption capabilities than bulk hexagonal boron nitride. According to theoretical and experimental studies, atomically thin boron nitride as an adsorbent experiences conformational changes upon surface adsorption of molecules, increasing adsorption energy and efficiency. The synergic effect of the atomic thickness, high flexibility, stronger surface adsorption capability, electrical insulation, impermeability, high thermal and chemical stability of BN nanosheets can increase the Raman sensitivity by up to two orders, and in the meantime attain long-term stability and reusability not readily achievable by other materials.

====Dielectric properties====
Atomically thin hexagonal boron nitride is an excellent dielectric substrate for graphene, molybdenum disulfide (), and many other 2D material-based electronic and photonic devices. As shown by electric force microscopy (EFM) studies, the electric field screening in atomically thin boron nitride shows a weak dependence on thickness, which is in line with the smooth decay of electric field inside few-layer boron nitride revealed by the first-principles calculations.

====Raman characteristics====
Raman spectroscopy has been a useful tool to study a variety of 2D materials, and the Raman signature of high-quality atomically thin boron nitride was first reported by Gorbachev et al. in 2011. and Li et al. However, the two reported Raman results of monolayer boron nitride did not agree with each other. Cai et al., therefore, conducted systematic experimental and theoretical studies to reveal the intrinsic Raman spectrum of atomically thin boron nitride. It reveals that atomically thin boron nitride without interaction with a substrate has a G band frequency similar to that of bulk hexagonal boron nitride, but strain induced by the substrate can cause Raman shifts. Nevertheless, the Raman intensity of G band of atomically thin boron nitride can be used to estimate layer thickness and sample quality.
===Boron nitride nanomesh===

Boron nitride nanomesh is a nanostructured two-dimensional material. It consists of a single BN layer, which forms by self-assembly a highly regular mesh after high-temperature exposure of a clean rhodium or ruthenium surface to borazine under ultra-high vacuum. The nanomesh looks like an assembly of hexagonal pores. The distance between two pore centers is 3.2 nm and the pore diameter is ~2 nm. Other terms for this material are boronitrene or white graphene.

The boron nitride nanomesh is air-stable and compatible with some liquids. up to temperatures of 800 °C. 

===Boron nitride nanotubes===
 Boron nitride tubules were first made in 1989 by Shore and Dolan This work was patented in 1989 and published in 1989 thesis (Dolan) and then 1993 Science. The 1989 work was also the first preparation of amorphous BN by B-trichloroborazine and cesium metal.

Boron nitride nanotubes were predicted in 1994 and experimentally discovered in 1995. They can be imagined as a rolled up sheet of h-boron nitride. Structurally, it is a close analog of the carbon nanotube, namely a long cylinder with diameter of several to hundred nanometers and length of many micrometers, except carbon atoms are alternately substituted by nitrogen and boron atoms. However, the properties of BN nanotubes are very different: whereas carbon nanotubes can be metallic or semiconducting depending on the rolling direction and radius, a BN nanotube is an electrical insulator with a bandgap of ~5.5 eV, basically independent of tube chirality and morphology. In addition, a layered BN structure is much more thermally and chemically stable than a graphitic carbon structure.

===Boron nitride aerogel===

Boron nitride aerogel is an aerogel made of highly porous BN. It typically consists of a mixture of deformed BN nanotubes and nanosheets. It can have a density as low as 0.6 mg/cm3 and a specific surface area as high as 1050 m2/g, and therefore has potential applications as an absorbent, catalyst support and gas storage medium. BN aerogels are highly hydrophobic and can absorb up to 160 times their weight in oil. They are resistant to oxidation in air at temperatures up to 1200 °C, and hence can be reused after the absorbed oil is burned out by flame. BN aerogels can be prepared by template-assisted chemical vapor deposition using borazine as the feed gas.

===Composites containing BN===
Addition of boron nitride to silicon nitride ceramics improves the thermal shock resistance of the resulting material. For the same purpose, BN is added also to silicon nitride-alumina and titanium nitride-alumina ceramics. Other materials being reinforced with BN include alumina and zirconia, borosilicate glasses, glass ceramics, enamels, and composite ceramics with titanium boride-boron nitride, titanium boride-aluminium nitride-boron nitride, and silicon carbide-boron nitride composition.

Zirconia Stabilized Boron Nitride (ZSBN) is produced by adding zirconia to BN, enhancing its thermal shock resistance and mechanical strength through a sintering process. It offers better performance characteristics including Superior corrosion and erosion resistance over a wide temperature range. Its unique combination of thermal conductivity, lubricity, mechanical strength, and stability makes it suitable for various applications including cutting tools and wear-resistant coatings, thermal and electrical insulation, aerospace and defense, and high-temperature components.

===Pyrolytic boron nitride (PBN)===

Pyrolytic boron nitride (PBN), also known as Chemical vapour-deposited Boron Nitride(CVD-BN), is a high-purity ceramic material characterized by exceptional chemical resistance and mechanical strength at high temperatures.
Pyrolytic boron nitride is typically prepared through the thermal decomposition of boron trichloride and ammonia vapors on graphite substrates at 1900°C.

Pyrolytic boron nitride (PBN) generally has a hexagonal structure similar to hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), though it can exhibit stacking faults or deviations from the ideal lattice. Pyrolytic boron nitride (PBN) shows some remarkable attributes, including exceptional chemical inertness, high dielectric strength, excellent thermal shock resistance, non-wettability, non-toxicity, oxidation resistance, and minimal outgassing.
Due to a highly ordered planar texture similar to pyrolytic graphite (PG), it exhibits anisotropic properties such as lower dielectric constant vertical to the crystal plane and higher bending strength along the crystal plane. PBN material has been widely manufactured as crucibles of compound semiconductor crystals, output windows and dielectric rods of traveling-wave tubes, high-temperature jigs and insulator.

==Health issues==
Boron nitride (along with , NbN, and BNC) is generally considered to be non-toxic and does not exhibit chemical activity in biological systems. Due to its excellent safety profile and lubricious properties, boron nitride finds widespread use in various applications, including cosmetics and food processing equipment.

==See also==
* Beta carbon nitride
* Borazon
* Borocarbonitrides
* Boron suboxide
* Superhard materials
* Wide-bandgap semiconductors

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*National Pollutant Inventory: Boron and Compounds
*Materials Safety Data Sheet at University of Oxford</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q410193" start="0" end="13" title="Boron nitride" label="Boron nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123417" start="54" end="64" title="refractory" label="refractory"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="77" end="82" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="87" end="95" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="105" end="121" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q410193" start="122" end="124" title="Boron nitride" label="BN"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="147" end="164" title="Polymorphism (materials science)" label="crystalline forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q899823" start="174" end="187" title="isoelectronic" label="isoelectronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="214" end="220" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="234" end="248" title="Hexagonal crystal system" label="hexagonal form"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="266" end="274" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="410" end="445" title="Zincblende (crystal structure)#Zincblende structure" label="zincblende aka sphalerite structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="468" end="475" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="580" end="588" title="Wurtzite crystal structure" label="wurtzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q411827" start="619" end="630" title="lonsdaleite" label="lonsdaleite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268371" start="792" end="805" title="Casting (metalworking)" label="metal casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242531" start="930" end="949" title="Liverpool Institute" label="Liverpool Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q187045" start="975" end="985" title="boric acid" label="boric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192470" start="1019" end="1036" title="potassium cyanide" label="potassium cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q798012" start="1609" end="1625" title="amorphous carbon" label="amorphous carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="2026" end="2039" title="covalent bond" label="covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="2087" end="2106" title="van der Waals force" label="van der Waals force"/>
<link wikidata="Q169917" start="2771" end="2779" title="graphene" label="graphene"/>
<link wikidata="Q176235" start="3025" end="3034" title="tunnel diode" label="tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="3167" end="3174" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3408" end="3436" title="Cubic crystal system#Zincblende structure" label="sphalerite crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="3583" end="3591" title="Wurtzite crystal structure" label="wurtzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q411827" start="3687" end="3698" title="lonsdaleite" label="lonsdaleite"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="3806" end="3816" title="tetrahedra" label="tetrahedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285479" start="3943" end="3962" title="chair configuration" label="chair configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285479" start="4024" end="4042" title="boat configuration" label="boat configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q62500" start="4485" end="4490" title="ionic bond" label="ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q806352" start="4779" end="4787" title="band gap" label="band gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="4841" end="4852" title="basal plane" label="basal plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="4952" end="4962" title="anisotropy" label="anisotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223404" start="5421" end="5437" title="Vickers hardness" label="Vickers hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="6073" end="6093" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q407613" start="7026" end="7030" title="Lithium hydroxide" label="LiOH"/>
<link wikidata="Q132298" start="7032" end="7035" title="Potassium hydroxide" label="KOH"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="7037" end="7041" title="Sodium hydroxide" label="NaOH"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="7042" end="7042" title="Sodium carbonate" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q184373" start="7044" end="7044" title="Sodium nitrate" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q413407" start="7046" end="7046" title="Lithium nitride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q425036" start="7048" end="7048" title="Magnesium nitride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1091256" start="7050" end="7050" title="Strontium nitride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7052" end="7052" title="Barium nitride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7056" end="7056" title="Lithium boron nitride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="7230" end="7231" title="watt" label="W"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573" start="7233" end="7234" title="metre" label="m"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="7235" end="7236" title="kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q169917" start="7316" end="7324" title="graphene" label="graphene"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="7454" end="7465" title="anisotropic" label="anisotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q169917" start="7771" end="7779" title="graphene" label="graphene"/>
<link wikidata="Q190453" start="7926" end="7946" title="Poisson&amp;#x27;s ratio" label="Poisson&amp;#x27;s ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q486802" start="8028" end="8037" title="toughness" label="toughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q899743" start="8075" end="8089" title="vacancy defect" label="vacancy defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="8222" end="8227" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105402" start="8242" end="8253" title="qingsongite" label="qingsongite"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="8301" end="8307" title="micron" label="micron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="8593" end="8600" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="8607" end="8611" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="8783" end="8792" title="amorphous solid" label="amorphous"/>
<link wikidata="Q505668" start="9280" end="9305" title="chemical vapor deposition" label="chemical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q422698" start="9311" end="9319" title="borazine" label="borazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9321" end="9333" title="ZYP Coatings (company)" label="ZYP Coatings"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="9449" end="9455" title="plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880535" start="9474" end="9483" title="Ultrafine particles" label="ultrafine"/>
<link wikidata="Q852508" start="9522" end="9527" title="toner (printing)" label="toner"/>
<link wikidata="Q419914" start="9557" end="9572" title="iodine monofluoride" label="iodine fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152516" start="9688" end="9701" title="nitridoborate" label="nitridoborate"/>
<link wikidata="Q751479" start="9923" end="9940" title="synthetic diamond" label="synthetic diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="10664" end="10674" title="shock wave" label="shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747127" start="10733" end="10746" title="heterodiamond" label="heterodiamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q409602" start="11063" end="11080" title="boron trifluoride" label="boron trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125820" start="11099" end="11118" title="Ion beam deposition" label="Ion beam deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q905958" start="11120" end="11161" title="plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition" label="plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q901321" start="11163" end="11186" title="pulsed laser deposition" label="pulsed laser deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q847609" start="11188" end="11207" title="Sputter deposition" label="reactive sputtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q900134" start="11219" end="11244" title="physical vapor deposition" label="physical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="11738" end="11743" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="11889" end="11900" title="metric tons" label="metric tons"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="13374" end="13383" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q174219" start="13385" end="13390" title="paint" label="paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q204885" start="13393" end="13406" title="dental cement" label="dental cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q14674" start="13413" end="13419" title="pencil" label="pencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="13484" end="13489" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418455" start="13734" end="13745" title="Foundation (cosmetics)" label="foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="13747" end="13754" title="make-up" label="make-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q964307" start="13756" end="13766" title="eye shadow" label="eye shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8243409" start="13779" end="13791" title="eye liner" label="kohl pencils"/>
<link wikidata="Q184191" start="13793" end="13801" title="lipstick" label="lipstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q190100" start="14147" end="14155" title="Bearing (mechanical)" label="bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753339" start="14340" end="14359" title="Xerography" label="xerographic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="14364" end="14377" title="laser printer" label="laser printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q286588" start="14519" end="14532" title="oxygen sensor" label="oxygen sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910801" start="14693" end="14705" title="hot pressing" label="hot pressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q411076" start="14764" end="14775" title="boron trioxide" label="boron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q863583" start="14776" end="14782" title="binder (material)" label="binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330050" start="14942" end="14956" title="calcium borate" label="calcium borate"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595716" start="15059" end="15082" title="Boron nitride nanosheet" label="Boron nitride nanosheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q422698" start="15138" end="15146" title="borazine" label="borazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q505668" start="15178" end="15203" title="chemical vapor deposition" label="chemical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686486" start="15438" end="15454" title="proton conductor" label="proton conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="15565" end="15575" title="fuel cells" label="fuel cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q903456" start="15580" end="15598" title="water electrolysis" label="water electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q424257" start="15731" end="15751" title="molybdenum disulfide" label="molybdenum disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16078" end="16090" title="ZYP Coatings (company)" label="ZYP Coatings"/>
<link wikidata="Q372301" start="16455" end="16463" title="abrasive" label="abrasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="16512" end="16516" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="16518" end="16524" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="16538" end="16543" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16832" end="16849" title="Passivation (chemistry)#Surface passivation" label="passivation layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162709" start="17031" end="17039" title="tool bit" label="tool bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760958" start="17044" end="17056" title="cutting tool" label="cutting tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464847" start="17243" end="17250" title="Borazon" label="Borazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q617088" start="17779" end="17792" title="heat spreader" label="heat spreader"/>
<link wikidata="Q175805" start="18164" end="18184" title="semiconductor device" label="semiconductor device"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="18192" end="18198" title="MOSFET" label="MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18251" end="18260" title="trichloroborazine" label="trichloro"/>
<link wikidata="Q422698" start="18260" end="18268" title="borazine" label="borazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="18274" end="18281" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714096" start="20195" end="20211" title="black phosphorus" label="black phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="20802" end="20819" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477165" start="22323" end="22345" title="nanomesh" label="Boron nitride nanomesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q910150" start="22441" end="22454" title="self-assembly" label="self-assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087" start="22520" end="22527" title="rhodium" label="rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="22531" end="22540" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q422698" start="22552" end="22560" title="borazine" label="borazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880334" start="22567" end="22584" title="ultra-high vacuum" label="ultra-high vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="23375" end="23390" title="carbon nanotube" label="carbon nanotube"/>
<link wikidata="Q381490" start="24035" end="24042" title="aerogel" label="aerogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595716" start="24133" end="24143" title="Boron nitride nanosheet" label="nanosheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q332828" start="24285" end="24294" title="Absorption (chemistry)" label="absorbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="24360" end="24371" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q505668" start="24614" end="24639" title="chemical vapor deposition" label="chemical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q422698" start="24646" end="24654" title="borazine" label="borazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413828" start="24733" end="24748" title="silicon nitride" label="silicon nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q960836" start="24771" end="24784" title="thermal shock" label="thermal shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="24881" end="24888" title="alumina" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q415638" start="24893" end="24909" title="titanium nitride" label="titanium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q36200" start="24989" end="24997" title="zirconia" label="zirconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422588" start="24999" end="25017" title="borosilicate glass" label="borosilicate glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q13078381" start="25021" end="25034" title="glass ceramic" label="glass ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213371" start="25037" end="25044" title="vitreous enamel" label="enamels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093696" start="25074" end="25089" title="titanium boride" label="titanium boride"/>
<link wikidata="Q414445" start="25121" end="25138" title="aluminium nitride" label="aluminium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q412356" start="25158" end="25173" title="silicon carbide" label="silicon carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q36200" start="25265" end="25273" title="zirconia" label="zirconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844613" start="25354" end="25363" title="sintering" label="sintering"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="25437" end="25446" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="25451" end="25458" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767650" start="25549" end="25558" title="lubricity" label="lubricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q505668" start="25865" end="25890" title="Chemical vapor deposition" label="Chemical vapour-deposited"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="25931" end="25938" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q415872" start="26126" end="26143" title="boron trichloride" label="boron trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="26148" end="26155" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="26166" end="26174" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="26493" end="26503" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q778653" start="26615" end="26625" title="outgassing" label="outgassing"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="26751" end="26761" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="26787" end="26794" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="26839" end="26846" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q390417" start="26899" end="26908" title="crucibles" label="crucibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="26921" end="26934" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="26964" end="26974" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q15331" start="27022" end="27026" title="Jig_(tool)" label="jigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="27031" end="27040" title="Insulator (electricity)" label="insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897295" start="27395" end="27414" title="Beta carbon nitride" label="Beta carbon nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464847" start="27417" end="27424" title="Borazon" label="Borazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611371" start="27427" end="27444" title="Borocarbonitrides" label="Borocarbonitrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120057" start="27447" end="27461" title="Boron suboxide" label="Boron suboxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557782" start="27464" end="27483" title="Superhard materials" label="Superhard materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157708" start="27486" end="27512" title="Wide-bandgap semiconductor" label="Wide-bandgap semiconductor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3371" wikidata="Q107809" url="?curid=3371" title="Bach (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Johann Sebastian Bach]] (1685–1750) was a German composer of the Baroque period.

Bach may also refer to:

==People==
* Bach (surname)
** Bach family, a noted family in music
* Bach (actor), stage name of French actor, singer and music hall performer Charles-Joseph Pasquier (1882–1953)
* Sebastian Bach (born 1968), stage name of Canadian heavy metal singer Sebastian Bierk
* King Bach, American actor, comedian, and Internet personality
* Bill Bachrach (1879–1959), American swim coach known as &quot;Bach&quot;
* Joel Sirkis (1561–1640), Polish posek and halakhist, known as &quot;the Bach&quot;
* P. D. Q. Bach (1807–1742), a fictitious composer invented by musical satirist Peter Schickele
* Nigel Bach, the nom de plume of Tom Fanslau, the creator of the &quot;Bad Ben&quot; series

==Places==
* Bach, Austria, a municipality in Reutte
* Bach, Lot, a commune in France
* Bach an der Donau, a town in Regensburg, Bavaria, Germany
* Bäch, a settlement of the Freienbach municipality in Schwyz, Switzerland
** Bäch railway station, in Freienbach, Switzerland
* Bach, Michigan, US, an unincorporated community
* Bach Ice Shelf, on Alexander Island, Antarctica
* Bach quadrangle, on the planet Mercury
* Bach (crater), on the planet Mercury
* 1814 Bach, an asteroid

==Radio stations==
* WBQK, a radio station licensed to West Point, Virginia, US, known as Bach FM
* WLTT, a defunct radio station formerly licensed to Carolina Beach, North Carolina, US, known as Bach FM from 2011 to 2013

==Other uses==
* Bach Gesellschaft, an 1850 society for publishing J.S. Bach&#x27;s complete works
* &quot;Bach&quot; (journal), an academic journal of Baroque music
* BACH motif, a sequence of notes
* Bach (New Zealand), a modest holiday home or beach house
* Brown Association for Cooperative Housing, in Providence, Rhode Island, United States
* Bach Aircraft, an aircraft manufacturer from 1927 to 1931
* Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis (abbreviated BWV), a catalogue of compositions by J.S. Bach
* Quarry Bach, a slate quarry near Cilgerran, Wales

==See also==
* Bache (disambiguation)
* Bach House (disambiguation)
* Batch (disambiguation)
* Bạch, a Vietnamese surname
* Bachs, a municipality in the canton of Zürich, Switzerland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q107809" start="0" end="25" title="Bach (disambiguation)" label="[[Johann Sebastian Bach]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q107809" start="84" end="88" title="Bach (disambiguation)" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409748" start="122" end="136" title="Bach (surname)" label="Bach (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q169509" start="140" end="151" title="Bach family" label="Bach family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861386" start="179" end="191" title="Bach (actor)" label="Bach (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q363490" start="291" end="305" title="Sebastian Bach" label="Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16163337" start="379" end="388" title="King Bach" label="King Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907981" start="443" end="456" title="Bill Bachrach" label="Bill Bachrach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691747" start="518" end="529" title="Joel Sirkis" label="Joel Sirkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190508" start="603" end="616" title="P. D. Q. Bach" label="P. D. Q. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q112061846" start="769" end="776" title="Bad Ben" label="Bad Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q679998" start="804" end="817" title="Bach, Austria" label="Bach, Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q936005" start="846" end="855" title="Bach, Lot" label="Bach, Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q488974" start="879" end="896" title="Bach an der Donau" label="Bach an der Donau"/>
<link wikidata="Q69780" start="965" end="975" title="Freienbach" label="Freienbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5845873" start="1015" end="1035" title="Bäch railway station" label="Bäch railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438590" start="1066" end="1080" title="Bach, Michigan" label="Bach, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838682" start="1116" end="1130" title="Bach Ice Shelf" label="Bach Ice Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629997" start="1166" end="1181" title="Bach quadrangle" label="Bach quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072625" start="1207" end="1220" title="Bach (crater)" label="Bach (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607073" start="1246" end="1255" title="1814 Bach" label="1814 Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947377" start="1291" end="1295" title="WBQK" label="WBQK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955604" start="1370" end="1374" title="WLTT" label="WLTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q479853" start="1510" end="1527" title="Bach Gesellschaft" label="Bach Gesellschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716525" start="1594" end="1620" title="Bach (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Bach&amp;quot; (journal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q584238" start="1661" end="1671" title="BACH motif" label="BACH motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838674" start="1695" end="1713" title="Bach (New Zealand)" label="Bach (New Zealand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="1754" end="1795" title="Brown Association for Cooperative Housing" label="Brown Association for Cooperative Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878220" start="1842" end="1855" title="Bach Aircraft" label="Bach Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q214203" start="1902" end="1924" title="Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis" label="Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119942" start="1987" end="1998" title="Quarry Bach" label="Quarry Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q236553" start="2053" end="2075" title="Bache (disambiguation)" label="Bache (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q798172" start="2078" end="2105" title="Bach House (disambiguation)" label="Bach House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q452823" start="2108" end="2130" title="Batch (disambiguation)" label="Batch (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21493787" start="2133" end="2137" title="Bạch" label="Bạch"/>
<link wikidata="Q70273" start="2162" end="2167" title="Bachs" label="Bachs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3374" wikidata="Q300854" url="?curid=3374" title="Blood on the Tracks">
<text>Blood on the Tracks is the fifteenth studio album by American singer-songwriter Bob Dylan, released on January 20, 1975, by Columbia Records. The album marked Dylan&#x27;s return to Columbia after a two-album stint with Asylum Records. Dylan began recording the album at an A &amp; R studio in New York City in September 1974. In December, shortly before Columbia was due to release the album, Dylan abruptly re-recorded much of the material in Sound 80 studio in Minneapolis. The final album contains five tracks recorded in New York and five from Minneapolis. The songs have been linked to tensions in Dylan&#x27;s personal life, including his estrangement from his then-wife Sara. One of their children, Jakob Dylan, described the songs as &quot;my parents talking&quot;. Dylan denied that the songs were autobiographical.

Although &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; initially received mixed reviews from critics, it has retrospectively been acclaimed as one of Dylan&#x27;s best albums by both critics and fans and various publications have since listed it as one of the greatest albums of all time. It was a commercial success, peaking at No. 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and No. 4 on the UK Albums Chart, with the single &quot;Tangled Up in Blue&quot; peaking at No. 31 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. It remains one of Dylan&#x27;s best-selling studio releases, with a double-platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for at least two million copies sold in the United States. In 2015, it was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.

&quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; was voted number 7 in the third edition of Colin Larkin&#x27;s book &quot;All Time Top 1000 Albums&quot; (2000). In 2003, the album was ranked number 16 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;&#x27;s list of the “500 Greatest Albums of All Time”, rising to number 9 in the 2020 revision of the list. In 2004, it was placed at number 5 on &quot;Pitchfork&quot;&#x27;s list of the &quot;Top 100 Albums of the 1970s&quot;. A high-definition 5.1 surround sound edition of the album was released on SACD by Columbia in 2003.

==Background and recording==
At the conclusion of his 1974 tour with the Band, Dylan began a relationship with a Columbia Records employee, Ellen Bernstein, which Dylan biographer Clinton Heylin has described as the beginning of the end of Dylan&#x27;s marriage to his wife Sara. In spring 1974, Dylan was in New York for several weeks while he attended art classes with the painter Norman Raeben. Dylan subsequently gave Raeben credit in interviews for transforming his understanding of time, and during the summer of 1974 Dylan began to write a series of songs in a series of three small notebooks which used his new knowledge:


Dylan subsequently spent time with Bernstein on his farm in Minnesota and there he completed the 17 songs from which &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; was formed—songs which Heylin has described as &quot;perhaps the finest collection of love songs of the twentieth century, songs filled with the full spectrum of emotions a marriage on the rocks can engender&quot;.

Before recording the songs that would constitute &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot;, Dylan previewed them for a number of friends in the music world, including David Crosby, Graham Nash, Stephen Stills, Tim Drummond and Peter Rowan. Nash recalled that Stills disliked Dylan&#x27;s private performance of his new songs; immediately after Dylan left the room, Stills remarked to Nash, &quot;He&#x27;s a good songwriter ... but he&#x27;s no musician.&quot;

All of the tracks on the album are performed in Open D tuning. Irish folk musician Paul Brady recounts how Dylan had heard Brady&#x27;s &#x27;the Lakes of Pontchartrain&#x27; and asked to meet him. Brady showed him Open D tuning, and where to put his fingers to make the chords.

Initially, Dylan considered recording &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; with an electric backing group, and contacted Mike Bloomfield who had played lead guitar on Dylan&#x27;s &quot;Highway 61 Revisited&quot; album. When the two met, Dylan ran through the songs he was planning to record, but he played them too quickly for Bloomfield to learn. Bloomfield later recalled the experience: &quot;They all began to sound the same to me; they were all in the same key; they were all long. It was one of the strangest experiences of my life. He was sort of pissed off that I didn&#x27;t pick it up.&quot; In the end, Dylan rejected the idea of recording the album with a band, and instead substituted stripped-down acoustic arrangements for all of his songs. On August 2, 1974, Dylan signed a contract with Columbia Records. After releasing his two previous albums, &quot;Planet Waves&quot; and &quot;Before the Flood&quot;, on Asylum Records, Dylan decided his new album would benefit from the commercial muscle of the record label that had made him famous, and his new contract gave him increased control over his own masters.

Dylan commenced recording at A &amp; R Recording Studios in New York City on September 16, 1974. Bernstein has stated &quot;the theme of returning ran through the sessions&quot;, so &quot;it made a lot of sense to do it at A&amp;R&quot;. A &amp; R Studios was the former Columbia Records &quot;Studio A&quot;, where Dylan had recorded six albums in the 1960s. The musicians quickly realized that Dylan was taking a &quot;spontaneous&quot; approach to recording. The producer, Phil Ramone, later said that Dylan transitioned from one song to another as if they were part of a medley. Ramone noted: &quot;Sometimes he will have several bars, and in the next version, he will change his mind about how many bars there should be in between a verse. Or eliminate a verse. Or add a chorus when you don&#x27;t expect.&quot;

Eric Weissberg and his band, Deliverance, originally recruited as session men, were rejected after two days of recording because they could not keep up with Dylan&#x27;s pace. Dylan retained bassist Tony Brown from the band, and soon added organist Paul Griffin (who had also worked on &quot;Highway 61 Revisited&quot; and &quot;Blonde on Blonde&quot;) and steel guitarist Buddy Cage. After ten days and four sessions with the current lineup, Dylan had finished recording and mixing, and, by November, had cut a test pressing of the album. Columbia began to prepare to release the album before Christmas.

Dylan played the test pressing for his brother, David Zimmerman, who persuaded Dylan the album would not sell because the overall sound was too stark. Robert Christgau also heard the early version of the album and called it &quot;a sellout to the memory of Dylan&#x27;s pre-electric period&quot;. At his brother&#x27;s urging, Dylan agreed to re-record five of the album&#x27;s songs in Sound 80 in Minneapolis, with backing musicians recruited by David. The new takes were accomplished in two days at the end of December 1974. &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; was released into stores on January 20, 1975. The version on the original test pressing was given a limited release in 2019 for Record Store Day.

=== Outtakes ===
The five New York acetate recordings that were replaced on the official album have been officially released on varied reissues archival releases, but only in 2019 did an official release of the original test pressing get released, as a limited-edition vinyl-only Record Store Day release. The acetate version of &quot;You&#x27;re a Big Girl Now&quot; was released on 1985&#x27;s &quot;Biograph&quot;. New York takes of &quot;Tangled Up in Blue&quot;, &quot;Idiot Wind&quot;, and &quot;If You See Her, Say Hello&quot; were released on &quot;The Bootleg Series, Vol. 1–3&quot;, but these were not the versions on the original test pressing. That collection also includes &quot;Call Letter Blues&quot;, an outtake/early version of &quot;Meet Me in the Morning&quot; with alternate lyrics. &quot;Up to Me&quot;, another outtake from these sessions, was also released on 1985&#x27;s &quot;Biograph&quot;. An alternate take of the song &quot;Shelter from the Storm&quot; is featured in the original soundtrack album for &quot;Jerry Maguire&quot; (1996). An alternate take of &quot;Meet Me in the Morning&quot; was released on the B-side of the Record Store Day 2012 release of &quot;Duquesne Whistle&quot;. The acetate versions of &quot;Lily, Rosemary and the Jack of Hearts&quot;, &quot;If You See Her, Say Hello&quot;, and &quot;Tangled Up in Blue&quot; were not released officially until 2018, when they were released, alongside 70 previously unreleased recordings, on the 6-disc deluxe edition of &quot;More Blood, More Tracks&quot;, volume 14 of Dylan&#x27;s ongoing archival &quot;Bootleg Series&quot;. Despite featuring multiple versions of nearly every song from the sessions, the actual mix of &quot;Idiot Wind&quot; found on the test pressing is not in the box set, and was only made available on the aforementioned 2019 reissue.

==Artwork and packaging==
The front cover shows Bob Dylan in a portrait in profile looking to the left. To the left of this is a burgundy color strip with the artist&#x27;s name and album title, both in white and underlined. While the cover image looks like a painting, it is a heavily edited photograph by Paul Till (who is credited accordingly). Till explained that the picture was taken with a telephoto lens at a concert in the Maple Leaf Gardens, in Toronto on January 10, 1974. When developing the photo he solarized it, then handcolored it using watercolors.

The backcover shows, depending on the edition, one of two lithographs by David Oppenheim. The main difference is between a version issued with and one issued without liner notes. The liner notes were written by Pete Hamill, then removed by Columbia Records for later 1975 pressings - which is when the lithograph was switched out - and then reinstated after Hamill was awarded a Grammy for his comments. There exist later issues of both versions of the back cover.

==Autobiographical interpretation==
The songs that constitute &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; have been described by many Dylan critics as stemming from his personal turmoil at the time, particularly his estrangement from his then-wife Sara Dylan. One of Bob and Sara Dylan&#x27;s children, Jakob Dylan, has said, &quot;When I&#x27;m listening to &quot;Blood On The Tracks&quot;, that&#x27;s about my parents.&quot;

Dylan has denied this autobiographical interpretation, stating in a 1985 interview with Bill Flanagan, &quot;A lot of people thought that album pertained to me. It didn&#x27;t pertain to me ... I&#x27;m not going to make an album and lean on a marriage relationship.&quot; Informed of the album&#x27;s popularity, Dylan told Mary Travers in a radio interview in April 1975: &quot;A lot of people tell me they enjoy that album. It&#x27;s hard for me to relate to that. I mean ... people enjoying that type of pain, you know?&quot; Addressing whether the album described his own personal pain, Dylan replied that he didn&#x27;t write &quot;confessional songs&quot;. However, on the live At Budokan album, Dylan seems to acknowledge the autobiographical nature of the song &quot;Simple Twist of Fate&quot; by introducing it as &quot;Here&#x27;s a simple love story. Happened to me.&quot; And in a 1978 interview, he responded to an observation that the album was confessional and that &quot;Tangled Up in Blue&quot; drew on his relationship with Sara by saying, &quot;There might be some little part of me which is confessing something which I&#x27;ve experienced and I know, but is not definitely the total me confessing anything.&quot;

According to &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, in Dylan&#x27;s lyric notebook, the working title of &quot;Simple Twist of Fate&quot; was &quot; 4th Street Affair&quot;; Dylan and Suze Rotolo lived at 161 W. 4th St. The narrator of the song memorializes an affair of ten years ago instead of singing about Dylan&#x27;s marriage. In &quot;Hot Press,&quot; writing about the three known lyric notebooks for the songs, Anne Margaret Daniel noted that &quot;Simple Twist of Fate&quot; was first entitled &quot;Snowbound,&quot; and set in part, like &quot;Tangled Up In Blue,&quot; in a New York City apartment.

In his 2004 memoir, &quot;Chronicles, Vol. 1&quot;, Dylan stated that the songs have nothing to do with his personal life, and that they were inspired by the short stories of Anton Chekhov.

==Critical reception and legacy==
Released in early 1975, &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; initially received mixed reviews from critics. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; published two assessments. The first, by Jonathan Cott, called it &quot;Dylan&#x27;s magnificent new album&quot;. The second reviewer, Jon Landau, wrote that &quot;the record has been made with typical shoddiness.&quot; In &quot;NME&quot;, Nick Kent described &quot;the accompaniments [as] often so trashy they sound like mere practice takes&quot;, while &quot;Crawdaddy&quot; magazine&#x27;s Jim Cusimano found the instrumentation incompetent.

An influential review of the album was written by Dylan critic Michael Gray for the magazine &quot;Let It Rock&quot;. Gray argued that it transformed the cultural perception of Dylan, and that he was no longer defined as &quot;the major artist of the sixties. Instead, Dylan has legitimized his claim to a creative prowess as vital now as then—a power not bounded by the one decade he so affected.&quot; This view was amplified by Clinton Heylin, who wrote: &quot;Ten years after he turned the rock &amp; roll brand of pop into rock ... [Dylan] renewed its legitimacy as a form capable of containing the work of a mature artist.&quot; In &quot;The Village Voice&quot;, Robert Christgau wrote that although the lyrics occasionally evoke romantic naiveté and bitterness, &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; is altogether Dylan&#x27;s &quot;most mature and assured record&quot;.

Since its initial reception, &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; has been viewed by critics as one of Dylan&#x27;s best albums. In Salon.com, Wyman wrote: &quot;&quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; is his only flawless album and his best produced; the songs, each of them, are constructed in disciplined fashion. It is his kindest album and most dismayed, and seems in hindsight to have achieved a sublime balance between the logorrhea-plagued excesses of his mid-1960s output and the self-consciously simple compositions of his post-accident years.&quot; Bell, in his critical biography of Dylan, wrote that &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; was proof that &quot;Dylan had won the argument over his refusal to argue about politics. In this, he began to seem prescient.&quot; Bell concluded the album &quot;might well count as one of the best things Dylan ever did&quot;. Novelist Rick Moody called it &quot;the truest, most honest account of a love affair from tip to stern ever put down on magnetic tape&quot;.

A result of the acclaim surrounding the album has been that when critics have praised one of Dylan&#x27;s subsequent albums, they have often described it as &quot;his best since &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot;&quot;. According to music journalist Rob Sheffield, &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; became a benchmark album for Dylan in the years that followed because it was &quot;such a stunning comeback&quot;.

The album was also included in the book &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot;.

Hip hop group Public Enemy reference it in their 2007 Dylan tribute song &quot;Long and Whining Road&quot;: &quot;It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back / You bet there&#x27;s blood on them Bomb Squad tracks&quot;.

A film adaptation of the album is currently in pre-production, under the direction of Luca Guadagnino.

==Track listing==

== Personnel ==
For personnel details, see Heylin, 1996 and Björner, 2014. Track numbers refer to CD and digital releases of the album.

===Personnel===
* Bob Dylan – lead vocals, acoustic guitar; mandolin (8); hammond organ (4); harmonica (1–5, 7, 9)
* Chris Weber – acoustic guitar (1, 3, 4, 7); twelve-string guitar (8)
* Kevin Odegard – acoustic guitar (1)
* Eric Weissberg – acoustic guitar (6)
* Charles Brown III – electric guitar (6)
* Buddy Cage – pedal steel guitar (6)
* Peter Ostroushko – mandolin (8)
* Gregg Inhofer – piano (3, 4); keyboards (1); Hammond organ (7, 8)
* Thomas McFaul – keyboards (6)
* Billy Peterson – bass guitar (1, 4, 7)
* Tony Brown – bass guitar (2, 5, 6, 9, 10)
* Bill Berg – drums (1, 3, 4, 7, 8)
* Richard Crooks – drums (6)

===Technical===

* Bob Dylan – producer 
* Phil Ramone – producer
* Philip Rabinowitz – engineering
* Paul Martinson – engineering
* Glenn Berger – tape operator, assistant engineer
* Paul Till – photography
* Ron Coro – art direction
* Pete Hamill – liner notes
* David Oppenheim – illustrations

MInvolved in the Minneapolis recording sessions

NYInvolved in the New York recording sessions

==Cover albums==
In 2002, Mary Lee&#x27;s Corvette released an album covering &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; in its entirety.

In 2022, singer/songwriter Ryan Adams also released an album covering each song on the album track-by-track.

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

===Singles===
==Certifications==



==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* &quot;Blood on the Tracks&quot; (Adobe Flash) at Spotify (streamed copy where licensed – registration required)
* Reviews, superseventies.com
* Public Radio Special, &quot;Right On Target, So Direct: Bob Dylan&#x27;s BLOOD ON THE TRACKS&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="80" end="89" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="124" end="140" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998195" start="220" end="234" title="Asylum Records" label="Asylum Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959753" start="274" end="283" title="A &amp;amp; R Recording" label="A &amp;amp; R"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564644" start="445" end="453" title="Sound 80" label="Sound 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="464" end="475" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q457433" start="678" end="682" title="Sara Dylan" label="Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q555426" start="707" end="718" title="Jakob Dylan" label="Jakob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1155" end="1180" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="1198" end="1213" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047985" start="1237" end="1255" title="Tangled Up in Blue" label="Tangled Up in Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1287" end="1316" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="1386" end="1401" title="platinum record" label="double-platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="1423" end="1464" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="1565" end="1584" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="1662" end="1674" title="Colin Larkin (writer)" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="1693" end="1717" title="All Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1781" end="1794" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="1821" end="1852" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="1952" end="1961" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q569874" start="2050" end="2064" title="surround sound" label="surround sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q212960" start="2102" end="2106" title="Super Audio CD" label="SACD"/>
<link wikidata="Q960168" start="2183" end="2206" title="Bob Dylan and The Band 1974 Tour" label="1974 tour with the Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134135" start="2309" end="2323" title="Clinton Heylin" label="Clinton Heylin"/>
<link wikidata="Q457433" start="2403" end="2407" title="Sara Dylan" label="Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999666" start="2512" end="2525" title="Norman Raeben" label="Norman Raeben"/>
<link wikidata="Q370560" start="3283" end="3295" title="David Crosby" label="David Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q357211" start="3297" end="3308" title="Graham Nash" label="Graham Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="3310" end="3324" title="Stephen Stills" label="Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677738" start="3326" end="3338" title="Tim Drummond" label="Tim Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647656" start="3343" end="3354" title="Peter Rowan" label="Peter Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362172" start="3626" end="3632" title="Open D tuning" label="Open D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="3641" end="3651" title="Irish traditional music" label="Irish folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q648789" start="3661" end="3671" title="Paul Brady" label="Paul Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745272" start="3720" end="3746" title="the Lakes of Pontchartrain" label="the Lakes of Pontchartrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q919156" start="3974" end="3989" title="Mike Bloomfield" label="Mike Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q217211" start="4039" end="4059" title="Highway 61 Revisited" label="Highway 61 Revisited"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="4316" end="4319" title="key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="4658" end="4674" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753252" start="4723" end="4735" title="Planet Waves" label="Planet Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q814220" start="4752" end="4768" title="Before the Flood (album)" label="Before the Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998195" start="4779" end="4793" title="Asylum Records" label="Asylum Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959753" start="5010" end="5037" title="A &amp;amp; R Recording" label="A &amp;amp; R Recording Studios"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5252" end="5289" title="Columbia Records#7th Avenue, New York" label="Columbia Records &amp;quot;Studio A&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q204323" start="5457" end="5468" title="Phil Ramone" label="Phil Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056431" start="5799" end="5813" title="Eric Weissberg" label="Eric Weissberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="6039" end="6047" title="organ (instrument)" label="organist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151012" start="6048" end="6060" title="Paul Griffin (musician)" label="Paul Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="6156" end="6168" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001146" start="6172" end="6182" title="Buddy Cage" label="Buddy Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673255" start="6311" end="6324" title="acetate disc" label="test pressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="6556" end="6572" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564644" start="6792" end="6800" title="Sound 80" label="Sound 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="6804" end="6815" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="7093" end="7109" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438388" start="7447" end="7473" title="You&amp;#x27;re a Big Girl Now" label="You&amp;#x27;re a Big Girl Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q864394" start="7514" end="7522" title="Biograph (album)" label="Biograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047985" start="7554" end="7572" title="Tangled Up in Blue" label="Tangled Up in Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979542" start="7586" end="7596" title="Idiot Wind" label="Idiot Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574349" start="7614" end="7639" title="If You See Her, Say Hello" label="If You See Her, Say Hello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574733" start="7669" end="7697" title="The Bootleg Series Volumes 1–3 (Rare &amp;amp; Unreleased) 1961–1991" label="The Bootleg Series, Vol. 1–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807780" start="7863" end="7885" title="Meet Me in the Morning" label="Meet Me in the Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q864394" start="8013" end="8021" title="Biograph (album)" label="Biograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493983" start="8065" end="8087" title="Shelter from the Storm" label="Shelter from the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q329131" start="8149" end="8162" title="Jerry Maguire" label="Jerry Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807780" start="8204" end="8226" title="Meet Me in the Morning" label="Meet Me in the Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5815119" start="8306" end="8322" title="Duquesne Whistle" label="Duquesne Whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042993" start="8360" end="8397" title="Lily, Rosemary and the Jack of Hearts" label="Lily, Rosemary and the Jack of Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574349" start="8411" end="8436" title="If You See Her, Say Hello" label="If You See Her, Say Hello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047985" start="8454" end="8472" title="Tangled Up in Blue" label="Tangled Up in Blue"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8630" end="8653" title="The Bootleg Series Vol. 14: More Blood, More Tracks" label="More Blood, More Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979542" start="8832" end="8842" title="Idiot Wind" label="Idiot Wind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9271" end="9280" title="Paul Till" label="Paul Till"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814534" start="9396" end="9414" title="Maple Leaf Gardens" label="Maple Leaf Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="9419" end="9426" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q981136" start="9477" end="9486" title="Solarization (photography)" label="solarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="9589" end="9599" title="lithograph" label="lithograph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9604" end="9619" title="David Oppenheim (French painter)" label="David Oppenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="9714" end="9725" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172000" start="9742" end="9753" title="Pete Hamill" label="Pete Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="9910" end="9916" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q457433" start="10233" end="10243" title="Sara Dylan" label="Sara Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q555426" start="10288" end="10299" title="Jakob Dylan" label="Jakob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q466386" start="10739" end="10751" title="Mary Travers (singer)" label="Mary Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q752934" start="11099" end="11109" title="Bob Dylan at Budokan" label="At Budokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q439920" start="11822" end="11833" title="Suze Rotolo" label="Suze Rotolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755205" start="12276" end="12294" title="Chronicles, Vol. 1" label="Chronicles, Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q842213" start="12408" end="12421" title="List of short stories by Anton Chekhov" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="12425" end="12438" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q67090103" start="12645" end="12658" title="Jonathan Cott" label="Jonathan Cott"/>
<link wikidata="Q522288" start="12739" end="12749" title="Jon Landau" label="Jon Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="12833" end="12836" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q517464" start="12844" end="12853" title="Nick Kent" label="Nick Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139100" start="12965" end="12974" title="Crawdaddy" label="Crawdaddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927579" start="13113" end="13125" title="Michael Gray (author)" label="Michael Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532796" start="13149" end="13160" title="Let It Rock (magazine)" label="Let It Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134135" start="13481" end="13495" title="Clinton Heylin" label="Clinton Heylin"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="13694" end="13711" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="13719" end="13735" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="14050" end="14059" title="Salon.com" label="Salon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q709368" start="14793" end="14803" title="Rick Moody" label="Rick Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486861" start="15173" end="15186" title="Rob Sheffield" label="Rob Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="15382" end="15422" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="15445" end="15457" title="Public Enemy" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106624166" start="15510" end="15531" title="Long and Whining Road" label="Long and Whining Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335528" start="15740" end="15755" title="Luca Guadagnino" label="Luca Guadagnino"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="15932" end="15941" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="15974" end="15982" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="15988" end="16001" title="hammond organ" label="hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q678090" start="16075" end="16095" title="twelve-string guitar" label="twelve-string guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q119345516" start="16102" end="16115" title="Kevin Odegard" label="Kevin Odegard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056431" start="16140" end="16154" title="Eric Weissberg" label="Eric Weissberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001146" start="16221" end="16231" title="Buddy Cage" label="Buddy Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q587027" start="16234" end="16252" title="pedal steel guitar" label="pedal steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176245" start="16259" end="16275" title="Peter Ostroushko" label="Peter Ostroushko"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734453" start="16393" end="16407" title="Billy Peterson" label="Billy Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908115" start="16478" end="16487" title="Bill Berg (musician)" label="Bill Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="16561" end="16570" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204323" start="16585" end="16596" title="Phil Ramone" label="Phil Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q204323" start="16610" end="16627" title="Phil Ramone" label="Philip Rabinowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="16630" end="16641" title="Audio engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="16661" end="16672" title="Audio engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="16763" end="16776" title="art direction" label="art direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172000" start="16779" end="16790" title="Pete Hamill" label="Pete Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="16793" end="16804" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780067" start="16962" end="16986" title="Mary Lee&amp;#x27;s Corvette" label="Mary Lee&amp;#x27;s Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q437970" start="17091" end="17101" title="Ryan Adams" label="Ryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="17393" end="17404" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="17409" end="17416" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3375" wikidata="Q425909" url="?curid=3375" title="Love and Theft (Bob Dylan album)">
<text>&quot;Love and Theft&quot; is the thirty-first studio album by American singer-songwriter Bob Dylan, released on September 11, 2001, by Columbia Records. It featured backing by his touring band of the time, with keyboardist Augie Meyers added for the sessions. It peaked at No. 5 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and has been certified Gold by the RIAA. The album&#x27;s highest chart positions worldwide were in Norway and Sweden, where it peaked at No. 1, giving Dylan his first No. 1 album in Norway since &quot;Infidels&quot;, and his first No. 1 album ever in Sweden. A limited edition release included a separate disc with two bonus tracks recorded in the early 1960s, and two years later, on September 16, 2003, this album was remixed into 5.1 surround sound and became one of 15 Dylan titles reissued and remastered for SACD playback.

==Background and recording==
&quot;Love and Theft&quot; was the first album Dylan recorded with his Never Ending Tour road band. This is a trend that would continue with his subsequent eight studio albums. Guitarist/multi-instrumentalist Larry Campbell recalls Dylan showing him the chord changes for the new song “Po&#x27; Boy” shortly after the band had recorded Dylan&#x27;s Oscar-winning original and non-album song &quot;Things Have Changed&quot; in 1999: “They were relatively sophisticated changes for a Bob Dylan song […] That was the first inkling of what the material might be like—taking elements from the jazz era and adding a folk sensibility to it&quot;.

David Kemper, Dylan&#x27;s drummer at the time, described in an interview how the sound of &quot;Love and Theft&quot; arose from lessons the band had absorbed from Dylan: &quot;I didn&#x27;t realise we were actually headed somewhere. I wasn&#x27;t smart enough to realise: you are in the School of Bob. But when we went in to record &quot;Love And Theft&quot;, I realised then, because the influences were really so old on that record. It comes from really early Americana, way back at the turn of the century, and the 1920s. And not everybody in the band was familiar with that style of playing. And I know that the songs that he would bring in would be these amazing examples of early Americana. Nobody that I know, knows as much about American music as Bob Dylan. He has spent so much time trying to understand, and collecting these songs—it was like a never stopping resource. He was always coming up with these songs or artists that I had never heard of. And then when we went in and recorded &quot;Love And Theft&quot; it was like, oh my God, he&#x27;s been teaching us this music—not literally these songs, but these styles. And as a band, we’re familiar with every one of these. That&#x27;s why we could cut a song a day […] and the album was done&quot;.

As Kemper indicated, the twelve songs on &quot;Love and Theft&quot; were recorded in just 12 days in May 2001 at Clinton Recording in Midtown Manhattan. The recording sessions were notable for their spontaneity. According to engineer Chris Shaw, “What surprised me was how quickly [Dylan] would abandon an arrangement when he was working. He&#x27;d say, ‘What&#x27;s the tempo? Let&#x27;s do it in F and drop the tempo down and do it like a Western swing tune, and I want the drummer to play brushes, not drums.’ And suddenly the song was completely different. Nothing was set in stone until he found that key, tempo and style that fit that vocal and that lyric”.

For his part, Dylan had been interested in working with Chris Shaw when he heard Shaw had gotten his start on Public Enemy&#x27;s early records. Dylan praised Shaw&#x27;s work as an engineer during a press conference in Rome to promote &quot;Love and Theft&quot; in 2001: After complaining that previous producers had botched the recording of his vocals, he was asked if he felt it was difficult to record his voice in the studio. Dylan referenced Shaw when he responded, &quot;I don&#x27;t think so […] On this particular record we had a young guy who understood how to do it.&quot; Dylan would subsequently employ Shaw to engineer and mix his albums &quot;Modern Times&quot; (2006) and &quot;Rough and Rowdy Ways&quot; (2020) as well as various non-album tracks.

==Content==
The album continued Dylan&#x27;s artistic comeback following 1997&#x27;s &quot;Time Out of Mind&quot; and was given an even more enthusiastic reception. The title of the album was apparently inspired by historian Eric Lott&#x27;s book &quot;Love &amp; Theft: Blackface Minstrelsy and the American Working Class,&quot; which was published in 1993. &quot;&quot;Love and Theft&quot; becomes his &quot;Fables of the Reconstruction&quot;, to borrow an R.E.M. album title&quot;, writes Greg Kot in the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; (published September 11, 2001), &quot;the myths, mysteries and folklore of the South as a backdrop for one of the finest roots rock albums ever made&quot;.

The opening track, &quot;Tweedle Dee &amp; Tweedle Dum&quot;, includes many references to parades in Mardi Gras in New Orleans, where participants are masked, and &quot;determined to go all the way&quot; of the parade route, in spite of being intoxicated. &quot;It rolls in like a storm, drums galloping over the horizon into ear shot, guitar riffs slicing with terse dexterity while a tale about a pair of vagabonds unfolds,&quot; writes Kot. &quot;It ends in death, and sets the stage for an album populated by rogues, con men, outcasts, gamblers, gunfighters and desperados, many of them with nothing to lose, some of them out of their minds, all of them quintessentially American.

Offered the song by Dylan, Sheryl Crow later recorded an up-tempo cover of &quot;Mississippi&quot; for her &quot;The Globe Sessions&quot;, released in 1998, before Dylan revisited it for &quot;Love and Theft&quot;. Subsequently, the Dixie Chicks made it a mainstay of their Top of the World, Vote for Change, and Accidents &amp; Accusations Tours.

As music critic Tim Riley notes, &quot;[Dylan&#x27;s] singing [on &quot;Love and Theft&quot;] shifts artfully between humble and ironic...&#x27;I&#x27;m not quite as cool or forgiving as I sound,&#x27; he sings in &#x27;Floater,&#x27; which is either hilarious or horrifying, and probably a little of both&quot;.

&quot;&quot;Love and Theft&quot; is, as the title implies, a kind of homage,&quot; writes Kot, &quot;[and] never more so than on &#x27;High Water (for Charley Patton),&#x27; in which Dylan draws a sweeping portrait of the South&#x27;s racial history, with the unsung blues singer as a symbol of the region&#x27;s cultural richness and ingrained social cruelties. Rumbling drums and moaning backing vocals suggest that things are going from bad to worse. &#x27;It&#x27;s tough out there,&#x27; Dylan rasps. &#x27;High water everywhere.&#x27; Death and dementia shadow the album, tempered by tenderness and wicked gallows humor&quot;.

&quot;&#x27;Po&#x27; Boy&#x27;, scored for guitar with lounge chord jazz patterns, &#x27;almost sounds as if it could have been recorded around 1920&quot;, says Riley. &quot;He leaves you dangling at the end of each bridge, lets the band punctuate the trail of words he&#x27;s squeezed into his lines, which gives it a reluctant soft-shoe charm&quot;.

The album closes with &quot;Sugar Baby&quot;, a lengthy, dirge-like ballad, noted for its evocative, apocalyptic imagery and sparse production drenched in echo. Praising it as &quot;a finale to be proud of&quot;, Riley notes that &quot;Sugar Baby&quot; is &quot;built on a disarmingly simple riff that turns foreboding&quot;.

In a &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; interview with Mikal Gilmore, Dylan himself summarized the album&#x27;s themes as dealing with &quot;business, politics and war, and maybe love interest on the side&quot;.

==Release and promotion==

Although no singles were released from the album, Dylan appeared in a 30-second commercial featuring the song &quot;Tweedle Dee &amp; Tweedle Dum&quot; that appeared online on August 28, 2001, and on network television beginning on September 3, 2001. The spot, directed by Kinka Usher, shows Dylan in a tense poker game with magician Ricky Jay, actress Francine York and &quot;Dharma &amp; Greg&quot; writer Eddie Gorodetsky. The poker setting was Dylan&#x27;s idea and, according to Usher, he only made one request of the director: &quot;He said, `You know, I just don&#x27;t want it to be corporate&#x27;. And I assured him that I wasn&#x27;t going to do that, I was going to shoot it like a little film. I know he&#x27;s very happy with it&quot;.

Dylan also consented to what, for him, was an unusual number of interviews with press to promote the album. On July 23, 2001, he participated in a press conference at the Hotel de la Ville in Rome with reporters from Austria, Britain, Denmark, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland. He was also interviewed by Edna Gundersen for &quot;USA Today&quot;, Robert Hilburn for the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; and Mikal Gilmore for &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;. All of these interviews appeared shortly before or shortly after the album&#x27;s release on September 11, 2001.

==Packaging==
The album&#x27;s cover features a black-and-white photograph of Dylan, sporting a then-new pencil-thin mustache, which was taken in the studio by Kevin Mazur. The back cover features a black-and-white portrait of Dylan taken by photographer David Gahr. Mazur also took the album&#x27;s inside cover photo of Dylan and the &quot;Love and Theft&quot; band (including organist Augie Meyers). The album&#x27;s art direction is credited to Geoff Gans.

==Reception and legacy==
The album won the Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album at the 44th Annual Grammy Awards. It was nominated for Album of the Year and the track &quot;Honest with Me&quot; was nominated for Best Male Rock Vocal Performance.

In a glowing review for his &quot;Consumer Guide&quot; column published by &quot;The Village Voice&quot;, Robert Christgau wrote: &quot;If &quot;Time Out of Mind&quot; was his death album—it wasn&#x27;t, but you know how people talk—this is his immortality album&quot;. Later, when &quot;The Village Voice&quot; conducted its annual Pazz &amp; Jop critics&#x27; poll, &quot;Love and Theft&quot; topped the list, the third Dylan album to accomplish this. It also topped &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s list. &quot;Q&quot; listed &quot;Love and Theft&quot; as one of the best 50 albums of 2001. &quot;Kludge&quot; ranked it at number eight on their list of best albums of 2001.

In 2003, the album was ranked number 467 on Rolling Stone&#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, climbing to number 385 in the 2012 update and dropping to number 411 in the 2020 update of the list. &quot;Newsweek&quot; magazine pronounced it the second best album of its decade. In 2009, &quot;Glide Magazine&quot; ranked it as the No. 1 Album of the Decade. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; put it on its end-of-the-decade, &quot;best-of&quot; list, saying, &quot;The predictably unpredictable rock poet greeted the new millennium with a folksy, bluesy instant classic&quot;.

In a 2020 list of &quot;Bob Dylan&#x27;s 10 greatest albums&quot; in &quot;Far Out&quot; magazine, &quot;Love and Theft&quot; was ranked seventh. An article accompanying the list characterized the album as one in which &quot;Dylan turns into a historian and showcases the music which moves him. It is another rootsy affair and one which feels capable of stirring up the ghosts of music past all on its own&quot;. A 2020 article at the &quot;Ultimate Classic Rock&quot; website also placed &quot;Love and Theft&quot; seventh in the Dylan pantheon, noting that it &quot;plays like an attic-sweeping of songs and themes Dylan and others left behind over the years&quot; and that it evokes &quot;long-gone musical spirits from the other turn of the century&quot;. Finally, &quot;Glide Magazine&quot; likewise placed &quot;Love and Theft&quot; seventh in a comprehensive list ranking all of Dylan&#x27;s albums, writing that &quot;Dylan here pulls readers through a bevy of American song traditions&quot; and that &quot;each song recaptures and renews a sub-genre that influenced Dylan&#x27;s career&quot;. Ian O&#x27;Riordan, in a 2021 article in the &quot;Irish Times&quot;, ranked the album sixth out of the 39, praising David Kemper&#x27;s drumming and citing &quot;Lonesome Day Blues&quot; as his favourite track.

Johnny Cash, in a 2001 interview with &quot;The New York Times&quot;, named it as Dylan&#x27;s best album.

Critic Jake Cole, in a 2021 &quot;Spectrum Culture&quot; article celebrating the album&#x27;s 20th anniversary, referred to it as Dylan&#x27;s most eclectic work &quot;from the storming rock of &#x27;Lonesome Day Blues&#x27; to the gorgeous slow-dance lounge number &#x27;Moonlight&#x27;, which points straight at Dylan&#x27;s later Great American Songbook phase of the 2010s. In that sense, &#x27;&quot;Love and Theft&quot;&#x27; might be the closest that Dylan ever came to capturing the spirit of his lauded Rolling Thunder Revue tour in the studio. If that roadshow was conceived as a way to rummage through folk tradition and feeding it into some kind of interpretive revivalism, this album codifies that approach into a freewheeling tour of blues, jazz, country and folk, all of it wrangled into a form of rock so rustic that even roots rock sounds modern compared to it&quot;.

==Allegations of plagiarism==
&quot;Love and Theft&quot; generated controversy when some similarities between the album&#x27;s lyrics and Japanese writer Junichi Saga&#x27;s book &quot;Confessions of a Yakuza&quot; were pointed out. Translated to English by John Bester, the book is a biography of one of the last traditional yakuza bosses in Japan. In the article published in the &quot;Journal&quot;, a line from &quot;Floater&quot; (&quot;I&#x27;m not quite as cool or forgiving as I sound&quot;) was traced to a line in the book, which said &quot;I&#x27;m not as cool or forgiving as I might have sounded.&quot; Another line from &quot;Floater&quot; is &quot;My old man, he&#x27;s like some feudal lord&quot;. One line in the book&#x27;s first chapter is, &quot;My old man would sit there like a feudal lord.&quot; However, when informed of this, author Saga&#x27;s reaction was one of having been honored rather than abused from Dylan&#x27;s use of lines from his work. Similarly, in defense of Dylan, Robert Christgau wrote: &quot;All pop music is love and theft, and in 40 years of records whose sources have inspired volumes of scholastic exegesis, Dylan has never embraced that truth so warmly.&quot;

==Track listing==

==Personnel==
* Bob Dylan – vocals, guitar, piano, record production
* Larry Campbell – guitar, banjo, mandolin, violin
* Charlie Sexton – guitar
* Augie Meyers – accordion, Hammond B3 organ, Vox organ
* Tony Garnier – bass guitar and upright bass
* David Kemper – drums
* Clay Meyers – bongos
* Chris Shaw – engineering

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

=== Year-end charts ===

==Certifications==


==References==
==External links==
*Love and Theft commercial at Bob Dylan&#x27;s official Facebook page
*Lyrics at Bob Dylan&#x27;s official site
*Chords at Dylanchords</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="90" end="99" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="136" end="152" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q329018" start="224" end="236" title="Augie Meyers" label="Augie Meyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975575" start="251" end="259" title="recording session" label="sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="287" end="312" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="337" end="341" title="gold album" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="349" end="353" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q598845" start="516" end="524" title="Infidels (Bob Dylan album)" label="Infidels"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="620" end="624" title="compact disc" label="disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="634" end="646" title="bonus tracks" label="bonus tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q569874" start="752" end="766" title="surround sound" label="surround sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="814" end="824" title="remastered" label="remastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q212960" start="829" end="833" title="Super Audio CD" label="SACD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411169" start="945" end="962" title="Never Ending Tour" label="Never Ending Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806036" start="1083" end="1097" title="Larry Campbell (musician)" label="Larry Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q107104978" start="1160" end="1172" title="Po&amp;#x27; Boy (Bob Dylan song)" label="Po&amp;#x27; Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="1223" end="1228" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627973" start="1271" end="1290" title="Things Have Changed" label="Things Have Changed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018194" start="1515" end="1527" title="David Kemper" label="David Kemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="2913" end="2930" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="3554" end="3566" title="Public Enemy" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324012" start="4096" end="4120" title="Modern Times (Bob Dylan album)" label="&amp;quot;Modern Times&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q93575200" start="4138" end="4158" title="Rough and Rowdy Ways" label="Rough and Rowdy Ways"/>
<link wikidata="Q657325" start="4301" end="4317" title="Time Out of Mind (Bob Dylan album)" label="Time Out of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386990" start="4435" end="4444" title="Eric Lott" label="Eric Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q338300" start="4620" end="4648" title="Fables of the Reconstruction" label="Fables of the Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="4669" end="4675" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q1028115" start="4702" end="4710" title="Greg Kot" label="Greg Kot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="4724" end="4739" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929352" start="4867" end="4877" title="roots rock" label="roots rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="5616" end="5627" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879045" start="5670" end="5681" title="Mississippi (Bob Dylan song)" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q430463" start="5702" end="5720" title="The Globe Sessions" label="The Globe Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q142636" start="5822" end="5834" title="Dixie Chicks" label="Dixie Chicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18360534" start="5863" end="5879" title="Top of the World Tour" label="Top of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016506" start="5881" end="5896" title="Vote for Change" label="Vote for Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672614" start="5902" end="5934" title="Accidents &amp;amp; Accusations Tour" label="Accidents &amp;amp; Accusations Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804171" start="5954" end="5963" title="Tim Riley (music critic)" label="Tim Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438403" start="6387" end="6397" title="High Water (For Charley Patton)" label="High Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q354519" start="6403" end="6417" title="Charley Patton" label="Charley Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q107104978" start="6898" end="6910" title="Po&amp;#x27; Boy (Bob Dylan song)" label="Po&amp;#x27; Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634748" start="7267" end="7277" title="Sugar Baby (Bob Dylan song)" label="Sugar Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="7577" end="7590" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845669" start="7612" end="7625" title="Mikal Gilmore" label="Mikal Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413901" start="8070" end="8081" title="Kinka Usher" label="Kinka Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516734" start="8131" end="8140" title="Ricky Jay" label="Ricky Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479879" start="8150" end="8163" title="Francine York" label="Francine York"/>
<link wikidata="Q672169" start="8174" end="8191" title="Dharma &amp;amp; Greg" label="Dharma &amp;amp; Greg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336076" start="8205" end="8221" title="Eddie Gorodetsky" label="Eddie Gorodetsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="8740" end="8744" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340048" start="8893" end="8907" title="Edna Gundersen" label="Edna Gundersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="8918" end="8927" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345501" start="8935" end="8949" title="Robert Hilburn" label="Robert Hilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="8964" end="8981" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845669" start="8992" end="9005" title="Mikal Gilmore" label="Mikal Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="9016" end="9029" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233970" start="9406" end="9416" title="David Gahr" label="David Gahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q329018" start="9539" end="9551" title="Augie Meyers" label="Augie Meyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593772" start="9656" end="9701" title="Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q637650" start="9709" end="9734" title="44th Annual Grammy Awards" label="44th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q953746" start="9834" end="9866" title="Best Male Rock Vocal Performance" label="Best Male Rock Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="9950" end="9967" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="9975" end="9991" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q657325" start="10014" end="10030" title="Time Out of Mind (Bob Dylan album)" label="Time Out of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046553" start="10202" end="10216" title="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop" label="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="10344" end="10357" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="10378" end="10379" title="Q magazine" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421478" start="10464" end="10470" title="Kludge (magazine)" label="Kludge"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="10586" end="10638" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="10747" end="10755" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="10908" end="10928" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830269" start="11556" end="11589" title="Townsquare Media" label="&amp;quot;Ultimate Classic Rock&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="12268" end="12291" title="The Irish Times" label="&amp;quot;Irish Times&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018194" start="12340" end="12352" title="David Kemper" label="David Kemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q105062496" start="12386" end="12404" title="Lonesome Day Blues" label="Lonesome Day Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="12436" end="12447" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12480" end="12498" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q678707" start="13583" end="13595" title="Junichi Saga" label="Junichi Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160041" start="13614" end="13637" title="Confessions of a Yakuza" label="Confessions of a Yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221779" start="13687" end="13698" title="John Bester" label="John Bester"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="13755" end="13761" title="yakuza" label="yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="14436" end="14452" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="14675" end="14684" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="14710" end="14727" title="producer (music)" label="record production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806036" start="14730" end="14744" title="Larry Campbell (musician)" label="Larry Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="14755" end="14760" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="14762" end="14770" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q933169" start="14781" end="14795" title="Charlie Sexton" label="Charlie Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q329018" start="14807" end="14819" title="Augie Meyers" label="Augie Meyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="14822" end="14831" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q937860" start="14863" end="14875" title="Tony Garnier (musician)" label="Tony Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018194" start="14909" end="14921" title="David Kemper" label="David Kemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q243998" start="14946" end="14952" title="bongos" label="bongos"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="14968" end="14979" title="recording engineer" label="engineering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3376" wikidata="Q941737" url="?curid=3376" title="The Beverly Hillbillies">
<text>The Beverly Hillbillies is an American television sitcom that was broadcast on CBS from 1962 to 1971. It had an ensemble cast featuring Buddy Ebsen, Irene Ryan, Donna Douglas, and Max Baer Jr. as the Clampetts, a poor backwoods family from the Ozark Mountains of Missouri who move to posh Beverly Hills, California after striking oil on their land. The show was produced by Filmways and was created by Paul Henning. It was followed by two other Henning-inspired &quot;country cousin&quot; series on CBS: &quot;Petticoat Junction&quot; and its spin-off &quot;Green Acres&quot;, which reversed the rags-to-riches, country-to-city model of &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot;.

&quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot; ranked among the top 20 most-watched programs on television for eight of its nine seasons, ranking as the No.1 series of the year during its first two seasons, with 16 episodes that still remain among the 100 most-watched television episodes in American history. It accumulated seven Emmy nominations during its run. It remains in syndicated reruns, and its ongoing popularity spawned a 1993 film adaptation by 20th Century Fox.

==Premise==
The series starts with Jed Clampett, a poor, widowed hillbilly who lives with his daughter and mother-in-law near an oil-rich swamp in Silver Dollar City in the Ozark Mountains of Missouri.

The opening sequence shows Jed discovering oil while shooting at a rabbit, although the first episode shows the oil being discovered by a surveyor for the OK Oil Company. The company pays Jed many millions of dollars for the right to drill on his land. Jed&#x27;s cousin Pearl Bodine prods him to move to California now that he is wealthy and pressures him into taking her son Jethro along. The family moves into a mansion in upscale Beverly Hills, California, next door to Jed&#x27;s banker, Milburn Drysdale, and his wife, Margaret, who is appalled by the hillbilly Clampetts.

The Clampetts bring an unsophisticated, simple, moral lifestyle to the wealthy and sometimes superficial community. Double entendres and cultural misconceptions are the core of the sitcom&#x27;s humor. Plots often involve Drysdale&#x27;s outlandish efforts to keep the Clampetts&#x27; money in his bank and his wife&#x27;s efforts to rid the neighborhood of &quot;those hillbillies&quot;. The family&#x27;s periodic attempts to return to the mountains are often the result of Granny feeling slighted by the &quot;city folk&quot;.

==Characters==
Three of the main charactersJed, Granny and Elly Mayappear in all 274 episodes. Jethro (272 episodes) is not in the last two episodes of the series, having gone into hiding to avoid an anticipated marriage proposal.

===Jed Clampett===
Good-natured patriarch Jed Clampett (portrayed by Buddy Ebsen) has little formal education and is naive about the world outside the rural area where he lived but has a great deal of wisdom and common sense. His forebears are revealed in series 1, episode 25, to have come to America before the &quot;Mayflower&quot; arrived. However, he later denies this to avoid offending Mrs. Drysdale. 

He is the widower of Granny&#x27;s daughter, Rose Ellen (Buddy Ebsen was only 5 years younger than Irene Ryan). He is the son of Luke Clampett and his wife and has a sister called Myrtle. In episode 13, it is revealed that Jed&#x27;s grandfather was 98 when he married Jed&#x27;s grandmother, who was 18. In an early episode, Jed tells Elly May that she is the spitting image of her mother. He is usually the straight man to Granny&#x27;s and Jethro&#x27;s antics. His catchphrase is, &quot;Welllllll, doggies!&quot;

===Granny===
Daisy May Moses (portrayed by Irene Ryan in all 274 episodes), called &quot;Granny&quot; by all, is Jed&#x27;s mother-in-law, so is often called &quot;Granny Clampett&quot; in spite of her last name and despite the fact that in the pilot episode Milburn Drysdale refers to her as Jed&#x27;s mother. She is a descendant of the Moses clan, who feuded with another family, the Bodkins, and drove them out of Napoleon, Tennessee. In Season 9, Episode 23, Granny states that she is &quot;from Limestone, Tennessee&quot;.

Granny has an abrasive personality and is quick to anger but is often overruled by Jed. She is a devout Confederate and fancies herself a Baptist Christian (&quot;dunked, not sprinkled&quot;). A self-styled &quot;M.D.&quot; (&quot;mountain doctor&quot;), Granny uses her &quot;white lightning&quot; brew as a form of anesthesia when performing painful treatments such as leech bleeding or tooth pulling. She often refers to the concoction as &quot;rheumatize medicine&quot;. Like the other Clampetts, she is known to take things literally, having thought Mrs. Drysdale had turned herself into a bird using black magic (astrology) and mistook an escaped kangaroo for a giant jackrabbit (but failed to convince anyone of its existence).

Paul Henning discarded the idea of making Granny Jed&#x27;s mother, which would have changed the show&#x27;s dynamics, making Granny the matriarch and Jed her subordinate.

===Elly May Clampett===
Elly May (portrayed by Donna Douglas in all 274 episodes), the only child of Jed and Rose Ellen Clampett, is a mountain beauty with the body of a pin-up girl and the soul of a tomboy. In a very early episode, Jed tells Elly May that she is the spitting image of her mother. She can throw a fastball and &quot;wrassle&quot; most men to a fall, and she can be tender with her friends, animals, and family. She says once that animals can be better companions than people, but as she grows older, she allows that &quot;fellas kin be more fun than critters.&quot; In addition to the family dog, Duke (an old Bloodhound), a number of pets live on the Clampett estate thanks to Elly May&#x27;s love of animals.

She is a terrible cook and family members cringe whenever she takes over the kitchen. Elly May is easily in her 20s, but Granny usually promotes her age as &quot;14&quot; since an unmarried mountain woman as old as Elly May is considered an old maid.

In the 1981 reunion TV movie, Elly May is the head of a zoo.

===Jethro Bodine===
Jethro (portrayed by Max Baer Jr. in 272 episodes) is the dim-witted son of Jed&#x27;s cousin, Pearl Bodine (in a customary practice, he addresses Jedhis once-removed elder cousinas &quot;Uncle Jed&quot;, just as his second cousin, Elly May, addresses Jethro&#x27;s mother as &quot;Aunt Pearl&quot;). Pearl&#x27;s mother and Jed&#x27;s father were siblings. Jethro drives the Clampett family to their new home in California and stays on with them to further his education. In the first season, he is in the fifth grade, having spent three years in the fourth grade and two years in the first grade. The others boast of Jethro&#x27;s &quot;sixth-grade education&quot;. Jethro often speaks enthusiastically of his abilities in &quot;cipherin&#x27;&quot; (1 and 1 is 2, 2 and 2 is 4), and &quot;gazintas&quot; (4 gazinta 8 2 times, 3 gazinta 12 4 times), and he is ignorant about nearly every aspect of modern California life. In one episode, he attends a local secretarial school and is so disruptive that he is given a diploma at the end of the day to keep him from returning. In real life, Max Baer Jr. has a bachelor&#x27;s degree in business administration, minoring in philosophy, from Santa Clara University.

Many story lines involve Jethro&#x27;s endless career search. He considers becoming a brain surgeon, a fry cook, a millwright, a street car conductor, a spy, a telephone lineman, a soda jerk, a chauffeur, a USAF general, a sculptor, a restaurant owner, a psychiatrist, a bookkeeper for Milburn Drysdale&#x27;s bank, a talent agent for &quot;cousin&quot; Bessie and &quot;Cousin Roy&quot; (see below), and a Hollywood producer. More often than not, his goal is merely to meet pretty girls. Miss Hathaway has a crush on him, but he is oblivious to this. Of all the Clampett clan, he is the most eager to embrace city life. Jethro has a huge appetite—in one episode, he eats a jetliner&#x27;s entire supply of steaks, in another he tries to set himself up as a Hollywood agent for cousin &quot;Bessie&quot; the chimpanzee—with a fee of 10,000 bananas for Bessie and 1,000 for him. When &quot;Cousin Roy&quot; (Roy Clark) comes from &quot;the hills&quot; to Beverly Hills to become a country music star, Jethro refuses to be his agent when Roy becomes a success. Jethro does not appear in the third- or second-to-last episodes, but Baer remains billed in the title credits.

As of 2025, Baer is the only surviving main cast member.

===Milburn Drysdale===
Milburn Drysdale (portrayed by Raymond Bailey in 247 episodes) is the Clampetts&#x27; banker, confidant, and next-door neighbor. He is obsessed with money and to keep the Clampetts&#x27; $96,000,000 (in 1969; ) in his Commerce Bank of Beverly Hills, Mr. Drysdale will go to great lengths to cater to their wishes. He often forces others, especially his long-suffering secretary, to help fulfill their outlandish requests. He is a descendant of the Bodkins family from Tennessee. It is revealed in the first season that Granny&#x27;s clan, the Moses family, feuded with the Bodkins family and drove them from Napoleon, Tennessee. A recurring comedic scene shows Drysdale angrily answering his phone only to find Jed on the other end of the line, at which point Drysdale&#x27;s demeanor instantly changes to one of good humor and accommodation.

===Jane Hathaway===

Jane Hathaway (portrayed by Nancy Kulp in 246 episodes), whom the Clampetts address as &quot;Miss Jane&quot;, is Drysdale&#x27;s loyal, well-educated, efficient secretary at the Commerce Bank of Beverly Hills. She is genuinely fond of the family and tries to shield them from her boss&#x27;s greed. Miss Hathaway frequently has to &quot;rescue&quot; Drysdale from his schemes, receiving little or no thanks for her efforts. The Clampetts consider her family; even Granny, the one most averse to living in California, likes her. Jane has a crush on Jethro for most of the series&#x27; run. In 1999, &quot;TV Guide&quot; ranked Jane Hathaway number 38 on its list titled &quot;50 Greatest TV Characters of All Time&quot;.

===Recurring characters===
* Margaret Drysdale (portrayed by Harriet MacGibbon in 55 episodes) is the snobbish wife of Milburn Drysdale. She is appalled by the Clampetts and their hillbilly lifestyle. She touts herself as a &quot;blue-blooded Bostonian&quot; and repeatedly tries to drive the Clampetts out of Beverly Hills, without success.
* &quot;Cousin&quot; Pearl Bodine (portrayed by Bea Benaderet in 23 episodes) is Jethro&#x27;s mother and Jed&#x27;s first cousin. Pearl encouraged the Clampetts to move to Beverly Hills and is envious of their wealth. She attempts to achieve success through various schemes, including wooing oil man John Brewster and finding a wealthy husband for her daughter Jethrine.
* Jethrine Bodine (portrayed by Max Baer Jr., voiced by Linda Kaye Henning in 11 episodes) is the sister of Jethro and the daughter of Pearl.
* Shorty Kellems (portrayed by Shug Fisher in 17 episodes) is Jed&#x27;s best friend who occasionally visits from back in Silver Dollar City. In one storyline, Drysdale mistakenly believes Shorty is richer than Jed and goes to great lengths to win his business.
* Helen Thompson (portrayed by Danielle Mardi in 17 episodes) is a British secretary at the Commerce Bank of Beverly Hills.
* Janet Trego (portrayed by Sharon Tate in 15 episodes) is a secretary at the Commerce Bank of Beverly Hills. She assists Jane Hathaway and is often the object of Jethro&#x27;s romantic overtures.
* John Brewster (portrayed by Frank Wilcox in 14 episodes) is an oil executive from Tulsa whose company made Jed a millionaire after leasing Jed&#x27;s land for oil production.
* Elverna Bradshaw (portrayed by Elvia Allman in 13 episodes) is Granny&#x27;s rival from Silver Dollar City.
* Dash Riprock (portrayed by Larry Pennell in 10 episodes) is a conceited macho movie star employed by Mammoth Pictures. He often tries to win Elly May&#x27;s affections to no avail.
* Mark Templeton (portrayed by Roger Torrey in 9 episodes) is a frogman and the brother of Matthew Templeman who Granny thought was an actual frog.
* Ravenswood (portrayed by Arthur Gould-Porter in 8 episodes) is the Drysdale family&#x27;s butler.
* Lawrence Chapman (portrayed by Milton Frome in 8 episodes) is the head of Mammoth Pictures that Jed owns.
* Parkins (portrayed by Barney Elmore in 7 episodes) is the Drysdale family&#x27;s chauffeur.
* Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs (portrayed by themselves in 7 episodes) are a music duo who are longtime friends of the Clampett family.
* John Faversham (portrayed by Richard Caldicot in 7 episodes) is the majordomo of Clampett Castle in Kent, England.
* Gloria Buckles (portrayed by Bettina Brenna in 6 episodes) is a secretary at the Commerce Bank of Beverly Hills. She is not to be confused with the earlier secretary that appeared in &quot;Granny&#x27;s Spring Tonic&quot;.
* Shifty Shaffer/Honest John (portrayed by Phil Silvers in 6 episodes) is a con artist that the Clampetts often encounter.
* Homer Cratchit (portrayed by Percy Helton in 6 episodes) is a bookkeeper at the Commerce Bank of Beverly Hills.
* Shad (portrayed by Lloyd &quot;Shad&quot; Heller in 6 episodes) is a blacksmith in Silver Dollar City, and later its mayor.
* Gladys Flatt (portrayed by Joi Lansing in 6 episodes) is Lester Flatt&#x27;s wife.
* Patricia Switzer (portrayed by Judith Jordan in 5 episodes) is a secretary at the Commerce Bank of Beverly Hills.
* Foster Phinney (portrayed by Charles Lane in 5 episodes) is Jane Hathaway&#x27;s landlord.
* Dr. Roy Clyburn (portrayed by Fred Clark in 5 episodes) is a doctor who is often competing with Granny&#x27;s medical skills.
* Sugar Jean Bell (portrayed by Jean Bell in 5 episodes)

==Episodes==


==Theme music==
The show&#x27;s theme song, &quot;The Ballad of Jed Clampett&quot;, was written by producer and writer Paul Henning and originally performed by bluegrass artists Foggy Mountain Boys, led by Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs. The song is sung by Jerry Scoggins (backed by Flatt and Scruggs) over the opening and end credits of each episode. Flatt and Scruggs subsequently cut their own version of the theme (with Flatt singing) for Columbia Records; released as a single, it reached number 44 on &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 pop music chart and number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Country chart (the lone country chart-topper for the duo).

As was customary in the early 1960s, the show&#x27;s advertising sponsors were woven into bumpers involving the cast. To this end, the show sometimes included extra verses of the theme song about Winston cigarettes and Kellogg&#x27;s cereals.

Perry Botkin composed many songs for &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot;. Botkin&#x27;s upbeat tune from &quot;Murder by Contract&quot;, played during scenes of sunny LA, signaled scenes at the Commerce Bank of Beverly Hills.

The six main cast members participated on a 1963 Columbia soundtrack album, which featured original song numbers in character. Additionally, Ebsen, Ryan, and Douglas each made a few solo recordings following the show&#x27;s success, including Ryan&#x27;s 1966 novelty single, &quot;Granny&#x27;s Miniskirt&quot;.

The series generally features no country music beyond the bluegrass banjo theme song, although country star Roy Clark and the team of Flatt and Scruggs occasionally play on the program. Pop singer Pat Boone appears in one episode as himself, under the premise that he hails from the same area of the country as the Clampetts, although Boone is a native of Jacksonville, Florida.

The 1989 film &quot;UHF&quot; featured a &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic parody music video, &quot;Money for Nothing/Beverly Hillbillies*&quot;, combining &quot;The Ballad of Jed Clampett&quot; and English rock band Dire Straits&#x27; 1985 hit song &quot;Money for Nothing&quot;.

==Reception==

&quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot; received generally poor reviews from contemporary critics. &quot;The New York Times&quot; called the show &quot;strained and unfunny&quot;; &quot;Variety&quot; called it &quot;painful to sit through&quot;. Film professor Janet Staiger writes that &quot;the problem for these reviewers was that the show confronted the cultural elite&#x27;s notions of quality entertainment.&quot; The show did receive a somewhat favorable review from noted critic Gilbert Seldes in the December 15, 1962 &quot;TV Guide&quot;: &quot;The whole notion on which &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot; is founded is an encouragement to ignorance... But it &quot;is&quot; funny. What can I do?&quot;

Regardless of the poor reviews, the show shot to the top of the Nielsen ratings shortly after its premiere and stayed there for several seasons. During its first two seasons, it was the number-one program in the U.S; during its second season, it earned some of the highest ratings ever recorded for a half-hour sitcom. The season-two episode &quot;The Giant Jackrabbit&quot; also became the most-watched telecast up to the time of its airing and remains the most-watched half-hour episode of a sitcom, as well. The series enjoyed excellent ratings throughout its run, although it had fallen out of the top 20 most-watched shows during its final season.

In 1997, the season-three episode &quot;Hedda Hopper&#x27;s Hollywood&quot; was ranked number 62 on &quot;&quot;TV Guide&quot;″s 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time&quot;.

===Nielsen ratings===
==Cancellation==
The show was canceled in the spring of 1971 after 274 episodes. The CBS network, prompted by pressure from advertisers seeking a more sophisticated urban audience, decided to refocus its schedule on new urban-themed shows and, to make room for them, the two remaining series of CBS&#x27;s rural-themed comedies were cancelled. This action came to be known as &quot;the Rural Purge&quot;. Pat Buttram, who played Mr. Haney on &quot;Green Acres&quot;, famously remarked, &quot;It was the year CBS cancelled everything with a tree—including Lassie.&quot;

==Reunions==
===1981 CBS film===
In 1981, &quot;Return of the Beverly Hillbillies&quot; television film, written and produced by series creator Henning, was aired on the CBS network. Irene Ryan had died in 1973, and Raymond Bailey had died in 1980. The script acknowledged Granny&#x27;s passing, but featured Imogene Coca as Granny&#x27;s mother. Max Baer decided against reprising the role that both started and stymied his career, so the character of Jethro Bodine was given to another actor, Ray Young.

The film&#x27;s plot had Jed back in his old homestead in Bugtussle, having divided his massive fortune among Elly May and Jethro, both of whom stayed on the West Coast. Jane Hathaway had become a Department of Energy agent and was seeking Granny&#x27;s &quot;White Lightnin&#x27;&quot; recipe to combat the energy crisis. Since Granny had gone on to &quot;her re-ward&quot;, it was up to Granny&#x27;s centenarian &quot;Maw&quot; (Imogene Coca) to divulge the secret brew&#x27;s ingredients. Subplots included Jethro playing an egocentric, starlet-starved Hollywood producer, Jane and her boss (Werner Klemperer) having a romance, and Elly May owning a large petting zoo. The four main characters finally got together by the end of the story.

According to viewer consensus, though filmed a mere decade after the final episode of the series, the movie lacked the series&#x27; original spirit on many fronts, among them being the deaths of Ryan and Bailey and Baer&#x27;s absence, leaving only three of the six original cast members to reprise their respective roles. Further subtracting from the familiarity was that the legendary Clampett mansion (the Sumner Spaulding–designed Chartwell Mansion)—was unavailable for a location shoot as the owners&#x27; lease was too expensive. Henning himself admitted sheer embarrassment when the finished product aired, blaming his inability to rewrite the script due to the 1981 Writers Guild of America strike.

===1993 special===
In 1993, Ebsen, Douglas, and Baer reunited onscreen for the only time in the CBS-TV retrospective television special, &quot;The Legend of the Beverly Hillbillies&quot; hosted by Mac Davis and written by Al Bendix, Tino Insana, and Mike Rowe while Dakin Matthews served as the field interviewer. This special was ranked as the fourth-most watched television program of the week—a major surprise given the mediocre rating for the 1981 television film. It was a rare tribute from the &quot;Tiffany network&quot;, which owed much of its success in the 1960s to the series, but has often seemed embarrassed by it in hindsight, often downplaying the show in retrospective television specials on the network&#x27;s history and rarely inviting cast members to participate in such all-star broadcasts.

&quot;The Legend of The Beverly Hillbillies&quot; special ignored several plot twists of the television film, notably that Jethro was now not a film director but a leading Los Angeles physician. Critter-loving Elly May was still in California with her animals. Jed was back home in the Hills where he declined interviews until now. He also mentioned how he got richer in the hills where he purchased some land and spends some of his days whittling. Nancy Kulp had died in 1991 and was little referred to beyond the multitude of film clips that dotted the special. When asked if he bears no grudge against Drysdale, Jed states &quot;I never bear no grudge against any man. The way I see it, I lost some money, but Mr. Drysdale lost his freedom. I don&#x27;t think I&#x27;m bad off at all&quot;. Jed then tells his interviewer that he goes into town to ring up Elly May and that Jethro brings his children around often. He then takes the man interviewing with him to meet some friends unaware that he struck another area of oil. The scene closes with Jed dancing to the theme song with Jerry Scoggins while Earl Scruggs and Roy Clark (who is substituting for the late Lester Flatt) playing the music. The special was released on VHS tape by CBS/Fox Video in 1995 and as a bonus feature on the Official Third Season DVD Set in 2009.

==Controversy==
In 1974, CBS made a reportedly large cash payment settlement to employee Hamilton Morgen after Morgen sued the network. Morgen claimed CBS appropriated his submitted ideas and script for a show called &quot;Country Cousins&quot; to form &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot;.

==Syndication==
&quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot; is still televised daily around the world in syndication. In the United States, the show has been broadcast on MeTV, Circle, Classic Reruns TV, GAC Family and Laff and was previously on TBS Superstation, Nick at Nite, TV Land, Hallmark Channel, and Superstation WGN. A limited number of episodes from the earlier portions of the series run have turned up in the public domain and as such are seen occasionally on many smaller networks such as Retro TV and MyFamily TV.

MeTV airs &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot; Saturday mornings at 6 a.m. and 6:30 a.m., on Sundays at 2 p.m. and 2:30 p.m. and weeknights at 9 p.m. (all Eastern/Pacific Time)

The show is distributed by CBS Media Ventures, the syndication arm of CBS Television Studios and the CBS network. It was previously distributed by CBS Enterprises, Viacom Enterprises, Paramount Domestic Television, and CBS Paramount Domestic Television (all through corporate changes involving TV distribution rights to the early CBS library). The repeats of the show that debuted on CBS Daytime on September 5–9, 1966, as &quot;Mornin&#x27; Beverly Hillbillies&quot; through September 10, 1971, and on September 13–17, 1971, as &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot; lasted up to winter 1971–72. It aired at 11:00–11:30 a.m. Eastern/10:00-10:30 a.m. Central through September 3, 1971, then moved to 10:30–11:00 a.m. Eastern/9:30–10:00 a.m. Central for the last season on CBS Daytime.

==Home media and legal status==

Fifty-five episodes of the series are in the public domain (all 36 season-one episodes and 19 season-two episodes), because Orion Television, successor to Filmways, neglected to renew their copyrights. As a result, these episodes have been released on home video and DVD on many low-budget labels and shown on low-power television stations and low-budget networks in prints. In many video prints of the public domain episodes, the original theme music has been replaced by generic music due to copyright issues.

Before his death, Paul Henning, whose estate now holds the original film elements to the public domain episodes, authorized MPI Home Video to release the best of the first two seasons on DVD, the first &quot;ultimate collection&quot; of which was released in the fall of 2005. These collections include the original, uncut versions of the first season&#x27;s episodes, complete with their original theme music and opening sponsor plugs. Volume 1 has, among its bonus features, the alternate, unaired version of the pilot film, &quot;The Hillbillies Of Beverly Hills&quot; (the version of the episode that sold the series to CBS), and the &quot;cast commercials&quot; (cast members pitching the products of the show&#x27;s sponsors) originally shown at the end of each episode. The alternate version is also the version seen on Amazon Prime Video.

With the exception of the public domain episodes, the copyrights to the series were renewed by Orion Television. However, any new compilation of &quot;Hillbillies&quot; material will be copyrighted by either MPI Media Group or CBS, depending on the content of the material used.

For many years, 20th Century Fox, through a joint venture with CBS called CBS/Fox Video, released select episodes of &quot;Hillbillies&quot; on videocassette. After Viacom merged with CBS in 1999, Paramount Home Entertainment (the video division of Paramount Pictures, which was acquired by Viacom in 1994) took over the video rights.

In 2006, Paramount announced plans to release the copyrighted episodes in boxed sets through CBS DVD later that year. The show&#x27;s second season (consisting of the public domain episodes from that season) was released on DVD in Region 1 on October 7, 2008, as &quot;...The Official Second Season&quot;. The third season was released on February 17, 2009. Both seasons are available to be purchased together from major online retailers. On October 1, 2013, season four was released on DVD as a Walmart exclusive. It was released as a full retail release on April 15, 2014. On April 26, 2016, CBS/Paramount released the complete first season on DVD. The fifth season was released on October 2, 2018.

==Spin-offs and associated merchandise==
===Theatrical adaptation===
A three-act stage play based on the pilot was written by David Rogers in 1968.

&quot;The Deadly Hillbillies,&quot; an interactive murder mystery, was written by John R. Logue using the core cast of characters as inspiration. This Gypsy Productions Murder Mystery Parody features characters such as Jed Clumpett, Daisy May Mostes, and Jane Hatchaway.

===Comics===
Dell Comics adapted the series into a comic book series in 1962. The art work was provided by Henry Scarpelli. The comic ran for 18 issues, ending in August 1967.

===Feature film===
In 1993, a film version of &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot; was released starring Jim Varney as Jed Clampett and featuring Buddy Ebsen in a cameo as Barnaby Jones, the lead character in his long-running post-&quot;Hillbillies&quot; television series.

=== Computer game ===
Based on &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot; movie, a PC computer adventure game for operating system MS-DOS was developed by Synergistic Software, Inc. and published in 1993 by Capstone Software.

==See also==
* Chartwell Mansion
* Rural purge

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot;; at the Museum of Broadcast Communications
* &quot;Beverly Hillbillies&quot; Theme Bluegrass Lyrics (&quot;The Ballad of Jed Clampett&quot;)
* All 55 public domain episodes (Season 1 and part of 2) at Internet Archive#Moving image collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="50" end="56" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="79" end="82" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="112" end="125" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001214" start="136" end="147" title="Buddy Ebsen" label="Buddy Ebsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q977559" start="149" end="159" title="Irene Ryan" label="Irene Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036761" start="161" end="174" title="Donna Douglas" label="Donna Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302014" start="180" end="192" title="Max Baer Jr." label="Max Baer Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="244" end="259" title="Ozarks" label="Ozark Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="263" end="271" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="289" end="314" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306553" start="374" end="382" title="Filmways" label="Filmways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565973" start="402" end="414" title="Paul Henning" label="Paul Henning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248820" start="510" end="528" title="Petticoat Junction" label="Petticoat Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230693" start="558" end="569" title="Green Acres" label="Green Acres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211343" start="1098" end="1118" title="The Beverly Hillbillies (film)" label="1993 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="1122" end="1138" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448" start="1206" end="1215" title="hillbilly" label="hillbilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="2040" end="2055" title="Double entendre" label="Double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001214" start="2756" end="2767" title="Buddy Ebsen" label="Buddy Ebsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187093" start="3006" end="3015" title="Mayflower" label="Mayflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708515" start="3566" end="3577" title="catchphrase" label="catchphrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q977559" start="3658" end="3668" title="Irene Ryan" label="Irene Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549308" start="4116" end="4136" title="Limestone, Tennessee" label="Limestone, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="4249" end="4260" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="4283" end="4290" title="Baptist church" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299434" start="4308" end="4314" title="immersion baptism" label="dunked"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807922" start="4320" end="4329" title="aspersion" label="sprinkled"/>
<link wikidata="Q917046" start="4422" end="4437" title="moonshine" label="white lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="4462" end="4472" title="anesthesia" label="anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43012" start="4516" end="4521" title="leech" label="leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="4593" end="4612" title="Rheumatism" label="rheumatize medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q690768" start="4751" end="4762" title="black magic" label="black magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="4764" end="4773" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="4798" end="4806" title="kangaroo" label="kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q640645" start="4819" end="4829" title="Black-tailed jackrabbit" label="jackrabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036761" start="5101" end="5114" title="Donna Douglas" label="Donna Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q151092" start="5224" end="5235" title="pin-up girl" label="pin-up girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q845799" start="5254" end="5260" title="tomboy" label="tomboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140647" start="5368" end="5376" title="fastball" label="fastball"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="5387" end="5394" title="wrestling" label="wrassle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21098" start="5681" end="5691" title="Bloodhound" label="Bloodhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q253506" start="6024" end="6032" title="Spinster" label="old maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302014" start="6138" end="6150" title="Max Baer Jr." label="Max Baer Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q798129" start="7226" end="7275" title="Bachelor of Business Administration" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree in business administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q992830" start="7306" end="7328" title="Santa Clara University" label="Santa Clara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q588662" start="7512" end="7521" title="soda jerk" label="soda jerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="7538" end="7542" title="USAF" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q721819" start="8238" end="8247" title="Roy Clark" label="Roy Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q433493" start="8614" end="8628" title="Raymond Bailey" label="Raymond Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077445" start="9476" end="9486" title="Nancy Kulp" label="Nancy Kulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q80687" start="9609" end="9618" title="secretary" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664095" start="10230" end="10247" title="Harriet MacGibbon" label="Harriet MacGibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285376" start="10559" end="10572" title="Bea Benaderet" label="Bea Benaderet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302014" start="10915" end="10927" title="Max Baer Jr." label="Max Baer Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3241349" start="10939" end="10957" title="Linda Kaye Henning" label="Linda Kaye Henning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504668" start="11056" end="11067" title="Shug Fisher" label="Shug Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q228699" start="11439" end="11450" title="Sharon Tate" label="Sharon Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528106" start="11638" end="11650" title="Frank Wilcox" label="Frank Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="11692" end="11697" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051811" start="11818" end="11830" title="Elvia Allman" label="Elvia Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806098" start="11924" end="11937" title="Larry Pennell" label="Larry Pennell"/>
<link wikidata="Q709552" start="12253" end="12272" title="Arthur Gould-Porter" label="Arthur Gould-Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q833899" start="12318" end="12324" title="butler" label="butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861088" start="12359" end="12371" title="Milton Frome" label="Milton Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q216541" start="12517" end="12526" title="chauffeur" label="chauffeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346706" start="12530" end="12542" title="Lester Flatt" label="Lester Flatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q74032" start="12547" end="12559" title="Earl Scruggs" label="Earl Scruggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324592" start="12696" end="12712" title="Richard Caldicot" label="Richard Caldicot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918995" start="12735" end="12744" title="majordomo" label="majordomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="12767" end="12771" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q601358" start="13050" end="13062" title="Phil Silvers" label="Phil Silvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="13083" end="13093" title="Confidence trick" label="con artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q727310" start="13161" end="13173" title="Percy Helton" label="Percy Helton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="13194" end="13204" title="Bookkeeping" label="bookkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="13315" end="13325" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q519604" start="13399" end="13410" title="Joi Lansing" label="Joi Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q634150" start="13602" end="13614" title="Charles Lane (actor, born 1905)" label="Charles Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q618532" start="13654" end="13662" title="landlord" label="landlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484213" start="13696" end="13706" title="Fred Clark" label="Fred Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807747" start="13824" end="13833" title="Jean Bell" label="Jean Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193470" start="13897" end="13907" title="theme music" label="theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="14025" end="14034" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040688" start="14043" end="14062" title="Foggy Mountain Boys" label="Foggy Mountain Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346706" start="14071" end="14083" title="Lester Flatt" label="Lester Flatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q74032" start="14088" end="14100" title="Earl Scruggs" label="Earl Scruggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="14308" end="14324" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="14372" end="14401" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="14440" end="14473" title="Hot Country Songs" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q171494" start="14722" end="14729" title="Winston (cigarette)" label="Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="14745" end="14759" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071754" start="14770" end="14782" title="Perry Botkin" label="Perry Botkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="15344" end="15357" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q342778" start="15508" end="15517" title="Pat Boone" label="Pat Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="15667" end="15688" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093100" start="15711" end="15714" title="UHF (film)" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="15732" end="15761" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301709" start="15788" end="15826" title="Money for Nothing/Beverly Hillbillies*" label="Money for Nothing/Beverly Hillbillies*"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715424" start="15850" end="15876" title="The Ballad of Jed Clampett" label="The Ballad of Jed Clampett"/>
<link wikidata="Q50040" start="15905" end="15917" title="Dire Straits" label="Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165404" start="15944" end="15961" title="Money for Nothing (song)" label="Money for Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16086" end="16104" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="16167" end="16174" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305229" start="16242" end="16255" title="Janet Staiger" label="Janet Staiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q969685" start="16468" end="16482" title="Gilbert Seldes" label="Gilbert Seldes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="16514" end="16522" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="16760" end="16775" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen ratings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17154" end="17196" title="List of most watched television broadcasts#Top 45 network primetime telecasts of all time (1964-Present)" label="most-watched half-hour episode of a sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672335" start="17456" end="17512" title="TV Guide&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time" label="&amp;quot;TV Guide&amp;quot;″s 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="17667" end="17678" title="advertising" label="advertisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q778407" start="17708" end="17713" title="urban culture" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380587" start="17929" end="17940" title="Rural purge" label="Rural Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451247" start="17948" end="17959" title="Pat Buttram" label="Pat Buttram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230693" start="17991" end="18002" title="Green Acres" label="Green Acres"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590906" start="18161" end="18194" title="Return of the Beverly Hillbillies" label="Return of the Beverly Hillbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291067" start="18422" end="18434" title="Imogene Coca" label="Imogene Coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="18928" end="18941" title="1979 energy crisis" label="energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291067" start="19052" end="19064" title="Imogene Coca" label="Imogene Coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q77566" start="19216" end="19232" title="Werner Klemperer" label="Werner Klemperer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158294" start="19774" end="19790" title="Sumner Spaulding" label="Sumner Spaulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q60751843" start="19800" end="19817" title="Chartwell Mansion" label="Chartwell Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580063" start="20034" end="20070" title="1981 Writers Guild of America strike" label="1981 Writers Guild of America strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="20169" end="20175" title="CBS-TV" label="CBS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775143" start="20306" end="20317" title="Tino Insana" label="Tino Insana"/>
<link wikidata="Q721819" start="22008" end="22017" title="Roy Clark" label="Roy Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="22125" end="22138" title="CBS/Fox Video" label="CBS/Fox Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="22671" end="22675" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q81729877" start="22677" end="22683" title="Circle (TV network)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q109927609" start="22685" end="22702" title="Classic Reruns TV" label="Classic Reruns TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q903398" start="22704" end="22714" title="GAC Family" label="GAC Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599473" start="22719" end="22723" title="Laff (TV network)" label="Laff"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="22746" end="22762" title="TBS Superstation" label="TBS Superstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q541051" start="22764" end="22776" title="Nick at Nite" label="Nick at Nite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109582" start="22778" end="22785" title="TV Land" label="TV Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q641746" start="22787" end="22803" title="Hallmark Channel" label="Hallmark Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105409747" start="22809" end="22825" title="Superstation WGN" label="Superstation WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="22922" end="22935" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077724" start="23003" end="23011" title="Retro TV" label="Retro TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945372" start="23016" end="23027" title="MyFamily TV" label="MyFamily TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="23030" end="23034" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009281" start="23234" end="23252" title="CBS Media Ventures" label="CBS Media Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576666" start="23277" end="23299" title="CBS Television Studios" label="CBS Television Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924442" start="23371" end="23389" title="Viacom Enterprises" label="Viacom Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135323" start="23391" end="23420" title="Paramount Domestic Television" label="Paramount Domestic Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009281" start="23426" end="23459" title="CBS Paramount Domestic Television" label="CBS Paramount Domestic Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009243" start="23591" end="23602" title="CBS Daytime" label="CBS Daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="24068" end="24081" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q891732" start="24147" end="24163" title="Orion Television" label="Orion Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717298" start="24660" end="24674" title="MPI Home Video" label="MPI Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="25680" end="25696" title="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="25738" end="25751" title="CBS/Fox Video" label="CBS/Fox Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q214346" start="25829" end="25835" title="Viacom (2005–2019)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135332" start="25861" end="25889" title="Paramount home entertainment" label="Paramount Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009241" start="26093" end="26100" title="CBS Home Entertainment" label="CBS DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289818" start="27136" end="27147" title="Dell Comics" label="Dell Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728055" start="27230" end="27245" title="Henry Scarpelli" label="Henry Scarpelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211343" start="27352" end="27375" title="The Beverly Hillbillies (film)" label="The Beverly Hillbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q276181" start="27404" end="27414" title="Jim Varney" label="Jim Varney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001214" start="27445" end="27456" title="Buddy Ebsen" label="Buddy Ebsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q808420" start="27471" end="27484" title="Barnaby Jones" label="Barnaby Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q108178864" start="27650" end="27676" title="The Beverly Hillbillies (video game)" label="PC computer adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q60751843" start="27809" end="27826" title="Chartwell Mansion" label="Chartwell Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380587" start="27829" end="27840" title="Rural purge" label="Rural purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q840284" start="27922" end="27956" title="Museum of Broadcast Communications" label="Museum of Broadcast Communications"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28115" end="28155" title="Internet Archive#Moving image collection" label="Internet Archive#Moving image collection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3378" wikidata="Q569" url="?curid=3378" title="Beryllium">
<text>Beryllium is a chemical element; it has symbol Be and atomic number 4. It is a steel-gray, hard, strong, lightweight and brittle alkaline earth metal. It is a divalent element that occurs naturally only in combination with other elements to form minerals. Gemstones high in beryllium include beryl (aquamarine, emerald, red beryl) and chrysoberyl. It is a relatively rare element in the universe, usually occurring as a product of the spallation of larger atomic nuclei that have collided with cosmic rays. Within the cores of stars, beryllium is depleted as it is fused into heavier elements. Beryllium constitutes about 0.0004 percent by mass of Earth&#x27;s crust. The world&#x27;s annual beryllium production of 220 tons is usually manufactured by extraction from the mineral beryl, a difficult process because beryllium bonds strongly to oxygen.

In structural applications, the combination of high flexural rigidity, thermal stability, thermal conductivity and low density (1.85 times that of water) make beryllium a desirable aerospace material for aircraft components, missiles, spacecraft, and satellites. Because of its low density and atomic mass, beryllium is relatively transparent to X-rays and other forms of ionizing radiation; therefore, it is the most common window material for X-ray equipment and components of particle detectors. When added as an alloying element to aluminium, copper (notably the alloy beryllium copper), iron, or nickel, beryllium improves many physical properties. For example, tools and components made of beryllium copper alloys are strong and hard and do not create sparks when they strike a steel surface. In air, the surface of beryllium oxidizes readily at room temperature to form a passivation layer 1–10 nm thick that protects it from further oxidation and corrosion. The metal oxidizes in bulk (beyond the passivation layer) when heated above , and burns brilliantly when heated to about .

The commercial use of beryllium requires the use of appropriate dust control equipment and industrial controls at all times because of the toxicity of inhaled beryllium-containing dusts that can cause a chronic life-threatening allergic disease, berylliosis, in some people. Berylliosis is typically manifested by chronic pulmonary fibrosis and, in severe cases, right sided heart failure and death.

==Characteristics==

===Physical properties===
Beryllium is a steel gray and hard metal that is brittle at room temperature and has a close-packed hexagonal crystal structure. It has exceptional stiffness (Young&#x27;s modulus 287 GPa) and a melting point of 1287 °C. The modulus of elasticity of beryllium is approximately 35% greater than that of steel. The combination of this modulus and a relatively low density results in an unusually fast sound conduction speed in beryllium – about 12.9 km/s at ambient conditions. Other significant properties are high specific heat () and thermal conductivity (), which make beryllium the metal with the best heat dissipation characteristics per unit weight. In combination with the relatively low coefficient of linear thermal expansion (11.4 × 10−6 K−1), these characteristics result in a unique stability under conditions of thermal loading.

===Nuclear properties===
Naturally occurring beryllium, save for slight contamination by the cosmogenic radioisotopes, is isotopically pure beryllium-9, which has a nuclear spin of −. Beryllium has a large scattering cross section for high-energy neutrons, about 6 barns for energies above approximately 10 keV. Therefore, it works as a neutron reflector and neutron moderator, effectively slowing the neutrons to the thermal energy range of below 0.03 eV, where the total cross section is at least an order of magnitude lower; the exact value strongly depends on the purity and size of the crystallites in the material.

The single primordial beryllium isotope 9Be also undergoes a (n,2n) neutron reaction with neutron energies over about 1.9 MeV, to produce 8Be, which almost immediately breaks into two alpha particles. Thus, for high-energy neutrons, beryllium is a neutron multiplier, releasing more neutrons than it absorbs. This nuclear reaction is:
: + n → 2 + 2 n

Neutrons are liberated when beryllium nuclei are struck by energetic alpha particles producing the nuclear reaction
: + → + n
where is an alpha particle and is a carbon-12 nucleus.
Beryllium also releases neutrons under bombardment by gamma rays. Thus, natural beryllium bombarded either by alphas or gammas from a suitable radioisotope is a key component of most radioisotope-powered nuclear reaction neutron sources for the laboratory production of free neutrons.

Small amounts of tritium are liberated when nuclei absorb low energy neutrons in the three-step nuclear reaction
: + n → + ,    → + β−,    + n → + 
 has a half-life of only 0.8 seconds, β− is an electron, and has a high neutron absorption cross section. Tritium is a radioisotope of concern in nuclear reactor waste streams.

===Optical properties===
As a metal, beryllium is transparent or translucent to most wavelengths of X-rays and gamma rays, making it useful for the output windows of X-ray tubes and other such apparatus.

===Isotopes and nucleosynthesis===

A very small fraction – 10−9 – of the primordial atoms created in the Big Bang nucleosynthesis were 7Be. This is a consequence of the low density of matter when the temperature of the universe has cooled enough for small nuclei to be stable. Creating such nuclei require nuclear reaction collisions that are rare. 7Be is unstable and decays by electron capture into 7Li with a half-life of 53 days, but in the early universe this decay channel was unavailable due to atoms being fully ionized. The conversion of 7Be to Li was only complete near the time of recombination.

Both stable and unstable isotopes of beryllium are created in stars, but the radioisotopes do not last long. It is believed that the beryllium in the universe was created in the interstellar medium when cosmic rays induced fission in heavier elements found in interstellar gas and dust, a process called cosmic ray spallation. Natural beryllium is solely made up of the stable isotope beryllium-9. Beryllium is the only monoisotopic element with an even atomic number.
Radioactive cosmogenic 10Be is produced in the atmosphere of the Earth by the cosmic ray spallation of oxygen. 10Be accumulates at the soil surface, where its relatively long half-life (1.36 million years) permits a long residence time before decaying to boron-10. Thus, 10Be and its daughter products are used to examine natural soil erosion, soil formation and the development of lateritic soils, and as a proxy for measurement of the variations in solar activity and the age of ice cores. The production of 10Be is inversely proportional to solar activity, because increased solar wind during periods of high solar activity decreases the flux of galactic cosmic rays that reach the Earth. Nuclear explosions also form 10Be by the reaction of fast neutrons with 13C in the carbon dioxide in air. This is one of the indicators of past activity at nuclear weapon test sites.
The isotope 7Be (half-life 53 days) is also cosmogenic, and shows an atmospheric abundance inversely proportional to solar activity too.

8Be has a very short half-life of about 8 s that contributes to its significant cosmological role, as elements heavier than beryllium could not have been produced by nuclear fusion in the Big Bang. This is due to the lack of sufficient time during the Big Bang&#x27;s nucleosynthesis phase to produce carbon by the fusion of 4He nuclei and the very low concentrations of available beryllium-8. British astronomer Sir Fred Hoyle first showed that the energy levels of 8Be and 12C allow carbon production by the so-called triple-alpha process in helium-fueled stars where more nucleosynthesis time is available. This process allows carbon to be produced in stars, but not in the Big Bang. Star-created carbon (the basis of carbon-based life) is thus a component in the elements in the gas and dust ejected by AGB stars and supernovae (see also Big Bang nucleosynthesis), as well as the creation of all other elements with atomic numbers larger than that of carbon.

The 2s electrons of beryllium may contribute to chemical bonding. Therefore, when 7Be decays by L-electron capture, it does so by taking electrons from its atomic orbitals that may be participating in bonding. This makes its decay rate dependent to a measurable degree upon its chemical surroundings – a rare occurrence in nuclear decay.

The exotic isotopes 11Be and 14Be are known to exhibit a nuclear halo. This phenomenon can be understood as the nuclei of 11Be and 14Be have, respectively, 1 and 4 neutrons orbiting substantially outside the expected nuclear radius.

==Occurrence==
The Sun has a concentration of 0.1 parts per billion (ppb) of beryllium. Beryllium has a concentration of 2 to 6 parts per million (ppm) in the Earth&#x27;s crust and is the 47th most abundant element. It is most concentrated in the soils at 6 ppm. Trace amounts of 9Be are found in the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. The concentration of beryllium in sea water is 0.2–0.6 parts per trillion. In stream water, however, beryllium is more abundant with a concentration of 0.1 ppb.

Beryllium is found in over 100 minerals, but most are uncommon to rare. The more common beryllium containing minerals include: bertrandite (Be4Si2O7(OH)2), beryl (Al2Be3Si6O18), chrysoberyl (Al2BeO4) and phenakite (Be2SiO4). Precious forms of beryl are aquamarine, red beryl and emerald. 
The green color in gem-quality forms of beryl comes from varying amounts of chromium (about 2% for emerald).

The two main ores of beryllium, beryl and bertrandite, are found in Argentina, Brazil, India, Madagascar, Russia and the United States. Total world reserves of beryllium ore are greater than 400,000 tonnes.

==Production==
The extraction of beryllium from its compounds is a difficult process due to its high affinity for oxygen at elevated temperatures, and its ability to reduce water when its oxide film is removed. Currently the United States, China and Kazakhstan are the only three countries involved in the industrial-scale extraction of beryllium. Kazakhstan produces beryllium from a concentrate stockpiled before the breakup of the Soviet Union around 1991. This resource had become nearly depleted by mid-2010s.

Production of beryllium in Russia was halted in 1997, and is planned to be resumed in the 2020s.

Beryllium is most commonly extracted from the mineral beryl, which is either sintered using an extraction agent or melted into a soluble mixture. The sintering process involves mixing beryl with sodium fluorosilicate and soda at to form sodium fluoroberyllate, aluminium oxide and silicon dioxide. Beryllium hydroxide is precipitated from a solution of sodium fluoroberyllate and sodium hydroxide in water. The extraction of beryllium using the melt method involves grinding beryl into a powder and heating it to . The melt is quickly cooled with water and then reheated in concentrated sulfuric acid, mostly yielding beryllium sulfate and aluminium sulfate. Aqueous ammonia is then used to remove the aluminium and sulfur, leaving beryllium hydroxide.

Beryllium hydroxide created using either the sinter or melt method is then converted into beryllium fluoride or beryllium chloride. To form the fluoride, aqueous ammonium hydrogen fluoride is added to beryllium hydroxide to yield a precipitate of ammonium tetrafluoroberyllate, which is heated to to form beryllium fluoride. Heating the fluoride to with magnesium forms finely divided beryllium, and additional heating to creates the compact metal. Heating beryllium hydroxide forms beryllium oxide, which becomes beryllium chloride when combined with carbon and chlorine. Electrolysis of molten beryllium chloride is then used to obtain the metal.

==Chemical properties==

A beryllium atom has the electronic configuration [He] 2s2. The predominant oxidation state of beryllium is +2; the beryllium atom has lost both of its valence electrons. Lower oxidation states complexes of beryllium are exceedingly rare. For example, bis(carbene) compounds proposed to contain beryllium in the 0 and +1 oxidation state have been reported, although these claims have proved controversial.
A stable complex with a Be-Be bond, which formally features beryllium in the +1 oxidation state, has been described. Beryllium&#x27;s chemical behavior is largely a result of its small atomic and ionic radii. It thus has very high ionization potentials and does not form divalent cations. Instead it forms two covalent bonds with a tendency to polymerize, as in solid BeCl2.. Its chemistry has similarities to that of aluminium, an example of a diagonal relationship.

At room temperature, the surface of beryllium forms a 1−10 nm-thick oxide passivation layer that prevents further reactions with air, except for gradual thickening of the oxide up to about 25 nm. When heated above about 500 °C, oxidation into the bulk metal progresses along grain boundaries. Once the metal is ignited in air by heating above the oxide melting point around 2500 °C, beryllium burns brilliantly, forming a mixture of beryllium oxide and beryllium nitride. Beryllium dissolves readily in non-oxidizing acids, such as HCl and diluted H2SO4, but not in nitric acid or water as this forms the oxide. This behavior is similar to that of aluminium. Beryllium also dissolves and reacts with alkali solutions.

Binary compounds of beryllium(II) are polymeric in the solid state. BeF2 has a silica-like structure with corner-shared BeF4 tetrahedra. BeCl2 and BeBr2 have chain structures with edge-shared tetrahedra. Beryllium oxide, BeO, is a white refractory solid which has a wurtzite crystal structure and a thermal conductivity as high as some metals. BeO is amphoteric. Beryllium sulfide, selenide and telluride are known, all having the zincblende structure. Beryllium nitride, Be3N2, is a high-melting-point compound which is readily hydrolyzed. Beryllium azide, BeN6 is known and beryllium phosphide, Be3P2 has a similar structure to Be3N2. A number of beryllium borides are known, such as Be5B, Be4B, Be2B, BeB2, BeB6 and BeB12. Beryllium carbide, Be2C, is a refractory brick-red compound that reacts with water to give methane. Beryllium silicides have been identified in the form of variously sized nanoclusters, formed through a spontaneous reaction between pure beryllium and silicon. The halides BeX2 (X = F, Cl, Br, and I) have a linear monomeric molecular structure in the gas phase.

Beryllium is a strong electron acceptor leading to Be bonding effects similar to hydrogen bonding.

===Aqueous solutions===

Solutions of beryllium salts, such as beryllium sulfate and beryllium nitrate, are acidic because of hydrolysis of the [Be(H2O)4]2+ ion. The concentration of the first hydrolysis product, [Be(H2O)3(OH)]+, is less than 1% of the beryllium concentration. The most stable hydrolysis product is the trimeric ion [Be3(OH)3(H2O)6]3+. Beryllium hydroxide, Be(OH)2, is insoluble in water at pH 5 or more. Consequently, beryllium compounds are generally insoluble at biological pH. Because of this, inhalation of beryllium metal dust leads to the development of the fatal condition of berylliosis. Be(OH)2 dissolves in strongly alkaline solutions.

Beryllium(II) forms few complexes with monodentate ligands because the water molecules in the aquo-ion, [Be(H2O)4]2+ are bound very strongly to the beryllium ion. Notable exceptions are the series of water-soluble complexes with the fluoride ion: 

Beryllium(II) forms many complexes with bidentate ligands containing oxygen-donor atoms. The species [Be3O(H2PO4)6]2- is notable for having a 3-coordinate oxide ion at its center. Basic beryllium acetate, Be4O(OAc)6, has an oxide ion surrounded by a tetrahedron of beryllium atoms.

With organic ligands, such as the malonate ion, the acid deprotonates when forming the complex. The donor atoms are two oxygens.
:

The formation of a complex is in competition with the metal ion-hydrolysis reaction and mixed complexes with both the anion and the hydroxide ion are also formed. For example, derivatives of the cyclic trimer are known, with a bidentate ligand replacing one or more pairs of water molecules.

Aliphatic hydroxycarboxylic acids such as glycolic acid form rather weak monodentate complexes in solution, in which the hydroxyl group remains intact. In the solid state, the hydroxyl group may deprotonate: a hexamer, , was isolated long ago. Aromatic hydroxy ligands (i.e. phenols) form relatively strong complexes. For example, log K1 and log K2 values of 12.2 and 9.3 have been reported for complexes with tiron.

Beryllium has generally a rather poor affinity for ammine ligands. There are many early reports of complexes with amino acids, but unfortunately they are not reliable as the concomitant hydrolysis reactions were not understood at the time of publication. Values for log β of ca. 6 to 7 have been reported. The degree of formation is small because of competition with hydrolysis reactions.

===Organic chemistry===

Organoberyllium chemistry is limited to academic research due to the cost and toxicity of beryllium, beryllium derivatives and reagents required for the introduction of beryllium, such as beryllium chloride. Organometallic beryllium compounds are known to be highly reactive. Examples of known organoberyllium compounds are dineopentylberyllium, beryllocene (Cp2Be), diallylberyllium (by exchange reaction of diethyl beryllium with triallyl boron), bis(1,3-trimethylsilylallyl)beryllium, Be(mes)2, and (beryllium(I) complex) diberyllocene. Ligands can also be aryls and alkynyls.

==History==
The mineral beryl, which contains beryllium, has been used at least since the Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt. In the first century CE, Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder mentioned in his encyclopedia &quot;Natural History&quot; that beryl and emerald (&quot;smaragdus&quot;) were similar. The Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis, written in the third or fourth century CE, contains notes on how to prepare artificial emerald and beryl.
Early analyses of emeralds and beryls by Martin Heinrich Klaproth, Torbern Olof Bergman, Franz Karl Achard, and always yielded similar elements, leading to the mistaken conclusion that both substances are aluminium silicates. Mineralogist René Just Haüy discovered that both crystals are geometrically identical, and he asked chemist Louis-Nicolas Vauquelin for a chemical analysis.

In a 1798 paper read before the Institut de France, Vauquelin reported that he found a new &quot;earth&quot; by dissolving aluminium hydroxide from emerald and beryl in an additional alkali. The editors of the journal &quot;Annales de chimie et de physique&quot; named the new earth &quot;glucine&quot; for the sweet taste of some of its compounds. The name &quot;beryllium&quot; was first used by Friedrich Wöhler in 1828. Both beryllium and glucinum were used concurrently until 1949, when the IUPAC adopted beryllium as the standard name of the element.
Friedrich Wöhler and Antoine Bussy independently isolated beryllium in 1828 by the chemical reaction of metallic potassium with beryllium chloride, as follows:
:BeCl2 + 2 K → 2 KCl + Be
Using an alcohol lamp, Wöhler heated alternating layers of beryllium chloride and potassium in a wired-shut platinum crucible. The above reaction immediately took place and caused the crucible to become white hot. Upon cooling and washing the resulting gray-black powder, he saw that it was made of fine particles with a dark metallic luster. The highly reactive potassium had been produced by the electrolysis of its compounds. He did not succeed to melt the beryllium particles.

The direct electrolysis of a molten mixture of beryllium fluoride and sodium fluoride by Paul Lebeau in 1898 resulted in the first pure (99.5 to 99.8%) samples of beryllium. However, industrial production started only after the First World War. The original industrial involvement included subsidiaries and scientists related to the Union Carbide and Carbon Corporation in Cleveland, Ohio, and Siemens &amp; Halske AG in Berlin. In the US, the process was ruled by Hugh S. Cooper, director of The Kemet Laboratories Company. In Germany, the first commercially successful process for producing beryllium was developed in 1921 by Alfred Stock and Hans Goldschmidt.

A sample of beryllium was bombarded with alpha rays from the decay of radium in a 1932 experiment by James Chadwick that uncovered the existence of the neutron. This same method is used in one class of radioisotope-based laboratory neutron sources that produce 30 neutrons for every million α particles.

Beryllium production saw a rapid increase during World War II due to the rising demand for hard beryllium-copper alloys and phosphors for fluorescent lights. Most early fluorescent lamps used zinc orthosilicate with varying content of beryllium to emit greenish light. Small additions of magnesium tungstate improved the blue part of the spectrum to yield an acceptable white light. Halophosphate-based phosphors replaced beryllium-based phosphors after beryllium was found to be toxic.

Electrolysis of a mixture of beryllium fluoride and sodium fluoride was used to isolate beryllium during the 19th century. The metal&#x27;s high melting point makes this process more energy-consuming than corresponding processes used for the alkali metals. Early in the 20th century, the production of beryllium by the thermal decomposition of beryllium iodide was investigated following the success of a similar process for the production of zirconium, but this process proved to be uneconomical for volume production.

Pure beryllium metal did not become readily available until 1957, even though it had been used as an alloying metal to harden and toughen copper much earlier. Beryllium could be produced by reducing beryllium compounds such as beryllium chloride with metallic potassium or sodium. Currently, most beryllium is produced by reducing beryllium fluoride with magnesium. The price on the American market for vacuum-cast beryllium ingots was about $338 per pound ($745 per kilogram) in 2001.

Between 1998 and 2008, the world&#x27;s production of beryllium had decreased from 343 to about 200 tonnes. It then increased to 230 metric tons by 2018, of which 170 tonnes came from the United States.

===Etymology===
Beryllium was named for the semiprecious mineral beryl, from which it was first isolated. Martin Klaproth, having independently determined that beryl and emerald share an element, preferred the name &quot;beryllina&quot; due to the fact that yttria also formed sweet salts.

Although Humphry Davy failed to isolate it, he proposed the name &quot;glucium&quot; for the new metal, derived from the name &quot;glucina&quot; for the earth it was found in; altered forms of this name, &quot;glucinium&quot; or &quot;glucinum&quot; (symbol Gl) continued to be used into the 20th century.

==Applications==

===Radiation windows===
Because of its low atomic number and very low absorption for X-rays, the oldest and still one of the most important applications of beryllium is in radiation windows for X-ray tubes. Extreme demands are placed on purity and cleanliness of beryllium to avoid artifacts in the X-ray images. Thin beryllium foils are used as radiation windows for X-ray detectors, and their extremely low absorption minimizes the heating effects caused by high-intensity, low energy X-rays typical of synchrotron radiation. Vacuum-tight windows and beam-tubes for radiation experiments on synchrotrons are manufactured exclusively from beryllium. In scientific setups for various X-ray emission studies (e.g., energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) the sample holder is usually made of beryllium because its emitted X-rays have much lower energies (≈100 eV) than X-rays from most studied materials.

Low atomic number also makes beryllium relatively transparent to energetic particles. Therefore, it is used to build the beam pipe around the collision region in particle physics setups, such as all four main detector experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (ALICE, ATLAS, CMS, LHCb), the Tevatron and at SLAC. The low density of beryllium allows collision products to reach the surrounding detectors without significant interaction, its stiffness allows a powerful vacuum to be produced within the pipe to minimize interaction with gases, its thermal stability allows it to function correctly at temperatures of only a few degrees above absolute zero, and its diamagnetic nature keeps it from interfering with the complex multipole magnet systems used to steer and focus the particle beams.

===Mechanical applications===
Because of its stiffness, light weight and dimensional stability over a wide temperature range, beryllium metal is used for lightweight structural components in the defense and aerospace industries in high-speed aircraft, guided missiles, spacecraft, and satellites, including the James Webb Space Telescope. Several liquid-fuel rockets have used rocket nozzles made of pure beryllium. Beryllium powder was itself studied as a rocket fuel, but this use has never materialized. A small number of extreme high-end bicycle frames have been built with beryllium. From 1998 to 2000, the McLaren Formula One team used Mercedes-Benz engines with beryllium-aluminium alloy pistons. The use of beryllium engine components was banned following a protest by Scuderia Ferrari.

Mixing about 2.0% beryllium into copper forms an alloy called beryllium copper that is six times stronger than copper alone. Beryllium alloys are used in many applications because of their combination of elasticity, high electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity, high strength and hardness, nonmagnetic properties, as well as good corrosion and fatigue resistance. These applications include non-sparking tools that are used near flammable gases (beryllium nickel), springs, membranes (beryllium nickel and beryllium iron) used in surgical instruments, and high temperature devices. As little as 50 parts per million of beryllium alloyed with liquid magnesium leads to a significant increase in oxidation resistance and decrease in flammability.
The high elastic stiffness of beryllium has led to its extensive use in precision instrumentation, e.g. in inertial guidance systems and in the support mechanisms for optical systems. Beryllium-copper alloys were also applied as a hardening agent in &quot;Jason pistols&quot;, which were used to strip the paint from the hulls of ships.

In sound amplification systems, the speed at which sound travels directly affects the resonant frequency of the amplifier, thereby influencing the range of audible high-frequency sounds. Beryllium stands out due to its exceptionally high speed of sound propagation compared to other metals. This unique property allows beryllium to achieve higher resonant frequencies, making it an ideal material for use as a diaphragm in high-quality loudspeakers.

Beryllium was used for cantilevers in high-performance phonograph cartridge styli, where its extreme stiffness and low density allowed for tracking weights to be reduced to 1 gram while still tracking high frequency passages with minimal distortion.

An earlier major application of beryllium was in brakes for military airplanes because of its hardness, high melting point, and exceptional ability to dissipate heat. Environmental considerations have led to substitution by other materials.

A metal matrix composite material combining beryllium with aluminium developed under the trade name AlBeMet for the high performance aerospace industry has low weight but four times the stiffness of aluminum alone.

===Mirrors===
Beryllium mirrors are of particular interest. Large-area mirrors, frequently with a honeycomb support structure, are used, for example, in meteorological satellites where low weight and long-term dimensional stability are critical. Smaller beryllium mirrors are used in optical guidance systems and in fire-control systems, e.g. in the German-made Leopard 1 and Leopard 2 main battle tanks. In these systems, very rapid movement of the mirror is required, which again dictates low mass and high rigidity. Usually the beryllium mirror is coated with hard electroless nickel plating which can be more easily polished to a finer optical finish than beryllium. In some applications, the beryllium blank is polished without any coating. This is particularly applicable to cryogenic operation where thermal expansion mismatch can cause the coating to buckle.

The James Webb Space Telescope has 18 hexagonal beryllium sections for its mirrors, each plated with a thin layer of gold. Because JWST will face a temperature of 33 K, the mirror is made of gold-plated beryllium, which is capable of handling extreme cold better than glass. Beryllium contracts and deforms less than glass and remains more uniform in such temperatures. For the same reason, the optics of the Spitzer Space Telescope are entirely built of beryllium metal.

===Magnetic applications===
Beryllium is non-magnetic. Therefore, tools fabricated out of beryllium-based materials are used by naval or military explosive ordnance disposal teams for work on or near naval mines, since these mines commonly have magnetic fuzes. They are also found in maintenance and construction materials near magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines because of the high magnetic fields generated.

===Nuclear applications===
High purity beryllium can be used in nuclear reactors as a moderator, reflector, or as cladding on fuel elements.
Thin plates or foils of beryllium are sometimes used in nuclear weapon designs as the very outer layer of the plutonium pits in the primary stages of thermonuclear bombs, placed to surround the fissile material. These layers of beryllium are good &quot;pushers&quot; for the implosion of the plutonium-239, and they are good neutron reflectors, just as in beryllium-moderated nuclear reactors.

Beryllium is commonly used in some neutron sources in laboratory devices in which relatively few neutrons are needed (rather than having to use a nuclear reactor or a particle accelerator-powered neutron generator). For this purpose, a target of beryllium-9 is bombarded with energetic alpha particles from a radioisotope such as polonium-210, radium-226, plutonium-238, or americium-241. In the nuclear reaction that occurs, a beryllium nucleus is transmuted into carbon-12, and one free neutron is emitted, traveling in about the same direction as the alpha particle was heading. Such alpha decay-driven beryllium neutron sources, named &quot;urchin&quot; neutron initiators, were used in some early atomic bombs. Neutron sources in which beryllium is bombarded with gamma rays from a gamma decay radioisotope, are also used to produce laboratory neutrons.

Beryllium is used in fuel fabrication for CANDU reactors. The fuel elements have small appendages that are resistance brazed to the fuel cladding using an induction brazing process with Be as the braze filler material. Bearing pads are brazed in place to prevent contact between the fuel bundle and the pressure tube containing it, and inter-element spacer pads are brazed on to prevent element to element contact.

Beryllium is used at the Joint European Torus nuclear-fusion research laboratory, and it will be used in the more advanced ITER to condition the components which face the plasma. Beryllium has been proposed as a cladding material for nuclear fuel rods, because of its good combination of mechanical, chemical, and nuclear properties. Beryllium fluoride is one of the constituent salts of the eutectic salt mixture FLiBe, which is used as a solvent, moderator and coolant in many hypothetical molten salt reactor designs, including the liquid fluoride thorium reactor (LFTR).

===Acoustics===
The low weight and high rigidity of beryllium make it useful as a material for high-frequency speaker drivers. Because beryllium is expensive (many times more than titanium), hard to shape due to its brittleness, and toxic if mishandled, beryllium tweeters are limited to high-end home, pro audio, and public address applications. Some high-fidelity products have been fraudulently claimed to be made of the material.

Some high-end phonograph cartridges used beryllium cantilevers to improve tracking by reducing mass.

===Electronic===
Beryllium is a p-type dopant in III-V compound semiconductors. It is widely used in materials such as GaAs, AlGaAs, InGaAs and InAlAs grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Cross-rolled beryllium sheet is an excellent structural support for printed circuit boards in surface-mount technology. In critical electronic applications, beryllium is both a structural support and heat sink. The application also requires a coefficient of thermal expansion that is well matched to the alumina and polyimide-glass substrates. The beryllium-beryllium oxide composite &quot;E-Materials&quot; have been specially designed for these electronic applications and have the additional advantage that the thermal expansion coefficient can be tailored to match diverse substrate materials.

Beryllium oxide is useful for many applications that require the combined properties of an electrical insulator and an excellent heat conductor, with high strength and hardness and a very high melting point. Beryllium oxide is frequently used as an insulator base plate in high-power transistors in radio frequency transmitters for telecommunications. Beryllium oxide is being studied for use in increasing the thermal conductivity of uranium dioxide nuclear fuel pellets. Beryllium compounds were used in fluorescent lighting tubes, but this use was discontinued because of the disease berylliosis which developed in the workers who were making the tubes.

===Medical applications===
Beryllium is a component of several dental alloys. Beryllium is used in X-ray windows because it is transparent to X-rays, allowing for clearer and more efficient imaging. In medical imaging equipment, such as CT scanners and mammography machines, beryllium&#x27;s strength and light weight enhance durability and performance. Beryllium is used in analytical equipment for blood, HIV, and other diseases. Beryllium alloys are used in surgical instruments, optical mirrors, and laser systems for medical treatments.

==Toxicity and safety==

===Biological effects===
Approximately 35 micrograms of beryllium is found in the average human body, an amount not considered harmful. Beryllium is chemically similar to magnesium and therefore can displace it from enzymes, which causes them to malfunction. Because Be2+ is a highly charged and small ion, it can easily get into many tissues and cells, where it specifically targets cell nuclei, inhibiting many enzymes, including those used for synthesizing DNA. Its toxicity is exacerbated by the fact that the body has no means to control beryllium levels, and once inside the body, beryllium cannot be removed.

===Inhalation===
Chronic beryllium disease (CBD), or berylliosis, is a pulmonary and systemic granulomatous disease caused by inhalation of dust or fumes contaminated with beryllium; either large amounts over a short time or small amounts over a long time can lead to this ailment. Symptoms of the disease can take up to five years to develop; about a third of patients with it die and the survivors are left disabled. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) lists beryllium and beryllium compounds as Category 1 carcinogens.

===Occupational exposure===
In the US, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has designated a permissible exposure limit (PEL) for beryllium and beryllium compounds of 0.2 μg/m3 as an 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA) and 2.0 μg/m3 as a short-term exposure limit over a sampling period of 15 minutes. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) upper-bound threshold of 0.5 μg/m3. The IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health) value is 4 mg/m3. The toxicity of beryllium is on par with other toxic metalloids/metals, such as arsenic and mercury.

Exposure to beryllium in the workplace can lead to a sensitized immune response, and over time development of berylliosis. NIOSH in the United States researches these effects in collaboration with a major manufacturer of beryllium products. NIOSH also conducts genetic research on sensitization and CBD, independently of this collaboration.

Acute beryllium disease in the form of chemical pneumonitis was first reported in Europe in 1933 and in the United States in 1943. A survey found that about 5% of workers in plants manufacturing fluorescent lamps in 1949 in the United States had beryllium-related lung diseases. Chronic berylliosis resembles sarcoidosis in many respects, and the differential diagnosis is often difficult. It killed some early workers in nuclear weapons design, such as Herbert L. Anderson.

Beryllium may be found in coal slag. When the slag is formulated into an abrasive agent for blasting paint and rust from hard surfaces, the beryllium can become airborne and become a source of exposure.

Although the use of beryllium compounds in fluorescent lighting tubes was discontinued in 1949, potential for exposure to beryllium exists in the nuclear and aerospace industries, in the refining of beryllium metal and the melting of beryllium-containing alloys, in the manufacturing of electronic devices, and in the handling of other beryllium-containing material.

===Detection===
Early researchers undertook the highly hazardous practice of identifying beryllium and its various compounds from its sweet taste. A modern test for beryllium in air and on surfaces has been developed and published as an international voluntary consensus standard, ASTM D7202. The procedure uses dilute ammonium bifluoride for dissolution and fluorescence detection with beryllium bound to sulfonated hydroxybenzoquinoline, allowing up to 100 times more sensitive detection than the recommended limit for beryllium concentration in the workplace. Fluorescence increases with increasing beryllium concentration. The new procedure has been successfully tested on a variety of surfaces and is effective for the dissolution and detection of refractory beryllium oxide and siliceous beryllium in minute concentrations (ASTM D7458). The NIOSH Manual of Analytical Methods contains methods for measuring occupational exposures to beryllium.

==Notes==
==References==
==Cited sources==
* 

==Further reading==
* Mroz MM, Balkissoon R, and Newman LS. &quot;Beryllium&quot;. In: Bingham E, Cohrssen B, Powell C (eds.) &quot;Patty&#x27;s Toxicology&quot;, Fifth Edition. New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons 2001, 177–220.
* Walsh, KA, &quot;Beryllium Chemistry and Processing&quot;. Vidal, EE. et al. Eds. 2009, Materials Park, OH:ASM International.
* Beryllium Lymphocyte Proliferation Testing (BeLPT). DOE Specification 1142–2001. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy, 2001.
*2007, Eric Scerri,&quot;The periodic table: Its story and its significance,&quot; Oxford University Press, New York, 

==External links==

* ATSDR Case Studies in Environmental Medicine: Beryllium Toxicity U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
* It&#x27;s Elemental – Beryllium
* MSDS: ESPI Metals
* Beryllium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health – Beryllium Page
* National Supplemental Screening Program (Oak Ridge Associated Universities)
* Historic Price of Beryllium in USA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="0" end="9" title="Beryllium" label="Beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="15" end="31" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="40" end="46" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="47" end="49" title="Beryllium" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="54" end="67" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563" start="129" end="149" title="alkaline earth metal" label="alkaline earth metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="159" end="167" title="divalent" label="divalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="256" end="265" title="Gemstones" label="Gemstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q103480" start="292" end="297" title="beryl" label="beryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q58959" start="299" end="309" title="Aquamarine (gemstone)" label="aquamarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="311" end="318" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q429651" start="320" end="329" title="red beryl" label="red beryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q422179" start="335" end="346" title="chrysoberyl" label="chrysoberyl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="356" end="371" title="Abundance of the chemical elements#Universe" label="relatively rare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="387" end="395" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q576621" start="435" end="445" title="spallation" label="spallation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="494" end="504" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q103480" start="780" end="785" title="beryl" label="beryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="843" end="849" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459050" start="904" end="921" title="flexural rigidity" label="flexural rigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q902494" start="923" end="940" title="Thermostability" label="thermal stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="942" end="962" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="971" end="978" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="1033" end="1042" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="1077" end="1084" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="1087" end="1097" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="1103" end="1113" title="satellites" label="satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="1146" end="1157" title="atomic mass" label="atomic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="1198" end="1203" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="1224" end="1242" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q736634" start="1331" end="1348" title="particle detector" label="particle detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="1368" end="1373" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="1388" end="1397" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="1399" end="1405" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q905582" start="1425" end="1441" title="beryllium copper" label="beryllium copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="1444" end="1448" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="1453" end="1459" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="1565" end="1570" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q240553" start="1576" end="1582" title="Strength of materials" label="strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="1587" end="1591" title="Hardness" label="hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="1731" end="1748" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="passivation layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="1857" end="1868" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="passivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="2081" end="2089" title="toxicity" label="toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q684810" start="2188" end="2199" title="berylliosis" label="berylliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32446" start="2264" end="2282" title="pulmonary fibrosis" label="pulmonary fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="2317" end="2330" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="2425" end="2430" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="2500" end="2517" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q569057" start="2538" end="2547" title="stiffness" label="stiffness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091584" start="2549" end="2569" title="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus" label="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="2585" end="2598" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q192005" start="2615" end="2636" title="modulus of elasticity" label="modulus of elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="2789" end="2811" title="Speed of sound" label="sound conduction speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="2846" end="2864" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="ambient conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="3106" end="3123" title="thermal expansion" label="thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174319" start="3325" end="3335" title="cosmogenic" label="cosmogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="3397" end="3409" title="Spin (physics)" label="nuclear spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128025" start="3449" end="3462" title="cross section (physics)" label="cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q209351" start="3497" end="3502" title="Barn (unit)" label="barns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889369" start="3569" end="3586" title="neutron reflector" label="neutron reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q466714" start="3591" end="3608" title="neutron moderator" label="neutron moderator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="3650" end="3664" title="Neutron temperature" label="thermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13099310" start="3992" end="3995" title="beryllium-8" label="8Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="4244" end="4250" title="Atomic nucleus" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="4275" end="4289" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058364" start="4368" end="4377" title="carbon-12" label="carbon-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q238323" start="4591" end="4607" title="nuclear reaction" label="nuclear reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q926734" start="4608" end="4622" title="neutron source" label="neutron source"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="4690" end="4697" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="5049" end="5075" title="transparency and translucency" label="transparent or translucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="5099" end="5104" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="5110" end="5119" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q174443" start="5165" end="5175" title="X-ray tube" label="X-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q837317" start="5310" end="5334" title="Big Bang nucleosynthesis" label="Big Bang nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="5584" end="5600" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373825" start="5797" end="5810" title="recombination (cosmology)" label="recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="6016" end="6027" title="cosmic rays" label="cosmic rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062473" start="6117" end="6138" title="cosmic ray spallation" label="cosmic ray spallation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588104" start="6233" end="6253" title="monoisotopic element" label="monoisotopic element"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566171" start="6305" end="6309" title="beryllium-10" label="10Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="6329" end="6352" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="atmosphere of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062473" start="6360" end="6381" title="cosmic ray spallation" label="cosmic ray spallation"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="6385" end="6391" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="6417" end="6421" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="6457" end="6466" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030793" start="6503" end="6517" title="residence time (fluid dynamics)" label="residence time"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="6537" end="6542" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="6612" end="6624" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q282070" start="6626" end="6640" title="soil formation" label="soil formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622845" start="6664" end="6679" title="laterite" label="lateritic soils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000285" start="6690" end="6695" title="Proxy (climate)" label="proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49385" start="6733" end="6747" title="solar variation" label="solar activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q258914" start="6763" end="6771" title="ice core" label="ice core"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="6860" end="6870" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="7130" end="7149" title="nuclear weapon test" label="nuclear weapon test"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="7483" end="7491" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q471702" start="7563" end="7578" title="nucleosynthesis" label="nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="7697" end="7707" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="7712" end="7722" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q336225" start="7815" end="7835" title="triple-alpha process" label="triple-alpha process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215735" start="8016" end="8033" title="carbon-based life" label="carbon-based life"/>
<link wikidata="Q50089" start="8102" end="8110" title="AGB star" label="AGB star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="8116" end="8125" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q837317" start="8137" end="8161" title="Big Bang nucleosynthesis" label="Big Bang nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="8215" end="8228" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="8357" end="8373" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="8415" end="8429" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128608" start="8655" end="8667" title="Halo nucleus" label="nuclear halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="8882" end="8899" title="parts per billion" label="parts per billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="8960" end="8977" title="parts per million" label="parts per million"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="9214" end="9232" title="parts per trillion" label="parts per trillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582855" start="9448" end="9459" title="bertrandite" label="bertrandite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103480" start="9477" end="9482" title="beryl" label="beryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q422179" start="9499" end="9510" title="chrysoberyl" label="chrysoberyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q423025" start="9525" end="9534" title="phenakite" label="phenakite"/>
<link wikidata="Q58959" start="9574" end="9584" title="aquamarine (gemstone)" label="aquamarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q429651" start="9586" end="9595" title="red beryl" label="red beryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="9600" end="9607" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="10347" end="10374" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="breakup of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q103480" start="10596" end="10601" title="beryl" label="beryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q844613" start="10619" end="10627" title="sintering" label="sintered"/>
<link wikidata="Q532908" start="10737" end="10758" title="sodium fluorosilicate" label="sodium fluorosilicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27113664" start="10779" end="10801" title="Tetrafluoroberyllate" label="sodium fluoroberyllate"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="10803" end="10818" title="aluminium oxide" label="aluminium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="10823" end="10838" title="silicon dioxide" label="silicon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419729" start="10840" end="10859" title="Beryllium hydroxide" label="Beryllium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="10922" end="10938" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="11129" end="11142" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419715" start="11160" end="11177" title="beryllium sulfate" label="beryllium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q421857" start="11182" end="11199" title="aluminium sulfate" label="aluminium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="11209" end="11216" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q416310" start="11386" end="11404" title="beryllium fluoride" label="beryllium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q265407" start="11408" end="11426" title="beryllium chloride" label="beryllium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q473546" start="11458" end="11484" title="ammonium hydrogen fluoride" label="ammonium hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q27113664" start="11552" end="11572" title="tetrafluoroberyllate" label="tetrafluoroberyllate"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="11650" end="11659" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q422714" start="11779" end="11794" title="beryllium oxide" label="beryllium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="11869" end="11881" title="Electrolysis" label="Electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="12047" end="12062" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q483788" start="12562" end="12568" title="atomic radius" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q908801" start="12573" end="12578" title="ionic radius" label="ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="12608" end="12628" title="ionization potential" label="ionization potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q386039" start="12822" end="12843" title="diagonal relationship" label="diagonal relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="12920" end="12931" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="passivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q422714" start="13279" end="13294" title="beryllium oxide" label="beryllium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271346" start="13299" end="13316" title="beryllium nitride" label="beryllium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115647" start="13353" end="13367" title="oxidizing acid" label="oxidizing acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="13412" end="13423" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416310" start="13633" end="13637" title="Beryllium fluoride" label="BeF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="13644" end="13650" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q265407" start="13702" end="13707" title="Beryllium chloride" label="BeCl2"/>
<link wikidata="Q420768" start="13712" end="13717" title="beryllium bromide" label="BeBr2"/>
<link wikidata="Q422714" start="13769" end="13784" title="Beryllium oxide" label="Beryllium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123417" start="13802" end="13812" title="refractory" label="refractory"/>
<link wikidata="Q204952" start="13831" end="13839" title="zinc sulfide" label="wurtzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q182677" start="13916" end="13926" title="amphoteric" label="amphoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445833" start="13928" end="13945" title="Beryllium sulfide" label="Beryllium sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13947" end="13955" title="Beryllium selenide" label="selenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q416128" start="13960" end="13969" title="Beryllium telluride" label="telluride"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13996" end="14016" title="Cubic crystal system#Zincblende structure" label="zincblende structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271346" start="14018" end="14035" title="Beryllium nitride" label="Beryllium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896099" start="14106" end="14121" title="Beryllium azide" label="Beryllium azide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14141" end="14160" title="beryllium phosphide" label="beryllium phosphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419302" start="14224" end="14230" title="boride" label="boride"/>
<link wikidata="Q411605" start="14291" end="14308" title="Beryllium carbide" label="Beryllium carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="14382" end="14389" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q426473" start="14401" end="14410" title="silicide" label="silicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q22302226" start="14463" end="14475" title="Nanocluster" label="nanoclusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="14735" end="14751" title="hydrogen bonding" label="hydrogen bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q419715" start="14817" end="14834" title="beryllium sulfate" label="beryllium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q421270" start="14839" end="14856" title="beryllium nitrate" label="beryllium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q898416" start="15074" end="15082" title="trimer (chemistry)" label="trimeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q419729" start="15107" end="15126" title="Beryllium hydroxide" label="Beryllium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q684810" start="15355" end="15366" title="berylliosis" label="berylliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q432016" start="15398" end="15406" title="Alkalinity" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="15652" end="15660" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788373" start="15848" end="15871" title="Basic beryllium acetate" label="Basic beryllium acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q421972" start="15985" end="15993" title="malonate" label="malonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10528967" start="16386" end="16408" title="hydroxycarboxylic acid" label="hydroxycarboxylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q409373" start="16418" end="16431" title="glycolic acid" label="glycolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="16651" end="16657" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436330" start="16786" end="16791" title="Tiron (chemical)" label="tiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064419" start="16845" end="16851" title="ammine" label="ammine"/>
<link wikidata="Q265407" start="17397" end="17415" title="beryllium chloride" label="beryllium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310521" start="17555" end="17566" title="beryllocene" label="beryllocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q425161" start="17700" end="17703" title="Mesitylene" label="mes"/>
<link wikidata="Q103480" start="17814" end="17819" title="beryl" label="beryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q131976" start="17880" end="17897" title="Ptolemaic dynasty" label="Ptolemaic dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="17929" end="17931" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="17950" end="17965" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="18002" end="18017" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="18039" end="18046" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269426" start="18089" end="18115" title="Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis" label="Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160196" start="18264" end="18288" title="Martin Heinrich Klaproth" label="Martin Heinrich Klaproth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201347" start="18290" end="18310" title="Torbern Olof Bergman" label="Torbern Olof Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60193" start="18312" end="18329" title="Franz Karl Achard" label="Franz Karl Achard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284687" start="18428" end="18446" title="aluminium silicate" label="aluminium silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q316515" start="18462" end="18476" title="René Just Haüy" label="René Just Haüy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333438" start="18557" end="18580" title="Louis-Nicolas Vauquelin" label="Louis-Nicolas Vauquelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q377066" start="18639" end="18657" title="Institut de France" label="Institut de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q407125" start="18730" end="18749" title="aluminium hydroxide" label="aluminium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="18790" end="18796" title="alkali" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q564386" start="18831" end="18863" title="Annales de chimie et de physique" label="Annales de chimie et de physique"/>
<link wikidata="Q58575" start="19005" end="19021" title="Friedrich Wöhler" label="Friedrich Wöhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="19103" end="19108" title="IUPAC" label="IUPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q58575" start="19164" end="19180" title="Friedrich Wöhler" label="Friedrich Wöhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q585780" start="19185" end="19198" title="Antoine Bussy" label="Antoine Bussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="19247" end="19264" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="19277" end="19286" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q265407" start="19292" end="19310" title="beryllium chloride" label="beryllium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="19748" end="19760" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q416310" start="19879" end="19897" title="beryllium fluoride" label="beryllium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q407520" start="19902" end="19917" title="sodium fluoride" label="sodium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q900301" start="19921" end="19932" title="Paul Lebeau" label="Paul Lebeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q908553" start="20165" end="20201" title="Union Carbide" label="Union Carbide and Carbon Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290583" start="20226" end="20246" title="Siemens &amp;amp; Halske" label="Siemens &amp;amp; Halske"/>
<link wikidata="Q77544" start="20460" end="20472" title="Alfred Stock" label="Alfred Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q77748" start="20477" end="20493" title="Hans Goldschmidt" label="Hans Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="20537" end="20546" title="alpha ray" label="alpha ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="20566" end="20572" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q80884" start="20597" end="20611" title="James Chadwick" label="James Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="20648" end="20655" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q926734" start="20728" end="20742" title="neutron source" label="neutron source"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="20925" end="20933" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="20939" end="20956" title="fluorescent light" label="fluorescent light"/>
<link wikidata="Q409139" start="20993" end="21011" title="zinc orthosilicate" label="zinc orthosilicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q420117" start="21099" end="21108" title="tungstate" label="tungstate"/>
<link wikidata="Q416310" start="21318" end="21336" title="beryllium fluoride" label="beryllium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q407520" start="21341" end="21356" title="sodium fluoride" label="sodium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="21531" end="21544" title="alkali metals" label="alkali metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q421448" start="21633" end="21649" title="beryllium iodide" label="beryllium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038" start="21732" end="21741" title="zirconium" label="zirconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q265407" start="22037" end="22055" title="beryllium chloride" label="beryllium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="22165" end="22174" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268371" start="22213" end="22224" title="Casting (metalworking)" label="vacuum-cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="22397" end="22402" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q103480" start="22566" end="22571" title="beryl" label="beryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q414685" start="22759" end="22765" title="yttria" label="yttria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="22801" end="22813" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174443" start="23312" end="23322" title="X-ray tube" label="X-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q689863" start="23623" end="23634" title="synchrotron" label="synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q386334" start="23832" end="23868" title="energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy" label="energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="24025" end="24038" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="24096" end="24105" title="Elementary particle" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300772" start="24142" end="24151" title="beamline" label="beam pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="24183" end="24199" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="24258" end="24279" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q294437" start="24281" end="24286" title="A Large Ion Collider Experiment" label="ALICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q299002" start="24288" end="24293" title="ATLAS experiment" label="ATLAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q659478" start="24295" end="24298" title="Compact Muon Solenoid" label="CMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q665728" start="24300" end="24304" title="LHCb" label="LHCb"/>
<link wikidata="Q944533" start="24311" end="24319" title="Tevatron" label="Tevatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q915217" start="24327" end="24331" title="SLAC" label="SLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="24660" end="24673" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q201048" start="24683" end="24694" title="diamagnetic" label="diamagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419413" start="24788" end="24793" title="strong focusing" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739927" start="24798" end="24811" title="particle beam" label="particle beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="25022" end="25031" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="25057" end="25065" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="25067" end="25081" title="guided missile" label="guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="25084" end="25094" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="25100" end="25109" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="25126" end="25152" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="25162" end="25180" title="liquid-fuel rocket" label="liquid-fuel rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054585" start="25192" end="25206" title="rocket engine nozzle" label="rocket nozzles"/>
<link wikidata="Q287464" start="25272" end="25283" title="rocket fuel" label="rocket fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167130" start="25357" end="25370" title="bicycle frame" label="bicycle frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="25427" end="25434" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="25435" end="25446" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="25457" end="25470" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703413" start="25484" end="25509" title="beryllium-aluminium alloy" label="beryllium-aluminium alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="25592" end="25608" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="25644" end="25650" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="25660" end="25665" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q905582" start="25673" end="25689" title="beryllium copper" label="beryllium copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="25832" end="25855" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="25860" end="25880" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="25900" end="25908" title="hardness (materials science)" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="25950" end="25959" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="25964" end="25982" title="fatigue (material)" label="fatigue resistance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26066" end="26082" title="beryllium nickel" label="beryllium nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102836" start="26085" end="26092" title="spring (device)" label="springs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26126" end="26140" title="beryllium iron" label="beryllium iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="26269" end="26278" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="26472" end="26489" title="inertial guidance" label="inertial guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963205" start="26621" end="26634" title="Needlegun scaler" label="Jason pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="26815" end="26824" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271779" start="27113" end="27122" title="Diaphragm (acoustics)" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="27177" end="27187" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="27209" end="27219" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="27454" end="27459" title="brake" label="brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="27474" end="27482" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15477170" start="27556" end="27570" title="heat dissipation" label="dissipate heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="27706" end="27715" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703413" start="27747" end="27754" title="AlBeMet" label="AlBeMet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="27887" end="27893" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893793" start="27961" end="27988" title="honeycomb mirror" label="honeycomb support structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q209363" start="28016" end="28040" title="meteorological satellite" label="meteorological satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707071" start="28147" end="28163" title="optical guidance" label="optical guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="28179" end="28198" title="fire-control system" label="fire-control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q153440" start="28225" end="28234" title="Leopard 1" label="Leopard 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q151968" start="28239" end="28248" title="Leopard 2" label="Leopard 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="28249" end="28265" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752266" start="28431" end="28457" title="electroless nickel plating" label="electroless nickel plating"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="28644" end="28653" title="cryogenic" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="28735" end="28761" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="29140" end="29163" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="29350" end="29377" title="explosive ordnance disposal" label="explosive ordnance disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="29404" end="29414" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="29449" end="29463" title="fuze" label="magnetic fuzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="29532" end="29558" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="29819" end="29840" title="nuclear weapon design" label="nuclear weapon design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198547" start="29873" end="29886" title="plutonium pit" label="plutonium pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="29913" end="29931" title="thermonuclear bomb" label="thermonuclear bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="29957" end="29964" title="fissile" label="fissile"/>
<link wikidata="Q523919" start="30038" end="30047" title="implosion (mechanical process)" label="implosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141329" start="30055" end="30068" title="plutonium-239" label="plutonium-239"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889369" start="30088" end="30105" title="neutron reflector" label="neutron reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="30139" end="30155" title="nuclear reactors" label="nuclear reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q926734" start="30193" end="30207" title="neutron source" label="neutron source"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="30325" end="30345" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123150" start="30354" end="30371" title="neutron generator" label="neutron generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="30467" end="30479" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q979" start="30488" end="30496" title="polonium" label="polonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="30502" end="30508" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="30514" end="30523" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872" start="30532" end="30541" title="americium" label="americium"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="30607" end="30617" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="transmuted"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="30745" end="30756" title="alpha decay" label="alpha decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889759" start="30797" end="30815" title="Modulated neutron initiator" label="&amp;quot;urchin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="30860" end="30871" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="30927" end="30936" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="30945" end="30956" title="gamma decay" label="gamma decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q558181" start="31060" end="31065" title="CANDU" label="CANDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702534" start="31459" end="31479" title="Joint European Torus" label="Joint European Torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="31480" end="31514" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear-fusion research laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q191788" start="31557" end="31561" title="ITER" label="ITER"/>
<link wikidata="Q194523" start="31646" end="31654" title="Cladding (nuclear fuel)" label="cladding"/>
<link wikidata="Q194523" start="31668" end="31684" title="nuclear fuel rod" label="nuclear fuel rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q416310" start="31768" end="31786" title="Beryllium fluoride" label="Beryllium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063311" start="31848" end="31853" title="FLiBe" label="FLiBe"/>
<link wikidata="Q373950" start="31926" end="31945" title="molten salt reactor" label="molten salt reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557437" start="31969" end="32000" title="liquid fluoride thorium reactor" label="liquid fluoride thorium reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530852" start="32120" end="32134" title="speaker driver" label="speaker driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="32190" end="32198" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q399793" start="32274" end="32281" title="tweeter" label="tweeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248058" start="32313" end="32322" title="pro audio" label="pro audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="32328" end="32342" title="public address" label="public address"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581044" start="32459" end="32480" title="Magnetic cartridge" label="phonograph cartridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064248" start="32579" end="32585" title="p-type semiconductor" label="p-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119237" start="32586" end="32592" title="dopant" label="dopant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659774" start="32596" end="32625" title="List of semiconductor materials" label="III-V compound semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="32666" end="32670" title="gallium arsenide" label="GaAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q304176" start="32672" end="32678" title="AlGaAs" label="AlGaAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618059" start="32680" end="32686" title="InGaAs" label="InGaAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737390" start="32691" end="32697" title="InAlAs" label="InAlAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q898542" start="32707" end="32729" title="molecular beam epitaxy" label="molecular beam epitaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="32805" end="32826" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q191042" start="32831" end="32855" title="surface-mount technology" label="surface-mount technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796959" start="32937" end="32946" title="heat sink" label="heat sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="32995" end="33012" title="thermal expansion" label="thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="33053" end="33068" title="glass-reinforced plastic" label="polyimide-glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362275" start="33069" end="33079" title="Substrate (materials science)" label="substrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756475" start="33111" end="33120" title="metal matrix composite" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321427" start="33127" end="33137" title="E-Material" label="E-Material"/>
<link wikidata="Q422714" start="33336" end="33351" title="Beryllium oxide" label="Beryllium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="33427" end="33447" title="electrical insulator" label="electrical insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q906544" start="33609" end="33619" title="power semiconductor device" label="high-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="33620" end="33630" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="33635" end="33650" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="33651" end="33662" title="transmitter" label="transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="33747" end="33767" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q378379" start="33771" end="33786" title="uranium dioxide" label="uranium dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q194523" start="33787" end="33799" title="nuclear fuel" label="nuclear fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="33842" end="33859" title="fluorescent light" label="fluorescent light"/>
<link wikidata="Q684810" start="33923" end="33934" title="berylliosis" label="berylliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040056" start="34057" end="34070" title="Dental material" label="dental alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="34733" end="34742" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="34778" end="34784" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q684810" start="35232" end="35243" title="berylliosis" label="berylliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="35250" end="35259" title="pulmonary" label="pulmonary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="35264" end="35272" title="systemic circulation" label="systemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129338" start="35273" end="35282" title="granuloma" label="granuloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="35602" end="35645" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="International Agency for Research on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983535" start="35696" end="35718" title="List of IARC Group 1 carcinogens" label="Category 1 carcinogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="35764" end="35809" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376583" start="35834" end="35860" title="permissible exposure limit" label="permissible exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501690" start="35978" end="36003" title="short-term exposure limit" label="short-term exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="36046" end="36099" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302715" start="36118" end="36144" title="recommended exposure limit" label="recommended exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q682341" start="36191" end="36195" title="IDLH" label="IDLH"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="36337" end="36344" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="36349" end="36356" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q684810" start="36469" end="36480" title="berylliosis" label="berylliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090486" start="36740" end="36760" title="chemical pneumonitis" label="chemical pneumonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="36896" end="36912" title="fluorescent lamp" label="fluorescent lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q193894" start="37010" end="37021" title="sarcoidosis" label="sarcoidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q837512" start="37048" end="37070" title="differential diagnosis" label="differential diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608700" start="37155" end="37174" title="Herbert L. Anderson" label="Herbert L. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q473546" start="38068" end="38087" title="ammonium bifluoride" label="ammonium bifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="39444" end="39483" title="Department of Health and Human Services" label="Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q222067" start="39520" end="39524" title="MSDS" label="MSDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="39559" end="39587" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3382" wikidata="Q11975" url="?curid=3382" title="Britney Spears">
<text>Britney Jean Spears (born December 2, 1981) is an American singer. Often referred to as the &quot;Princess of Pop&quot;, Spears has sold over 150 million records worldwide, making her one of the world&#x27;s best-selling music artists. An influential figure in popular music, she is credited with the revival of teen pop during the late 1990s and early 2000s.

After appearing in the television shows &quot;Star Search&quot; and &quot;The Mickey Mouse Club&quot;, Spears signed with Jive Records in 1997 at age fifteen. Her first two studio albums, &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; (1999) and &quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot; (2000), are among the best-selling albums of all time and made her the best-selling teenage artist of all time. She adopted a more mature and provocative style for her albums &quot;Britney&quot; (2001) and &quot;In the Zone&quot; (2003). Spears was the executive producer of her fifth studio album, &quot;Blackout&quot; (2007), often referred to as her best work. She returned to the top of the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart with the albums &quot;Circus&quot; (2008) and &quot;Femme Fatale&quot; (2011), and embarked on a four-year concert residency, (2013–2017), to promote her next two albums, &quot;Britney Jean&quot; (2013) and &quot;Glory&quot; (2016). Spears&#x27; catalog of high-charting singles includes &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, &quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;m a Slave 4 U&quot;, &quot;Toxic&quot;, &quot;Gimme More&quot;, &quot;Womanizer&quot;, &quot;3&quot;, &quot;Hold It Against Me&quot;, and &quot;Scream &amp; Shout&quot;.

Spears&#x27; life, including her high-profile relationships and personal struggles during the 2000s, received widespread media coverage. In 2008, she was involuntarily placed in a conservatorship following a highly publicized breakdown. In 2019, her legal battle over her conservatorship led to media scrutiny, the establishment of the #FreeBritney movement and the documentary &quot;Framing Britney Spears&quot; (2021). The conservatorship was terminated in 2021, following her public testimony in which she accused her management team and family of abuse. Spears&#x27; 2023 memoir, &quot;The Woman in Me&quot;, reached number one on &quot;The New York Times&quot; Best Seller list in its first week of release. Her other ventures include starring in the film &quot;Crossroads&quot; (2002) and launching numerous products, with her 2005 fragrance Fantasy with Elizabeth Arden, Inc. generating over $1.5 billion in sales.

In the United States, Spears is the fourth best-selling female album artist of the Nielsen SoundScan era, as well as the best-selling female album artist of the 2000s. Her accolades include a Grammy Award, 15 Guinness World Records, six MTV Video Music Awards, seven &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Awards (including the Millennium Award), the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. &quot;Billboard&quot; ranked her sixth on their list of the Greatest Pop Stars of the 21st Century. &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; was named the greatest debut single of all time by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; in 2020. &quot;Forbes&quot; listed Spears as the world&#x27;s highest-paid female musician in 2001 and 2012. By 2012, she had topped Yahoo!&#x27;s list of most searched celebrities seven times in twelve years. &quot;Time&quot; named Spears one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2021, placing first in the reader poll.

==Life and career==
===1981–1997: Early life, family, and career beginnings===
Britney Jean Spears was born on December 2, 1981, in McComb, Mississippi, the second child of James &quot;Jamie&quot; Parnell Spears and Lynne Irene Bridges. Her maternal grandmother, Lillian Portell, was English and born in London, and one of Spears&#x27; maternal great-grandfathers was Maltese. Her siblings are Bryan James Spears and Jamie Lynn Spears.

Born in the Bible Belt, where socially conservative evangelical Protestantism is a particularly strong religious influence, she was baptized as a Southern Baptist and sang in a church choir as a child. As an adult, she has studied Kabbalist teachings. On August 5, 2021, Spears announced that she had converted to Catholicism. Her mother, sister, and nieces Maddie Aldridge and Ivey Joan Watson, are also Catholic. However, on September 5, 2022, after Spears&#x27; ex-husband, Kevin Federline, and youngest son did an interview defending her father&#x27;s actions during her conservatorship, she stated: &quot;I don&#x27;t believe in God anymore because of the way my children and my family have treated me. There is nothing to believe in anymore. I&#x27;m an atheist y&#x27;all&quot;.

At age three, Spears began attending dance lessons in her hometown of Kentwood, Louisiana, and was selected to perform as a solo artist at the annual recital. Aged five she made her local stage debut, singing &quot;What Child Is This?&quot; at her kindergarten graduation. During her childhood, she also had gymnastics and voice lessons and won many state-level competitions and children&#x27;s talent shows. In gymnastics, Spears attended Béla Károlyi&#x27;s training camp. She said of her ambition as a child, &quot;I was in my own world, ... I found out what I&#x27;m supposed to do at an early age&quot;.

When Spears was eight, she and her mother Lynne traveled to Atlanta, Georgia, to audition for the 1990s revival of &quot;The Mickey Mouse Club&quot;. Casting director Matt Casella rejected her as too young, but introduced her to Nancy Carson, a New York City talent agent. Carson was impressed with Spears&#x27; singing and suggested enrolling her at the Professional Performing Arts School.

Spears was hired for her first professional role as the understudy for the lead role of Tina Denmark in the off-Broadway musical &quot;Ruthless!&quot; She also appeared as a contestant on the popular television show &quot;Star Search&quot; and was cast in a number of commercials. In December 1992, she was cast in &quot;The All-New Mickey Mouse Club&quot;. Other fellow cast members included Christina Aguilera, Justin Timberlake, Ryan Gosling, Keri Russell, and JC Chasez. After the show was canceled in 1994, she returned to Mississippi and enrolled at McComb&#x27;s Parklane Academy. Although she made friends with most of her classmates, she compared the school to &quot;the opening scene in &quot;Clueless&quot; with all the cliques. ... I was so bored. I was the point guard on the basketball team. I had my boyfriend, and I went to homecoming and Christmas formal. But I wanted more.&quot;

In June 1997, Spears was in talks with manager Lou Pearlman to join the female pop group Innosense. Lynne asked family friend and entertainment lawyer Larry Rudolph for his opinion and submitted a tape of Spears singing over a Whitney Houston karaoke song along with some pictures. Rudolph decided that he wanted to pitch her to record labels, for which she needed a professional demo made. He sent Spears an unused song of Toni Braxton; she rehearsed for a week and recorded her vocals in a studio. Spears traveled to New York with the demo and met with executives from four labels, returning to Kentwood the same day. Three of the labels rejected her, saying that audiences wanted pop bands such as the Backstreet Boys and the Spice Girls, and &quot;there wasn&#x27;t going to be another Madonna, another Debbie Gibson, or another Tiffany.&quot;

Two weeks later, executives from Jive Records returned calls to Rudolph. Senior vice president of A&amp;R Jeff Fenster said about Spears&#x27; audition that &quot;it&#x27;s very rare to hear someone that age who can deliver emotional content and commercial appeal ... For any artist, the motivation—the &#x27;eye of the tiger&#x27;—is extremely important. And Britney had that.&quot; Spears sang Houston&#x27;s &quot;I Have Nothing&quot; (1992) for the executives, and was subsequently signed to the label. They assigned her to work with producer Eric Foster White for a month; he reportedly shaped her voice from &quot;lower and less poppy&quot; delivery to &quot;distinctively, unmistakably Britney&quot;. After hearing the recorded material, president Clive Calder ordered a full album. Spears had originally envisioned &quot;Sheryl Crow music, but younger; more adult contemporary&quot;. She felt secure with her label&#x27;s appointment of producers, since &quot;It made more sense to go pop, because I can dance to it—it&#x27;s more me.&quot; She flew to Cheiron Studios in Stockholm, Sweden, where half of the album was recorded from March to April 1998, with producers Max Martin, Denniz Pop, and Rami Yacoub, among others.

===1998–2000: &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; and &quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot;===
After Spears returned to the United States, she embarked on a shopping mall promotional tour, titled L&#x27;Oreal Hair Zone Mall Tour, to promote her upcoming debut album. Her show was a four-song set and she was accompanied by two back-up dancers. Her first concert tour followed, as an opening act for NSYNC. Her debut studio album, &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, was released on January 12, 1999. It debuted at number one on the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and was certified two-times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America after a month. Worldwide, the album topped the charts in fifteen countries and sold over 10 million copies in a year. It became the biggest-selling album ever by a teenage artist.

&quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; was released as the lead single from the album on September 29, 1998. Originally, Jive Records wanted the associated music video to be animated; however, Spears rejected this idea, and suggested the final concept of a Catholic schoolgirl. The single peaked at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, topping the chart for two consecutive weeks in January–February 1999. It sold more than 10 million copies, making it one of the best-selling singles of all time. &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; later received a Grammy nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. The title track also topped the singles chart for two weeks in the United Kingdom, and became the fastest-selling single ever by a female artist, shipping over 460,000 copies. It would later become the 25th-most successful song of all time in British chart history. Spears is the youngest female artist to have a million seller in the UK. The album&#x27;s third single, &quot;(You Drive Me) Crazy&quot;, became a top-ten hit worldwide and further propelled the success of the &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; album. The album has sold 30 million copies worldwide, making it one of the best-selling albums of all time. It is the best-selling debut album by any artist.

On June 28, 1999, Spears began her first headlining ...Baby One More Time Tour in North America, which was positively received by critics. It also generated some controversy due to her racy outfits. An extension of the tour, titled (You Drive Me) Crazy Tour, followed in March 2000. Spears premiered songs from her upcoming second album during the show.

&quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot;, Spears&#x27; second studio album, was released in May 2000. It debuted at number one in the US, selling 1.3 million copies, breaking the Nielsen SoundScan record for the highest debut sales by any solo artist. It has sold over 20 million copies worldwide to date, making it one of the best-selling albums of all time. Rob Sheffield of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; said that &quot;the great thing about &quot;Oops!&quot; – under the cheese surface, Britney&#x27;s demand for satisfaction is complex, fierce and downright scary, making her a true child of rock &amp; roll tradition.&quot; The album&#x27;s lead single, &quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot;, peaked at the top of the charts in Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and many other European nations, while the second single, &quot;Lucky&quot;, peaked at number one in Austria, Germany, Sweden, and Switzerland. The album as well as the title track received Grammy nominations for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance, respectively.

The same year, Spears embarked on the Oops!... I Did It Again Tour, which grossed $40.5 million; she also released her first book, &quot;Britney Spears&#x27; Heart to Heart&quot;, co-written with her mother. On September 7, 2000, Spears performed at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards. Halfway through the performance, she ripped off her black suit to reveal a sequined flesh-colored bodysuit, followed by heavy dance routine. It is noted by critics as the moment that Spears showed signs of becoming a more provocative performer. Amidst media speculation, Spears confirmed she was dating NSYNC member Justin Timberlake. Spears and Timberlake both graduated from high school via distance learning from the University of Nebraska High School. She also bought a home in Destin, Florida. In her 2023 memoir, Spears revealed that she had an abortion in late 2000 while dating Timberlake after he said they were not prepared for parenthood. Spears called the abortion &quot;one of the most agonizing things I have ever experienced in my life.&quot;

===2001–2002: &quot;Britney&quot; and &quot;Crossroads&quot;===

In January 2001, Spears hosted the 28th Annual American Music Awards, starred at Rock in Rio alongside NSYNC, and performed as a special guest in the Super Bowl XXXV halftime show headlined by Aerosmith and NSYNC. In February 2001, she signed a $7–8 million promotional deal with Pepsi, and released another book co-written with her mother, &quot;A Mother&#x27;s Gift&quot;. Her third studio album, &quot;Britney&quot;, was released in November 2001, with a funkier sound inspired by hip hop artists such as Jay-Z and the Neptunes. &quot;Britney&quot; debuted at number one in the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and reached top five positions in Australia, the United Kingdom, and mainland Europe, and has sold 10 million copies worldwide.

Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic called &quot;Britney&quot; &quot;the record where she strives to deepen her persona, making it more adult while still recognizably Britney. ... It does sound like the work of a star who has now found and refined her voice, resulting in her best record yet.&quot; It was nominated for the Grammy awards for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for &quot;Overprotected&quot;, and in 2007 it was named one of the best albums of the preceding 25 years by &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;. The lead single, &quot;I&#x27;m a Slave 4 U&quot;, became a top-ten hit in several countries.

Spears&#x27; performance of the single at the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards featured a caged tiger (wrangled by Bhagavan Antle) and a large albino python draped over her shoulders. It was harshly received by animal rights organization PETA, who claimed the animals were mistreated and scrapped plans for an anti-fur billboard that was to feature Spears. Jocelyn Vena of MTV News summarized Spears&#x27; performance at the ceremony, saying, &quot;draping herself in a white python and slithering around a steamy garden setting – surrounded by dancers in zebra and tiger outfits – Spears created one of the most striking visuals in the 27-year history of the show.&quot;

To support the album, Spears embarked on the Dream Within a Dream Tour. The show was critically praised for its technical innovations, the &quot;pièce de résistance&quot; being a water screen that pumped two tons of water into the stage. The tour grossed $53.3 million, becoming the second highest-grossing tour of 2002 by a female artist, behind Cher&#x27;s Farewell Tour. Her career success was highlighted by &quot;Forbes&quot; in 2002, as Spears was ranked the world&#x27;s most powerful celebrity. Spears also landed her first starring role in &quot;Crossroads&quot;, released in February 2002. Although the film was largely panned, critics praised Spears&#x27; acting. The film was a box office success, grossing over $61.1 million worldwide on a $12 million budget.

In June 2002, Spears opened her first restaurant, Nyla, in New York City, but terminated her relationship in November due to mismanagement and &quot;management&#x27;s failure to keep her fully apprised&quot;. In July 2002, Spears announced she would take a six-month break from her career; however, she went back into the studio in November to record her new album. Spears&#x27; relationship with Justin Timberlake ended after three years. In November 2002, Timberlake released the song &quot;Cry Me a River&quot; as the second single from his solo debut album. The music video featured a Spears look-alike and fueled the rumors that she had been engaging in an affair, fueled by further rumors of possible relationships involving Timberlake&#x27;s choreographer Wade Robson and Limp Bizkit&#x27;s frontman Fred Durst. Spears had initially denied the allegations of a possible affair involving Durst, despite the two being spotted together on multiple occasions; even claiming the two had a friendly connection. In 2023, she admitted to engaging in an affair with Robson. As a response, Spears wrote the ballad &quot;Everytime&quot; with her backing vocalist and friend Annet Artani.

===2003–2005: &quot;In the Zone&quot; and first two marriages===
In August 2003, Spears opened the MTV Video Music Awards with Christina Aguilera, performing &quot;Like a Virgin&quot;. Halfway through they were joined by Madonna, whom they both kissed. The incident was highly publicized. In 2008, MTV listed the performance as the number-one opening moment in the history of MTV Video Music Awards, while &quot;Blender&quot; cited it as one of the 25 sexiest music moments on television history.

Spears released her fourth studio album, &quot;In the Zone&quot;, in November 2003. She assumed more creative control by writing and co-producing most of the material. &quot;Vibe&quot; called it &quot;a supremely confident dance record that also illustrates Spears&#x27; development as a songwriter&quot;. NPR named it one of the most important recordings of the decade, writing that &quot;the decade&#x27;s history of impeccably crafted pop is written on her body of work&quot;. &quot;In the Zone&quot; sold over 609,000 copies during its first week of availability in the United States, debuting at the top of the charts, making Spears the first female artist in the SoundScan era to have her first four studio albums to debut at number one. It also debuted at the top of the charts in France and the top ten in Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, and the Netherlands. The album produced four singles: &quot;Me Against the Music&quot;, a collaboration with Madonna; &quot;Toxic&quot;—which won Spears her first Grammy for Best Dance Recording; &quot;Everytime&quot;, and &quot;Outrageous&quot;.

In January 2004, Spears married her childhood friend at A Little White Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas, Nevada. The marriage was annulled 55 hours later, following a petition to the court that stated that Spears &quot;lacked understanding of her actions&quot;.

In March 2004, Spears embarked on the Onyx Hotel Tour in support of &quot;In the Zone&quot;. The tour was canceled in June 2004, when she fell and injured her left knee during the music video shoot for &quot;Outrageous&quot;. She underwent arthroscopic surgery and wore a thigh brace for six weeks, followed by eight to twelve weeks of rehabilitation. That year, Spears became involved in the Kabbalah Centre through her friendship with Madonna.

In July 2004, Spears became engaged to dancer Kevin Federline, whom she had met three months earlier. The romance was the subject of intense media attention, since Federline had recently broken up with actress Shar Jackson, who was still pregnant with their second child at the time. The stages of their relationship were chronicled in Spears&#x27; first reality show &quot;Britney and Kevin: Chaotic&quot;, which premiered on May 17, 2005, on UPN. Spears later referred to the show in a 2013 interview as &quot;probably the worst thing I&#x27;ve done in my career&quot;. They held a wedding ceremony on September 18, 2004, but were not legally married until three weeks later on October 6 due to a delay finalizing the couple&#x27;s prenuptial agreement.

Shortly after, she released her first perfume, Curious, with Elizabeth Arden, which broke the company&#x27;s first-week gross for a perfume. In October 2004, Spears took a career break to start a family. &quot;Greatest Hits: My Prerogative&quot;, her first greatest hits compilation album, was released in November 2004. Spears&#x27; cover version of Bobby Brown&#x27;s &quot;My Prerogative&quot; was released as the lead single from the album, reaching the top of the charts in Finland, Ireland, Italy, and Norway. The second single, &quot;Do Somethin&#x27;&quot;, was a top ten hit in Australia, the United Kingdom, and other countries of mainland Europe. In August 2005, Spears released &quot;Someday (I Will Understand)&quot;, which was dedicated to her first child, a son named Sean Preston, who was born the following month. In November 2005, she released her first remix compilation, &quot;B in the Mix: The Remixes&quot;, which consists of 11 remixes.

===2006–2007: Personal struggles and &quot;Blackout&quot;===

In February 2006, pictures surfaced of Spears driving with her son, Sean, on her lap instead of in a car seat. Child advocates were horrified by the photos of her holding the wheel with one hand and Sean with the other. Spears claimed that the situation happened because of a frightening encounter with paparazzi, and that it was a mistake on her part. The following month, she guest-starred on the &quot;Will &amp; Grace&quot; episode &quot;Buy, Buy Baby&quot; as closeted lesbian Amber-Louise. She announced she no longer studied Kabbalah in May 2006, explaining, &quot;my baby is my religion&quot;. Spears posed nude for the August 2006 cover of &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;; the photograph was compared to Demi Moore&#x27;s August 1991 &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; cover. In September 2006, she gave birth to her second son, Jayden James. In November 2006, Spears filed for divorce from Federline, citing irreconcilable differences. Their divorce was finalized in July 2007, when the two reached a global settlement and agreed to share joint custody of their sons.

Spears&#x27; maternal aunt Sandra Bridges Covington, with whom she had been very close, died of ovarian cancer in January 2007. In February, Spears stayed in a drug rehabilitation facility in Antigua for less than a day. The following night, she shaved her head with electric clippers at a hair salon in Tarzana, Los Angeles. She admitted herself to other treatment facilities during the following weeks. In May 2007, she produced a series of promotional concerts at House of Blues venues, titled The M+M&#x27;s Tour. In October 2007, Spears lost physical custody of her sons to Federline. The reasons of the court ruling were not revealed to the public. Spears was also sued by Louis Vuitton over her 2005 music video &quot;Do Somethin&#x27;&quot; for upholstering her Hummer interior in counterfeit Louis Vuitton cherry blossom fabric, which resulted in the video being banned on European TV stations.

In October 2007, Spears released her fifth studio album, &quot;Blackout&quot;. The album debuted atop the charts in Canada and Ireland, at number two in the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, France, Japan, Mexico, and the United Kingdom, and the top ten in Australia, South Korea, New Zealand, and many European nations. In the United States, it was Spears&#x27; first album not to debut at number one, although, she did become the only female artist to have her first five studio albums debut at the two top slots of the chart. The album received positive reviews from critics and had sold 3.1 million copies worldwide by the end of 2008. &quot;Blackout&quot; won Album of the Year at the 2008 MTV Europe Music Awards and was listed as the fifth Best Pop Album of the Decade by &quot;The Times&quot;.

Spears performed the lead single, &quot;Gimme More&quot;, at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards. The performance was widely panned by critics. Despite the criticism, the single enjoyed worldwide success, peaking at number one in Canada and within the top ten in almost every country it charted. The second single, &quot;Piece of Me&quot;, reached the top of the charts in Ireland and reached the top five in Australia, Canada, Denmark, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. The third single, &quot;Break the Ice&quot;, was released the following year, and respectively reached numbers seven and nine in Ireland and Canada. In December 2007, Spears began a relationship with paparazzo Adnan Ghalib.

===2008–2010: Conservatorship and &quot;Circus&quot;===
In January 2008, Spears refused to relinquish custody of her sons to Federline&#x27;s representatives. She was hospitalized at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center after police that had arrived at her house noted she appeared to be under the influence of an unidentified substance. The following day, Spears&#x27; visitation rights were suspended at an emergency court hearing, and Federline was given sole physical and legal custody of their sons. She was committed to the psychiatric ward of Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center and put on 5150 involuntary psychiatric hold under California state law. The court placed her under a conservatorship led by her father, Jamie Spears, and attorney Andrew Wallet, giving them complete control of her assets. She was released five days later.

The following month, Spears guest-starred on the &quot;How I Met Your Mother&quot; episode &quot;Ten Sessions&quot; as receptionist Abby. She received positive reviews for her performance, as well as bringing the series its highest ratings ever. In July 2008, Spears regained some visitation rights after coming to an agreement with Federline and his counsel. In September 2008, Spears opened the MTV Video Music Awards with a pre-taped comedy sketch with Jonah Hill and an introduction speech. She won Best Female Video, Best Pop Video, and Video of the Year for &quot;Piece of Me&quot;. A 60-minute introspective documentary, &quot;&quot;, was produced to chronicle Spears&#x27; return to the recording industry. Directed by Phil Griffin, &quot;For the Record&quot; was shot in Beverly Hills, Hollywood, and New York City during the third quarter of 2008. The documentary was broadcast on MTV to 5.6 million viewers for the two airings on the premiere night. It was the highest rating in its Sunday night timeslot and in the network&#x27;s history. 
In December 2008, Spears&#x27; sixth studio album, &quot;Circus&quot;, was released. It received positive reviews from critics and debuted at number one in Canada, Czech Republic, and the United States, and within the top ten in many European nations. In the United States, Spears became the youngest female artist to have five albums debut at number one, earning a place in &quot;Guinness World Records&quot;. She also became the only act in the SoundScan era to have four albums debut with 500,000 or more copies sold. The album was one of the fastest-selling albums of the year, and has sold 4 million copies worldwide. Its lead single, &quot;Womanizer&quot;, became Spears&#x27; first chart-topper on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 since &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;. The single also topped the charts in Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Norway, and Sweden. It was also nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording.

In January 2009, Spears and her father obtained a restraining order against her former manager Sam Lutfi, ex-boyfriend Adnan Ghalib, and attorney Jon Eardley, all of whom had been accused of conspiring to gain control of Spears&#x27; affairs. Spears embarked on The Circus Starring Britney Spears tour in March 2009. With a gross of U.S. $131.8 million, it became the fifth highest-grossing tour of the year. In November 2009, Spears released her second greatest hits album, &quot;The Singles Collection&quot;. The album&#x27;s lead and only single, &quot;3&quot;, became her third number-one single in the U.S.

In May 2010, Spears&#x27; representatives confirmed she was dating her agent, Jason Trawick, and that they had decided to end their professional relationship to focus on their personal relationship. Spears designed a limited edition clothing line for Candie&#x27;s, which was released in stores in July 2010. In September 2010, she made a cameo appearance on a Spears-themed tribute episode of the television series &quot;Glee&quot;, titled &quot;Britney/Brittany&quot;; the episode drew the highest Nielsen ratingup to that point in the series&#x27;s runin the 18–49 demographic.

===2011–2012: &quot;Femme Fatale&quot; and &quot;The X Factor&quot;===
In March 2011, Spears released her seventh studio album, &quot;Femme Fatale&quot;. The album peaked at number one in the United States, Canada, and Australia, and within the top ten on nearly every other chart. Its peak in the United States tied Spears with Mariah Carey and Janet Jackson for the third-most number ones among women. &quot;Femme Fatale&quot; has been certified platinum by the RIAA and as of February 2014, it had sold 2.4 million copies worldwide.

The album&#x27;s lead single, &quot;Hold It Against Me&quot;, debuted atop the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, becoming Spears&#x27; fourth number-one single on the chart and making her the second artist in history to have two consecutive singles debut at number one, after Mariah Carey. The second single, &quot;Till the World Ends&quot;, peaked at number three on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in May, while the third single, &quot;I Wanna Go&quot;, reached number seven in August. &quot;Femme Fatale&quot; became Spears&#x27; first album in which three of its songs reached the top ten of the chart. The fourth and final single &quot;Criminal&quot; was released in September 2011. The music video sparked controversy when British politicians criticized Spears for using replica guns while filming the video in a London area that had been badly affected by the 2011 England riots. Spears&#x27; management briefly responded, stating, &quot;The video is a fantasy story featuring Britney&#x27;s boyfriend, Jason Trawick, which literally plays out the lyrics of a song written three years before the riots ever happened.&quot; In April 2011, Spears appeared in a remix of Rihanna&#x27;s song &quot;S&amp;M&quot;. It reached number one in the US later that month, giving Spears her fifth number one on the chart. On &quot;Billboard&quot;″s 2011 Year-End list, Spears was ranked number fourteen on the Artists of the Year, thirty-two on &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 artists, and ten on &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 artists. Spears co-wrote &quot;Whiplash&quot;, a song from the album &quot;When the Sun Goes Down&quot; (2011) by Selena Gomez &amp; the Scene.

In June 2011, Spears embarked on her Femme Fatale Tour. The first ten dates of the tour grossed $6.2 million, landing the fifty-fifth spot on &quot;Pollstar&quot;″s Top 100 North American Tours list for the half-way point of the year. The tour ended on December 10, 2011, in Puerto Rico, after 79 performances. A DVD of the tour was released in November 2011. In August 2011, Spears received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards. The next month, she released her second remix album, &quot;B in the Mix: The Remixes Vol. 2&quot;. In December 2011, Spears became engaged to her long-time boyfriend Jason Trawick, who had formerly been her agent. Trawick was legally granted a role as co-conservator, alongside her father, in April 2012.

In May 2012, Spears was hired to replace Paula Abdul as a judge for the second season of the USA show of &quot;The X Factor&quot;, joining Simon Cowell, L.A. Reid, and fellow new judge Demi Lovato, who replaced Nicole Scherzinger. With a reported salary of $15 million, she became the highest-paid judge on a singing competition series in television history. However, Katy Perry broke her record in 2018 after Perry was signed for a $25-million salary to serve as a judge on ABC&#x27;s revival of &quot;American Idol&quot;. Spears mentored the Teens category; her final act, Carly Rose Sonenclar, was named the runner-up of the season. Spears did not return for the show&#x27;s third season and was replaced by Paulina Rubio.

Spears appeared on the song &quot;Scream &amp; Shout&quot; with will.i.am, which was released as the third single from his fourth studio album, &quot;#willpower&quot; (2013). The song later became Spears&#x27; sixth number-one single on the UK Singles Chart and peaked at number three on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. &quot;Scream &amp; Shout&quot; was among the best-selling songs of 2012 and 2013 with denoting sales of over 8.1 million worldwide, the accompanying music video was the third most-viewed video in 2013 on Vevo despite the video being released in 2012. In December 2012, &quot;Forbes&quot; named her music&#x27;s top-earning woman of 2012, with estimated earnings of $58 million.

===2013–2015: &quot;Britney Jean&quot; and Britney: Piece of Me===
Spears began work on her eighth studio album, &quot;Britney Jean&quot;, in December 2012, and enlisted will.i.am as its executive producer in May 2013. In January 2013, Spears and Jason Trawick ended their engagement. Trawick was also removed as Spears&#x27; co-conservator, restoring her father as the sole conservator. Following the breakup, she began dating David Lucado in March; the couple split in August 2014. During the production of &quot;Britney Jean&quot;, Spears recorded the song &quot;Ooh La La&quot; for the soundtrack of &quot;The Smurfs 2&quot;, which was released in June 2013.

On September 17, 2013, she appeared on &quot;Good Morning America&quot; to announce her two-year concert residency at Planet Hollywood Resort &amp; Casino in Las Vegas, titled . It began on December 27, 2013, and included a total of 100 shows throughout 2014 and 2015. During the same appearance, Spears announced that &quot;Britney Jean&quot; would be released on December 3, 2013, in the United States. It was released through RCA Records due to the disbandment of Jive Records in 2011, which had formed the joint RCA/Jive Label Group (initially known as BMG Label Group) between 2007 and 2011.

&quot;Britney Jean&quot; became Spears&#x27; final project under her original recording contract with Jive, which had guaranteed the release of eight studio albums. The record received a low amount of promotion and had little commercial impact, reportedly due to time conflicts involving preparations for Britney: Piece of Me. Upon its release, the record debuted at number four on the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 with first-week sales of 107,000 copies, becoming her lowest-peaking and lowest-selling album in the United States. &quot;Britney Jean&quot; debuted at number 34 on the UK Albums Chart, selling 12,959 copies in its first week. In doing so, it became Spears&#x27; lowest-charting and lowest-selling album in the country.

&quot;Work Bitch&quot; was released as the lead single from &quot;Britney Jean&quot; in September 2013. It debuted and peaked at number 12 on the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 marking Spears&#x27; 31st entry on the chart and the fifth highest debut of her career on the chart, and her seventh in the top 20. It also marked Spears&#x27; 19th top 20 entry and overall her 23rd top 40 single. The song marked Spears&#x27; highest sales debut since her 2011 number-one single &quot;Hold It Against Me&quot;. &quot;Work Bitch&quot; debuted and peaked at number seven on the UK Singles Chart. The song also peaked within the top ten of the charts in Brazil, Canada, France, Italy, Mexico, and Spain.

The second single, &quot;Perfume&quot;, premiered in November 2013. It debuted and peaked at number 76 on the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. In October 2013, she was featured as a guest vocalist on the song &quot;SMS (Bangerz)&quot; by Miley Cyrus, from the latter&#x27;s fourth studio album, &quot;Bangerz&quot; (2013). On January 8, 2014, Spears won Favorite Pop Artist at the 40th People&#x27;s Choice Awards at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles. In August 2014, Spears confirmed she had renewed her contract with RCA and that she was writing and recording new music for her next album.

Spears announced via Twitter in August 2014 that she would be releasing an intimate apparel line called &quot;The Intimate Britney Spears&quot;. It was available to be purchased beginning on September 9, 2014, in the United States and Canada through Spears&#x27; Intimate Collection website. It was later available on September 25 for purchase in Europe. The company now ships to over 200 countries including Australia and New Zealand. On September 25, 2014, Spears confirmed on &quot;Good Morning Britain&quot; that she extended her contract to perform her Britney: Piece of Me concert residency at Planet Hollywood Las Vegas for two additional years. Spears began dating television producer Charlie Ebersol in October 2014. The pair were split in June 2015.

On May 14, 2015, Spears released a single, &quot;Pretty Girls&quot;, with Iggy Azalea. It reached number 29 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and charted moderately in international territories. Spears and Azalea performed the track live at the 2015 &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Awards from The AXIS, the home of Spears&#x27; residency, to positive critical response. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; praised the performance, noting &quot;Spears gave one of her most energetic televised performances in years.&quot;

On June 16, 2015, Giorgio Moroder released the album &quot;Déjà Vu&quot;, which featured Spears on &quot;Tom&#x27;s Diner&quot;. The song was released as the fourth single from the album on October 9, 2015. In an interview, Moroder praised Spears&#x27; vocals and said she &quot;sounds so good that you would hardly recognize her&quot;. At the 2015 Teen Choice Awards, Spears received the Candie&#x27;s Style Icon Award, her ninth Teen Choice Award. In November 2015, Spears guest-starred as a fictionalized version of herself on the CW series &quot;Jane the Virgin&quot;. On the show, she danced to &quot;Toxic&quot; with Gina Rodriguez&#x27;s character.

===2016–2018: &quot;Glory&quot;, continued residency, and the Piece of Me Tour===

In November 2015, Spears confirmed via social media that she had begun recording her ninth studio album. On March 1, 2016, &quot;V&quot; announced that Spears would appear on the cover of its 100th issue, dated March 8, 2016, in addition to revealing three different covers shot by photographer Mario Testino for the milestone publication. The &quot;V&quot; editor-in-chief, Stephen Gan, said Spears was selected because of her status as an icon in the industry, and asked: &quot;Who in our world did not grow up listening to her music?&quot; In May 2016, Spears launched a casual role-play gaming application, &quot;Britney Spears: American Dream&quot;. The app, created by Glu Mobile, was made available through both iOS and Google Play.

On May 22, 2016, Spears performed a medley of her past singles at the 2016 &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Awards. In addition to opening the show, Spears was honored with the &quot;Billboard&quot; Millennium Award. On July 15, 2016, Spears released the lead single, &quot;Make Me&quot;, from her ninth studio album, featuring guest vocals from American rapper G-Eazy. The album, &quot;Glory&quot;, was formally released on August 26, 2016. On August 16, 2016, MTV and Spears announced that she would perform at the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards. The performance marked Spears&#x27; first time returning to the VMA stage after her widely panned performance of &quot;Gimme More&quot; at the 2007 show nine years earlier. Along with &quot;Make Me&quot;, Spears and G-Eazy also performed the latter&#x27;s hit song &quot;Me, Myself &amp; I&quot;.

Spears appeared on the cover of &quot;Marie Claire&quot; UK for the October 2016 issue. In the publication, Spears revealed that she had suffered from crippling anxiety in the past, and that motherhood played a major role in helping her overcome it. &quot;My boys don&#x27;t care if everything isn&#x27;t perfect. They don&#x27;t judge me&quot;, Spears said in the issue. In November 2016, during an interview with Las Vegas Blog, Spears confirmed she had already begun work on her next album, stating: &quot;I&#x27;m not sure what I want the next album to sound like. ... I just know that I&#x27;m excited to get into the studio again and actually have already been back recording.&quot; In the same month, she released a remix version of &quot;Slumber Party&quot; as the second single from &quot;Glory&quot;, featuring Tinashe.

She began dating &quot;Slumber Party&quot;&#x27;s music video co-star Sam Asghari after the two met on set. In January 2017, Spears received four wins out of four nominations at the 43rd People&#x27;s Choice Awards, including Favorite Pop Artist, Female Artist, Social Media Celebrity, as well as Comedic Collaboration for a skit with Ellen DeGeneres for &quot;The Ellen DeGeneres Show&quot;. In March 2017, Spears announced that her residency concert would be performed abroad as a world tour, , with dates in select Asian cities. In April 2017, the Israeli Labor Party announced that it would reschedule its July primary election to avoid conflict with Spears&#x27; sold-out Tel Aviv concert, citing traffic, and security concerns.

Spears&#x27; manager Larry Rudolph also announced the residency would not be extended following her contract expiration with Caesars Entertainment at the end of 2017. On April 29, 2017, Spears became the first recipient of the Icon Award at the 2017 Radio Disney Music Awards. On November 4, 2017, Spears attended the grand opening of the Nevada Childhood Cancer Foundation Britney Spears Campus in Las Vegas. Later that month, &quot;Forbes&quot; announced that Spears was the 8th highest earning female musician, earning $34 million in 2017. On December 31, 2017, Spears performed the final show of Britney: Piece of Me. The final performance reportedly brought in $1.172 million, setting a new box office record for a single show in Las Vegas, and breaking the record previously held by Jennifer Lopez. Performances of &quot;Toxic&quot; and &quot;Work Bitch&quot; were recorded on earlier dates and aired on ABC&#x27;s &quot;Dick Clark&#x27;s New Year&#x27;s Rockin&#x27; Eve&quot; to a record audience of 25.6 million.

In January 2018, Spears released her 24th perfume with Elizabeth Arden, Sunset Fantasy, and announced the Piece of Me Tour which took place in July 2018 in North America and Europe. Tickets were sold out within minutes for major cities, and additional dates were added to meet the demand. Pitbull was the supporting act for the European leg. The tour ranked at 86 and 30 on &quot;Pollstar&quot;″s 2018 Year-End Top 100 Tours chart both in North America and worldwide, respectively. In total, the tour grossed $54.3 million with 260,531 tickets sold and was the sixth highest-grossing female tour of 2018, and was the United Kingdom&#x27;s second best-selling female tour of 2018.

On March 20, 2018, Spears was announced as part of a campaign for French luxury fashion house Kenzo. The company said it aimed to shake up the &#x27;jungle&#x27; world of fashion with Spears&#x27; &#x27;La Collection Memento No. 2&#x27; campaign. On April 12, 2018, Spears was honored with the 2018 GLAAD Vanguard Award at the GLAAD Media Awards for her role in &quot;accelerating acceptance for the LGBTQ community&quot;. On April 27, 2018, Epic Rights announced a new partnership with Spears to debut her own fashion line in 2019, which would include clothing, fitness apparel, accessories, and electronics.

In July 2018, Spears released her first unisex fragrance, Prerogative. On October 18, 2018, Spears announced her second Las Vegas residency show, Britney: Domination, which was set to launch at Park MGM&#x27;s Park Theatre on February 13, 2019. Spears was slated to make $507,000 per show, which would have made her the highest paid act on the Las Vegas Strip. On October 21, 2018, Spears performed at the Formula One Grand Prix in Austin, the final performance of her Piece of Me Tour.

===2019–2021: Conservatorship dispute, #FreeBritney, and abuse allegations===

On January 4, 2019, Spears announced an indefinite hiatus and the cancellation of her Las Vegas residency after her father, Jamie, suffered a near-fatal colon rupture. In March 2019, Andrew Wallet resigned as co-conservator of her estate after 11 years. Spears entered a psychiatric facility amidst stress from her father&#x27;s illness that same month. The following month, a fan podcast, &quot;Britney&#x27;s Gram&quot;, released a voicemail message from a source who claimed to be a former member of Spears&#x27; legal team. They alleged that Jamie had canceled the residency due to Spears&#x27; refusal to take her medication, that he had been holding her in the facility against her will since January 2019 after she violated a no-driving rule, and that her conservatorship was supposed to have ended in 2009. The allegations gave rise to a movement to terminate the conservatorship, #FreeBritney, which received support from celebrities including singers Cher, Paris Hilton, and Miley Cyrus, and the nonprofit organization American Civil Liberties Union. On April 22, 2019, fans protested outside the West Hollywood City Hall and demanded Spears&#x27; release. Spears said &quot;all [was] well&quot; two days later and left the facility later that month.

In a May 2019 hearing, Judge Brenda Penny ordered a professional evaluation of the conservatorship. In September, Spears&#x27; ex-husband Federline obtained a restraining order against Britney&#x27;s father, Jamie, following an alleged physical altercation between Jamie and one of her sons. Spears&#x27; longtime care manager, Jodi Montgomery, temporarily replaced Jamie as her conservator that same month, which also saw a hearing where no decisions about the arrangement were reached. An interactive pop-up museum dedicated to Spears, dubbed &quot;The Zone&quot;, opened in Los Angeles in February 2020, though it was later suspended in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. She released &quot;Glory&quot;″s Japanese-exclusive bonus track, &quot;Mood Ring&quot; as a single, and debuted a new cover of the album to streaming and digital platforms worldwide in May 2020. In August, Jamie called the #FreeBritney movement &quot;a joke&quot; and its organizers &quot;conspiracy theorists&quot;.

On August 17, 2020, Spears&#x27; court-appointed lawyer, Samuel D. Ingham III, submitted a court filing that documented Spears&#x27; desire to have her conservatorship altered to reflect her wishes as well as lifestyle, to instate Montgomery as her permanent conservator, and to replace Jamie with a fiduciary as conservator of her estate. Four days later, Penny extended the established arrangement until February 2021. In November 2020, Penny approved Bessemer Trust as co-conservator of Spears&#x27; estate alongside Jamie. The following month, Spears released a new deluxe edition of &quot;Glory&quot;, which includes &quot;Mood Ring&quot; and new songs &quot;Swimming in the Stars&quot; and &quot;Matches&quot;.

A documentary about Spears&#x27; career and conservatorship, &quot;Framing Britney Spears&quot;, premiered on FX in February 2021. Spears later revealed that she had seen parts of the documentary, stating that she felt humiliated by the perception of her that was presented and that she &quot;cried for two weeks&quot; following the initial broadcast. The following month, Ingham filed a petition to permanently replace Jamie with Montgomery as the conservator of Spears&#x27; person, citing a 2014 order that determined that Spears did not have the capacity to consent to medical treatment of any form.

On June 22, 2021, shortly before Spears was set to speak to the court, &quot;The New York Times&quot; obtained confidential court documents stating that Spears had pushed for years to end her conservatorship. Spears spoke to the court on June 23, calling the conservatorship &quot;abusive&quot;. She said she had lied by &quot;telling the whole world I&#x27;m OK and I&#x27;m happy&quot;, and that she was traumatized and angry. The court statement received widespread media coverage and generated over 1 million shares on Twitter, over 500,000 messages using the tag #FreeBritney, and more than 150,000 messages with a new hashtag referencing the court appearance, #BritneySpeaks.

On July 1, Bessemer Trust asked the judge to allow them to withdraw from the conservatorship, saying that they had been misled and had entered into the arrangement on the understanding that the conservatorship was voluntary. The same day, senators Elizabeth Warren and Bob Casey Jr. called on federal agencies to increase oversight of the country&#x27;s conservatorship systems. Spears&#x27; manager of 25 years, Larry Rudolph, resigned on July 6 due to her &quot;intention to officially retire&quot; and on that same day, it was reported that Ingham planned to file documents to the court asking to be dismissed. In a July 14 hearing, Judge Penny approved the resignations of Bessemer Trust and Ingham. The court also approved of Spears&#x27; request to hire attorney Mathew S. Rosengart to represent her. Rosengart informed the court that he would be working to terminate the conservatorship. Later that day, Spears publicly endorsed the #FreeBritney movement for the first time, using the hashtag in a caption on an Instagram post. She mentioned feeling &quot;blessed&quot; after earning &quot;real representation&quot;, referring to Judge Penny&#x27;s decision to allow her to choose her own counsel.

On July 26, Rosengart filed a petition seeking to remove Jamie as conservator of Spears&#x27; estate and to replace him with Jason Rubin, a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) at Certified Strategies Inc. in Woodland Hills, California. On August 12, Jamie agreed to step down as conservator at some future date, with his lawyers stating that he wanted &quot;an orderly transition to a new conservator&quot;. On September 7, Jamie filed a petition to end the conservatorship. Five days later, Spears announced her engagement to her longtime boyfriend, Sam Asghari, through an Instagram post. On September 29, Judge Penny suspended Jamie as conservator of Spears&#x27; estate, with accountant John Zabel replacing him on a temporary basis. On November 12, Judge Penny terminated the conservatorship.

===2022–present: Third marriage, &quot;The Woman in Me&quot;, and retirement from singing===
In April 2022, she announced her pregnancy with Asghari&#x27;s child, which ended in a miscarriage the following month. The couple married on June 9 at her home in Thousand Oaks, Los Angeles. None of Spears&#x27; immediate family (including her parents, sister, and brother) were invited; her two sons did not attend. Spears&#x27; first husband, Jason Alexander, attempted to crash the wedding by breaking into her home, armed with a knife, but was arrested. Spears had a three-year restraining order against him. On August 26, Spears and English musician Elton John released the duet &quot;Hold Me Closer&quot;, a remake of John&#x27;s 1972 single &quot;Tiny Dancer&quot;. It was Spears&#x27; first musical release since the termination of her conservatorship. &quot;Hold Me Closer&quot; debuted at number six on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, becoming her 14th top-ten single and her highest-charting song in the chart since &quot;Scream &amp; Shout&quot; (2012). It debuted at number three on the UK Singles Chart, earning Spears her 24th top-ten.

Since the termination of her conservatorship, Spears&#x27; personal life, social media presence, and overall well-being have been subject to renewed media interest and fan speculation, giving rise to conspiracy theories. On January 24, 2023, deputies from the Ventura County Sheriff&#x27;s Office performed a welfare check at Spears&#x27; residence after receiving several calls from fans who were concerned after she deleted her Instagram account. A spokesperson for the Sheriff&#x27;s Department stated that Spears &quot;was safe and in no danger&quot;. Spears addressed the incident on her Twitter account, asking fans to respect her privacy. Spears and the rapper will.i.am released their single, &quot;Mind Your Business&quot;, on July 21, 2023. On August 16, it was announced Spears and Asghari separated after 14 months of marriage. On May 1, 2024, they reached a divorce settlement. The following day, the judge signed off on the settlement and the couple were divorced on December 2, 2024. In September 2023, an additional welfare check was initiated when Spears posted an Instagram video of herself dancing with knives. Her security team assured the attending officer that there was no immediate threat to her safety, and the officer departed. Spears also clarified that the knives were not real.

In February 2022, Spears signed a $15 million book deal for a memoir in one of the biggest book deals of all time. The memoir, &quot;The Woman in Me,&quot; was released on October 24, 2023. It details her rise to fame, public media events, her conservatorship, and her newfound freedom. In the United States, it sold 1.1 million copies, while worldwide it sold 2.4 million copies in print sales during its first week of release.

In January 2024, reports circulated that Charli XCX and Julia Michaels had been asked to write songs for Spears, and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; reported that &quot;management and A&amp;R are trying to get her excited for the music&quot;. Spears denied the reports, saying she would never return to the music industry. However, she also said that she had written more than 20 songs for other artists in the previous two years. In May 2024, Charli XCX confirmed in an interview that she was indeed asked to write for Spears, for which she traveled to Malibu, but that she did not know if Spears was a part of the process explaining that &quot;the team were present... But she didn&#x27;t record it. She obviously didn&#x27;t.&quot;

==Artistry==
===Influences===

Spears has cited Madonna, Janet Jackson, and Whitney Houston as major influences, her &quot;three favorite artists&quot; as a child, whom she would &quot;sing along to ... day and night in [her] living room&quot;; Houston&#x27;s &quot;I Have Nothing&quot; was the song she auditioned to that landed her record deal with Jive Records. Spears also named Mariah Carey as &quot;one of the main reasons I started singing&quot;. Throughout her career, Spears has drawn frequent comparisons to Madonna and Jackson in particular, in terms of vocals, choreography, and stage presence. According to Spears: &quot;I know when I was younger, I looked up to people ... like, you know, Janet Jackson and Madonna. And they were major inspirations for me. But I also had my own identity and I knew who I was.&quot;

In the 2002 book &quot;Madonnastyle&quot; by Carol Clerk, she is quoted saying: &quot;I have been a huge fan of Madonna since I was a little girl. She&#x27;s the person that I&#x27;ve really looked up to. I would really, really like to be a legend like Madonna.&quot; Spears cited &quot;That&#x27;s the Way Love Goes&quot; as the inspiration for her song &quot;Touch of My Hand&quot; from her album &quot;In the Zone&quot;, saying &quot;I like to compare it to &#x27;That&#x27;s the Way Love Goes,&#x27; kind of a Janet Jackson thing.&quot; She also said her song &quot;Just Luv Me&quot; from her &quot;Glory&quot; album also reminded her of &quot;That&#x27;s the Way Love Goes&quot;.

After meeting Spears face to face, Janet Jackson stated: &quot;she said to me, &#x27;I&#x27;m such a big fan; I really admire you.&#x27; That&#x27;s so flattering. Everyone gets inspiration from some place. And it&#x27;s awesome to see someone else coming up who&#x27;s dancing and singing, and seeing how all these kids relate to her. A lot of people put it down, but what she does is a positive thing.&quot; Madonna said of Spears in the documentary &quot;&quot;: &quot;I admire her talent as an artist ... There are aspects about her that I recognize in myself when I first started out in my career&quot;. Spears has also named Michael Jackson, Mariah Carey, Sheryl Crow, Otis Redding, Shania Twain, Brandy, Beyoncé, Natalie Imbruglia, Cher, and Prince as inspirations, and younger artists such as Selena Gomez and Ariana Grande.

===Musical style===
Spears is described as a pop artist and generally explores the genre in the form of Following her debut, she was credited with influencing the revival of teen pop in the late 1990s. Rob Sheffield of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; wrote: &quot;Spears carries on the classic archetype of the rock &amp; roll teen queen, the dungaree doll, the angel baby who just has to make a scene.&quot; In a review of &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described her music as a &quot;blend of infectious, rap-inflected dance-pop and smooth balladry&quot;. &quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot; saw Spears working with several R&amp;B producers to create &quot;a combination of bubblegum, urban soul, and raga&quot;. Her third studio album, &quot;Britney&quot;, derived from the teen pop niche &quot;[r]hythmically and melodically&quot;, but was described as &quot;sharper, tougher than what came before&quot;, incorporating genres such as R&amp;B, disco, and funk.

Spears has explored and heavily incorporated the genres of electropop and dance music in her records, as well as influences of urban and hip hop, which are most present on &quot;In the Zone&quot; and &quot;Blackout&quot;. &quot;In the Zone&quot; also experiments with Euro trance, reggae, and Middle Eastern music. &quot;Femme Fatale&quot; and &quot;Britney Jean&quot; were also heavily influenced by electronic music genres. Spears&#x27; ninth studio album, &quot;Glory&quot;, is more eclectic and experimental than her previous released work. She commented that it &quot;took a lot of time ... it&#x27;s really different ... there are like two or three songs that go in the direction of more urban that I&#x27;ve wanted to do for a long time now, and I just haven&#x27;t really done that.&quot;

&quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; and &quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot; address themes such as love and relationships from a teenager&#x27;s point of view. Following the massive commercial success of her first two studio albums, Spears&#x27; team and producers wanted to maintain the formula that took her to the top of the charts. Spears, however, was no longer satisfied with the sound and themes covered on her records. She co-wrote five songs and choose each track&#x27;s producer on her third studio album, &quot;Britney&quot;, which lyrics address the subjects of reaching adulthood, sexuality, and self-discovery. Sex, dancing, freedom, and love continued to be Spears&#x27; music main subjects on her subsequent albums. Her fifth studio effort, &quot;Blackout&quot;, also addresses issues such as fame and media scrutiny, including on the song &quot;Piece of Me&quot;.

Spears&#x27; music has also been noted for some catchphrases. The opening in her debut single &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, &quot;Oh, baby baby&quot; is considered to be one of her signature lines and has been parodied in the media by various artists such as Nicole Scherzinger and Ariana Grande. It has been used in variating forms throughout her music, such as simply, &quot;baby&quot; and &quot;oh baby&quot;, as well as the &quot;Blackout&quot; track, &quot;Ooh Ooh Baby&quot;. On the initial development of &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, Barry Weiss noted Spears&#x27; inception of the catchphrase from her strange ad-libbing during the recording of the song. He commented further, &quot;We thought it was really weird at first. It was strange. It was not the way Max wrote it. But it worked! We thought it could be a really good opening salvo for her.&quot; The opening line in &quot;Gimme More&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s Britney, bitch&quot; has become another signature phrase. An early review of &quot;Blackout&quot; suggested the phrase was &quot;simply laughable&quot;. Amy Roberts of &quot;Bustle&quot; called it &quot;an indelible cultural turning point, transforming a frenetic, floundering moment in the superstar&#x27;s career to one of strength and empowerment&quot;.

===Voice===
Spears is a soprano. Other sources state that she possesses a contralto vocal range. Prior to her breakthrough success, she is described as having sung &quot;much deeper than her highly recognizable trademark voice of today&quot;, with Eric Foster White, who worked with Spears on her debut album, &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, being cited as &quot;[shaping] her voice over the course of a month&quot; upon being signed to Jive Records &quot;to where it is today—distinctively, unmistakably Britney&quot;. Rami Yacoub, who co-produced Spears&#x27; debut album with lyricist Max Martin, commented, &quot;I know from Denniz Pop and Max&#x27;s previous productions, when we do songs, there&#x27;s kind of a nasal thing. With N&#x27; Sync and the Backstreet Boys, we had to push for that mid-nasal voice. When Britney did that, she got this kind of raspy, sexy voice.&quot;

Guy Blackman of &quot;The Age&quot; wrote that &quot;[t]he thing about Spears, though, is that her biggest songs, no matter how committee-created or impossibly polished, have always been convincing because of her delivery, her commitment and her presence. ... Spears expresses perfectly the conflicting urges of adolescence, the tension between chastity and sexual experience, between hedonism and responsibility, between confidence and vulnerability.&quot; Producer William Orbit, who worked with Spears on her album &quot;Britney Jean&quot;, stated regarding her vocals: &quot;[Britney] didn&#x27;t get so big just because [she] put on great shows; [she] got to be that way because [her voice is] unique: you hear two words and you know who is singing&quot;.

Spears has also been criticized for her reliance on Auto-Tune and her vocals being &quot;over-processed&quot; on records. Erlewine criticized Spears&#x27; singing abilities in a review of her &quot;Blackout&quot; album, stating: &quot;Never the greatest vocalist, her thin squawk could be dismissed early in her career as an adolescent learning the ropes, but nearly a decade later her singing hasn&#x27;t gotten any better, even if the studio tools to masquerade her weaknesses have.&quot; Joan Anderman of &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; remarked that &quot;Spears sounds robotic, nearly inhuman, on her records, so processed is her voice by digital pitch-shifters and synthesizers.&quot;

Kayla Upadhyaya of &quot;The Michigan Daily&quot; has provided a different point of view, stating: &quot;Auto-tuned and over-processed vocals define [Spears]&#x27;s voice as an artist, and in her music, auto-tune isn&#x27;t so much a gimmick as it is an instrument used to highlight, contort and make a statement.&quot; Adam Markovitz of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; opines that &quot;Spears is no technical singer, that&#x27;s for sure. But backed by Martin and Dr. Luke&#x27;s wall of sound, her vocals melt into a mix of babytalk coo and coital panting that is, in its own overprocessed way, just as iconic and propulsive as Michael Jackson&#x27;s yips or Eminem&#x27;s snarls.&quot;

===Stage performances and videos===
Spears is known for her stage performances, particularly the elaborate dance routines which incorporate &quot;belly-dancing and tempered erotic moves&quot; that are credited with influencing &quot;dance-heavy acts&quot; such as Danity Kane and the Pussycat Dolls. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; readers voted Spears their second-favorite dancing musician. Spears is described as being much more shy than her stage persona suggests. She said that performing is &quot;a boost to [her] confidence. It&#x27;s like an alter-ego type thing. Something clicks and I go and turn into this different person. I think it&#x27;s kind of a gift to be able to do that.&quot; Her 2000, 2001, and 2003 MTV Video Music Awards performances were lauded, while her 2007 presentation was widely panned by critics, as she &quot;teetered through her dance steps and mouthed only occasional words&quot;. &quot;Billboard&quot; called her 2016 &quot;comeback&quot; performance at the show &quot;an effective, but not entirely glorious, bid to regain pop superstardom&quot;.

After her knee injuries and personal problems, Spears&#x27; &quot;showmanship&quot; and dance abilities came under criticism. Serge F. Kovaleski of &quot;The New York Times&quot; watched her in 2016 and stated: &quot;Once a fluid, natural dancer, Ms. Spears can appear stiff, even robotic, today, relying on flailing arms and flashy sets.&quot; &quot;Las Vegas Sun&quot;″s Robin Leach seemed more impressed over Spears&#x27; efforts on the concert by saying that she delivered a &quot;flawless performance&quot; on the residency&#x27;s opening night.

It has been widely reported that Spears lip-syncs during live performances, which often prompts criticism from music critics and concert goers. Some, however, claimed that, although she &quot;got plenty of digital support&quot;, she &quot;doesn&#x27;t merely lip-sync&quot; during her live shows. In 2016, Sabrina Weiss of Refinery29 referred to her lip-syncing as a &quot;well-known fact that&#x27;s not even taboo anymore.&quot; Noting on the prevalence of lip-syncing, the &quot;Los Angeles Daily News&quot; opined: &quot;In the context of a Britney Spears concert, does it really matter? ... you [just] go for the somewhat-ridiculous spectacle of it all&quot;. Spears herself has commented on the topic, arguing: &quot;Because I&#x27;m dancing so much, I do have a little bit of playback, but there&#x27;s a mixture of my voice and the playback. ... It really pisses me off because I&#x27;m busting my ass out there and singing at the same time and nobody ever gives me credit for it&quot;.

In 2012, VH1 ranked Spears as the fourth Greatest Woman of the Video Era, while &quot;Billboard&quot; ranked her as the eight Greatest Music Video Artist of All Time in 2020, explaining: &quot;The storylines, the dancing, the &quot;outfits&quot;. Right from the start, the pop princess established the lengths of her creativity with some of the most memorable videos of the last three decades.&quot; She has been retroactively noted as the pioneer for her early career videography. She conceptualized the &quot;iconic Catholic schoolgirl and cheerleader motif&quot; in the &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; video, rejecting the animation video idea. She also made the &quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot; video &quot;dance-centric rather than space-centric as her producers suggested&quot;. She also used her dancer&#x27;s intuition to help select the beats for each track.

==Public image==
Upon launching her music career with &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, Spears was labeled a teen idol, and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; described her as &quot;the latest model of a classic product: the unneurotic pop star who performs her duties with vaudevillian pluck and spokesmodel charm.&quot; The April 1999 cover of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; pictured a 17-year-old Spears reclining on a bed, wearing an exposed bra and hot pants while cradling a Teletubby in one arm. The American Family Association (AFA) decried the image as &quot;a disturbing mix of childhood innocence and adult sexuality&quot; and called on &quot;God-loving Americans to boycott stores selling Britney&#x27;s albums&quot;. Spears addressed the outcry, commenting: &quot;What&#x27;s the big deal? I have strong morals. ... I&#x27;d do it again. I thought the pictures were fine. And I was tired of being compared to Debbie Gibson and all of this bubblegum pop all the time.&quot; Shortly before this, Spears had announced publicly she would remain abstinent until marriage.

An early criticism of Spears dismissed her as &quot;the product of a Swedish songwriting factory that had no real hand in either her music or her persona&quot;. &quot;Vox&quot; editor Constance Grady wrote this was perpetuated from the fact that Spears debuted in the late 1990s, when music was dominated by rockism, that prizes &quot;so-called authenticity and grittiness of rock above all else&quot;. Spears&#x27; &quot;slick, breezy pop was an affront to rockist sensibilities, and claiming that Spears was fake was an easy way to dismiss her.&quot; Ron Levy for &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; noted that &quot;I have to tell you, if the record company could have created more than one Britney Spears, they would have done it, and they tried!&quot;

&quot;Billboard&quot; opined that, by the time Spears released her second album, &quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot;, &quot;There was a shift occurring in both the music and her public image: She was sharper, sexier and singing about more grown-up fare, setting the stage for 2001&#x27;s &quot;Britney&quot;, which shed her innocent skin and ushered her into adulthood.&quot; &quot;Britney&quot;″s lead single, &quot;I&#x27;m a Slave 4 U&quot;, and its music video were also credited for distancing her from her previous &quot;wholesome bubblegum star&quot; image. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic remarked, &quot;If 2001&#x27;s &quot;Britney&quot; was a transitional album, capturing Spears at the point when she wasn&#x27;t a girl and not yet a woman, its 2003 follow-up, &quot;In the Zone&quot;, is where she has finally completed that journey and turned into Britney, the Adult Woman.&quot; Erlewine likened Spears to fellow singer Christina Aguilera, explaining that both equated &quot;maturity with transparent sexuality and the pounding sounds of nightclubs&quot;. Brittany Spanos of &quot;LA Weekly&quot; stated that Spears &quot;set the bar for the &#x27;adulthood&#x27; transition teen pop stars often struggle with&quot;.

Spears&#x27; erratic behavior and personal problems during 2006–2008 were highly publicized and affected both her career and public image. Erlewine writes that &quot;each new disaster [was] stripping away any residual sexiness in her public image&quot;. In a 2008 article, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s Vanessa Grigoriadis described her much-publicized personal issues as &quot;the most public downfall of any star in history&quot;. Spears later received favorable media attention; &quot;Billboard&quot; wrote that her appearance at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards &quot;was a picture of professionalism and poise&quot; after her &quot;disastrous&quot; performance the previous year, while &quot;Business Insider&quot; ran an article on how she had &quot;lost control of her life ... and then made an incredible career comeback&quot;. In 2017, Spears said: &quot;I think I had to give myself more breaks through my career and take responsibility for my mental health. ... I wrote back then, that I was lost and didn&#x27;t know what to do with myself. I was trying to please everyone around me because that&#x27;s who I am deep inside. There are moments where I look back and think: &#x27;What the hell was I thinking?&#x27;&quot;

In September 2002, Spears was placed at number eight on VH1&#x27;s 100 Sexiest Artists list. She was placed at number one on &quot;FHM&quot;″s 100 Sexiest Women in the World list in 2004, and, in December 2012, &quot;Complex&quot; ranked her 12th on its 100 Hottest Female Singers of All Time list. Remarking upon her perceived image as a sex symbol, Spears stated: &quot;When I&#x27;m on stage, that&#x27;s my time to do my thing and go there and be that and it&#x27;s fun. It&#x27;s exhilarating just to be something that you&#x27;re not. And people tend to believe it.&quot; In 2003, &quot;People&quot; cited her as one of the 50 Most Beautiful People.

Spears is recognized as a gay icon and received the 2018 GLAAD Vanguard Award at the GLAAD Media Awards for her role in &quot;accelerating acceptance for the LGBTQ community&quot;. She addressed the &quot;unwavering loyalty&quot; and &quot;lack of judgment&quot; of her LGBTQ fans in &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Love Letters to the LGBTQ Community. She said: &quot;Your stories are what inspire me, bring me joy, and make me and my sons strive to be better people.&quot; Manuel Betancourt of &quot;Vice&quot; wrote about the &quot;queer adoration&quot;, especially of gay men, on Spears, and said that &quot;Where other gay icons exude self-possession, Spears&#x27; fragile resilience has made her an even more fascinating role model, closer to Judy Garland than to Lady Gaga ... she&#x27;s a glittering mirror ball, a fractured reflection of those men on the dance floor back onto themselves.&quot; &quot;HuffPost&quot;″s Ben Appel attributed Spears&#x27; status as a gay icon to her &quot;oh-so-innocent/not that innocent&quot; Monroe-like sensuality, her sweet, almost saccharine nature, her beyond basic but addictive pop songs, her dance moves, her phoenix-out-of-the-fire comeback from a series of mental health crises, and her unmistakable tenderness. &quot;Britney is camp. She is a fashion plate. A doll. Britney is a drag queen.&quot;

Since her early years in the public eye, Spears has been a tabloid fixture and a paparazzi target. According to &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, photos of Spears sold for a combined value of $100 million in 2007. Harvey Levin, the founder of &quot;TMZ&quot;, said in an interview, &quot;Britney is gold. She is crack to our readers. Her life is a complete train-wreck, and I thank God for her every day.&quot; Steve Huey of AllMusic remarked that &quot;among female singers of [Spears&#x27;] era ... her celebrity star power was rivaled only by Jennifer Lopez.&quot; &#x27;Britney Spears&#x27; was Yahoo!&#x27;s most popular search term between 2005 and 2008, and has been in a total of seven different years. Spears was named as Most Searched Person in the &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; book edition 2007 and 2009. She was later named as the most searched person of the decade 2000–2009.

As a public figure, Spears &quot;has never been known to her fans as a politically active, committed—or even aware—entertainer.&quot; In a 2003 interview with Tucker Carlson, she commented on President George W. Bush and the Iraq War, saying that &quot;we should just trust our president in every decision that he makes ... and be faithful in what happens&quot;. Michael Moore included the footage of Spears&#x27; answer in his &quot;anti-Bush&quot; documentary &quot;Fahrenheit 9/11&quot;, which, according to &quot;The Washington Times&quot;″s James Frazier, presented her &quot;as an example of a naive American blindly trusting a dishonest commander in chief&quot; and fueled the &quot;urban legend&quot; of a &quot;conservative&quot; Spears. Frazier also said that &quot;the few positions she has taken can hardly be considered conservative&quot;, such as supporting same-sex marriage. In 2016, Spears posted pictures of a meeting with Hillary Clinton on social media. She described Clinton as &quot;an inspiration and [a] beautiful voice for women around the world&quot;.

In December 2017, Spears publicly showed support for the DREAM Act in the wake of the announcement that Donald Trump would end the DACA policy, which previously granted undocumented immigrants who came to the country as minors a renewable two-year period of deferred action from deportation. She posted a photo of herself on social media wearing a black T-shirt that reads &quot;We Are All Dreamers&quot; in white letters. The caption read, &quot;Tell Congress to pass the #DreamAct&quot;.

On September 15, 2021, Spears was named one of the 100 most influential people of 2021 by &quot;Time.&quot; A few days before the editors&#x27;s list was released, Spears was put at the top of the readers voting list of which personalities should be included on the annual &quot;Time&quot; 100 list. Deemed an icon of 2021, editors highlighted the impact of her fight against her conservatorship as well as of the #FreeBritney movement. In October 2021, Spears thanked her fans and the #FreeBritney movement for &quot;freeing me from my conservatorship&quot;. Britney Spears was also named most famous celebrity from Louisiana according to a study done by Baton Rouge.

==Legacy==

Referred to as the &quot;Princess of Pop&quot;, Spears was credited as one of the &quot;driving force[s] behind the return of teen pop in the late 1990s&quot;. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s Stacy Lambe explained that she &quot;help[ed] to usher in a new era for the genre that had gone dormant in the decade that followed New Kids on the Block. ... Spears would lead an army of pop stars ... built on slick Max Martin productions, plenty of sexual innuendo and dance-heavy performances. [She became] one of the most successful artists of all time—and a cautionary tale for a generation, whether they paid attention or not.&quot; In a 2021 article for &quot;Time&quot;, Maura Johnston opined that &quot;Spears&#x27; legacy as a pop artist is complex, made up of dazzling musical heights and music-business-borne lows&quot;. Johnston also commented: &quot;While Spears&#x27; catalog is part of the canon that defines the first 20 years of this millennium, one hopes that her public struggles, and the strength she&#x27;s shown while enduring them, will lead to her cementing her true legacy: Reshaping the machine that turns those songs into cultural touchstones.&quot;

&quot;Glamour&quot; contributor Christopher Rosa described her as &quot;one of pop music&#x27;s defining voices. ... When she emerged onto the scene in 1998 with &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, the world hadn&#x27;t seen a performer like her. Not since Madonna had a female artist affected the genre so profoundly.&quot; &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Robert Kelly observed that Spears&#x27; &quot;sexy and coy&quot; vocals on her debut single &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; &quot;kicked off a new era of pop vocal stylings that would influence countless artists to come&quot;. In 2020, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the song at number one on a list of the 100 Greatest Debut Singles of All Time and Rob Sheffield described it as &quot;One of those pop manifestos that announces a new sound, a new era, a new century. But most of all, a new star ... With &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, [Spears] changed the sound of pop forever: It&#x27;s Britney, bitch. Nothing was ever the same.&quot;

Spears was at the forefront of the female teen pop explosion starting in 1999 and extending through the 2000s, leading the pack of Christina Aguilera, Jessica Simpson, and Mandy Moore. All of these performers had been developing material in 1998, but the market changed dramatically in December 1998 when Spears&#x27; single and video were charting highly. RCA Records quickly signed Aguilera and released her debut single to capitalize on Spears&#x27; success, producing her debut hit single &quot;Genie in a Bottle&quot;. Simpson consciously modeled her persona as more mature than Spears; her &quot;I Wanna Love You Forever&quot; charted in September 1999, and her album &quot;Sweet Kisses&quot; followed shortly after. Moore&#x27;s first single, &quot;Candy&quot;, hit the airwaves a month before Simpson&#x27;s single, but it did not perform as well on the charts; Moore was often seen as less accomplished than Spears and the others, coming in fourth of the &quot;pop princesses&quot;. Fueling media stories about their competition for first place, Spears and Aguilera traded barbs but also compliments through the 2000s.

Alim Kheraj of &quot;Dazed&quot; called Spears &quot;one of pop&#x27;s most important pioneers&quot;. After eighteen years as a performer, &quot;Billboard&quot; described her as having &quot;earned her title as one of pop&#x27;s reigning queens. Since her early days as a Mouseketeer, [Spears] has pushed the boundaries of 21st century sounds, paving the way for a generation of artists to shamelessly embrace glossy pop and redefine how one can accrue consistent success in the music industry.&quot; &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;″s Adam Markovitz described Spears as &quot;an American institution, as deeply sacred and messed up as pro wrestling or the filibuster.&quot; In 2012, she was ranked as the fourth VH1&#x27;s 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era show list. VH1 also cited her among its choices on the 100 Greatest Women in Music in 2012 and the 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons in 2003. In 2020, &quot;Billboard&quot; ranked her eight on its 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of all-time list. In October 2024, &quot;Billboard&quot; placed Spears at number six on their Greatest Pop Stars of the 21st Century list.

Spears and her work have influenced various artists including Katy Perry, Meghan Trainor, Demi Lovato, Kelly Key, Kristinia DeBarge, Little Boots, Charli XCX, Chappell Roan, Marina Diamandis, the Weeknd, Tegan and Sara, Pixie Lott, Grimes, Selena Gomez, Hailee Steinfeld, Pabllo Vittar, Tinashe, Victoria Justice, Cassie, Leah Wellbaum of Slothrust, the Saturdays, Normani, Miley Cyrus, Cheryl, Lana Del Rey, Ava Max, Sam Smith, and Rina Sawayama. During the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, Lady Gaga said that Spears &quot;taught us all how to be fearless, and the industry wouldn&#x27;t be the same without her.&quot; Gaga has also cited Spears as an influence, calling her &quot;the most provocative performer of my time&quot;.

Before Spears joined &quot;The X Factor&quot;, Simon Cowell explained that he is &quot;fascinated by [Britney]. The fact that she&#x27;s one of the most talked about – not just pop stars – but people in the world today, means that you&#x27;ve got this star power. ... She&#x27;s still hot, she&#x27;s still having hit records and she&#x27;s still controversial, there&#x27;s a reason for that.&quot; Marina Diamandis named Spears as the main influence behind her album &quot;Electra Heart&quot;. Lana Del Rey said that the music video for &quot;Toxic&quot; inspires her. Porcelain Black describes her music as a &quot;love child&quot; of Spears and Marilyn Manson. Rita Ora&#x27;s 2019 music video for &quot;Only Want You&quot; was inspired by Spears&#x27; &quot;Everytime&quot; music video, and said in a stories from Instagram, &quot;Hey @britneyspears this was for you because I love you so. Pay homage to the ones who inspire! #icon.&quot;

Spears has been credited with redefining Las Vegas residencies as a retirement place for musicians. Her debut concert residency was described as &quot;the natural evolution of Celine Dion&#x27;s powerhourse Vegas residency, a still-charting star of another generation redefining the role of Strip headliner.&quot; &quot;Forbes&quot; named Spears the sixth-highest-earning female musician of 2015.&quot; She is credited with influencing and paving the way for other artists&#x27;s residencies such as Jennifer Lopez&#x27;s Jennifer Lopez: All I Have, Bruno Mars&#x27;s Bruno Mars at Park MGM, and Backstreet Boys&#x27; Backstreet Boys: Larger Than Life. The arrival of Spears &quot;saw the pop promoters finally tap into the younger crowd arriving in town for a good time&quot;.

Spears&#x27; much-publicized personal problems and her subsequent career comeback have inspired some artists. Gwyneth Paltrow&#x27;s character in the 2010 film &quot;Country Strong&quot; was inspired by Spears&#x27; treatment by the media. According to film director Shana Fest, &quot;that&#x27;s where this movie came from. I mean, I was seeing what was happening in the media to Britney Spears. I think it&#x27;s tragic how we treat people who give us so much, and we love to see them knocked down to build them back up again, to knock them down again.&quot; Nicki Minaj has cited Spears&#x27; comeback after her much-publicized personal issues as an inspiration. Spears&#x27; hounding by paparazzi and personal problems also inspired Barry Manilow&#x27;s album &quot;15 Minutes&quot;. Manilow said: &quot;She couldn&#x27;t have a life without them pulling up next to her car and following her and driving her crazy to the point where, that was around the time she shaved off her hair. ... We all looked at it in horror ... So it seemed like a thing to be writing an album about.&quot; Bebo Norman wrote a song about Spears, called &quot;Britney&quot;, which was inspired by &quot;culture&#x27;s make-or-break treatment of celebrities.&quot;

In 2008, &quot;Salon&quot; published an article titled &quot;The Britney Economy&quot; describing how Spears is a driving force in music and fashion, stimulating consumer purchases and media coverage. Magazines, paparazzi, and record labels make millions of dollars, and Spears profits to a lesser degree. Along with Alicia Silverstone, Christy Turlington, and Naomi Campbell, Spears has been credited with introducing the navel piercing to mainstream culture.

==Achievements==
Spears&#x27; awards and accolades include a Grammy Award; 15 Guinness World Records; six MTV Video Music Awards, including the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award; seven &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Awards, including the Millennium Award; the inaugural Radio Disney Icon Award; the GLAAD Media Award&#x27;s Vanguard Award; and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

Spears is listed by the &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; as having the &quot;Best-selling album by a teenage solo artist&quot; for her debut studio album, &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, which sold over 13 million copies in the United States. Melissa Ruggieri of the &quot;Richmond Times-Dispatch&quot; reported: &quot;She&#x27;s also marked for being the best-selling teenage artist. Before she turned 20 in 2001, Spears had sold over 37 million albums worldwide&quot;.

, according to the &quot;Evening Standard&quot;, Spears has sold over 150 million records worldwide, making her one of the best-selling music artists of all time. She also sold more than 70 million records in United States, including 36.9 million digital singles and 33.6 million digital albums. Spears is further recognized as the best-selling female albums artist of the 2000s in the United States, as well as the fifth overall. In December 2009, &quot;Billboard&quot; ranked Spears the 8th Artist of the 2000s decade in the United States. She is one of the few artists in history to have had a number-one single and a number-one studio album in the US during each of the three decades of her career. With &quot;3&quot; in 2009 and &quot;Hold It Against Me&quot; in 2011, she became the second artist after Mariah Carey in the Hot 100&#x27;s history to debut at number one with two or more songs. In 2016, Spears ranked at number twenty on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Greatest Of All Time Top Dance Club Artists list.

==Other ventures==
===Product and endorsements===

In 2000, Spears released a limited edition of sunglasses titled Shades of Britney. In 2001, she signed a deal with shoe company Skechers, and a $7–8 million promotional deal with Pepsi, their biggest entertainment deal at the time. Aside from numerous commercials with the latter during that year, she also appeared in a 2004 Pepsi television commercial in the theme of &quot;Gladiators&quot; with singers Beyoncé, Pink, and Enrique Iglesias. On June 19, 2002, she released her first multi-platform video game, &quot;Britney&#x27;s Dance Beat&quot;, which received positive reviews.

In March 2009, Spears was announced as the new face of clothing brand Candie&#x27;s. Dari Marder, chief marketing officer for the brand, said: &quot;Everybody loves a comeback and nobody&#x27;s doing it better than Britney. She&#x27;s just poised for even greater success.&quot; In 2010, Spears designed a limited edition line for the brand, which was released in stores in July 2010. In 2011, she teamed up with Sony, Make Up For Ever, and Plenty of Fish to release her music video for &quot;Hold It Against Me&quot;, earning her $500,000 for the product placement.

Spears also teamed up with Hasbro in 2012 to release an exclusive version of &quot;Twister Dance&quot;, which includes a remix of &quot;Till the World Ends&quot;. She was also featured on a commercial, which was directed by Ray Kay, to promote the game. Spears was also featured on the commercial of &quot;Twister Dance Rave&quot;, and the game included a Twister remix of &quot;Circus&quot;. In March 2018, it was revealed that Spears would be the face of Kenzo, a contemporary French luxury clothing house.

Spears&#x27; range of commercial deals and products also includes beauty care products and perfumes. She released her first perfume with Elizabeth Arden, Curious in 2004, which broke the company&#x27;s first-week gross for a perfume. By 2009, she had released seven more perfumes including Fantasy. In 2010, Spears released her eighth fragrance, Radiance.

In 2011, Radiance was reissued as a new perfume titled Cosmic Radiance. Worldwide, Spears sold over one million bottles in the first five years, with gross receipts of $1.5 billion. In 2016, Spears contacted Glu Mobile to create her own role-playing game, &quot;Britney Spears: American Dream&quot;. The app officially launched in May 2016 and is compatible with iOS and Android. On June 17, 2016, Spears announced the release of her twentieth fragrance, Private Show. , Spears has released 24 fragrances through Elizabeth Arden.

===Philanthropy===
Spears founded The Britney Spears Foundation, a charitable entity set up to help children in need. The philosophy behind the Foundation was that music and entertainment has a healing quality that can benefit children. The Foundation also supported the annual Britney Spears Camp for the Performing Arts, where campers had the opportunity to explore and develop their talents. In April 2002, through the efforts of Spears and The Britney Spears Foundation, a grant of $1 million was made to the Twin Towers Fund to support the children of uniformed service heroes affected by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, including New York City Fire Department and its Emergency Medical Services Command, the New York City Police Department, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the New York State Office of court Administration and other government offices. However, it was reported in 2008 that the Foundation had a deficit of $200,000. After Spears went through conservatorship, her father and lawyer Andrew Wallet zeroed out the effort, leading to its closure in 2011.

On October 30, 2001, Spears, alongside Bono and other popular recording artists under the name &quot;Artists Against AIDS Worldwide&quot;, released an album consisting of multiple versions of Marvin Gaye&#x27;s &quot;What&#x27;s Going On&quot;, intending to benefit AIDS programs in Africa and other impoverished regions. In the wake of Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Spears donated $350,000 to Music Rising. Spears has also helped several charities during her career, including Madonna&#x27;s Kabbalah-based Spirituality for Kids, cancer charity Gilda&#x27;s Club Worldwide, Promises Foundation, and United Way, with the latter two focused on giving families from various disadvantaged situations new hope and stable foundations for the future.

On October 24, 2015, Spears donated $120,000 to the Nevada Childhood Cancer Foundation. In addition, $1 of each ticket sale for her Las Vegas residency, Britney: Piece of Me, was donated to the nonprofit organization. Spears also fundraised for the charity through social media, in addition to selling limited edition merchandise, with all proceeds going to the NCCF. On October 27, 2016, Spears partnered with Zappos and XCYCLE to host the &quot;Britney Spears Piece of Me Charity Ride&quot; in Boca Park, Las Vegas to raise additional money toward her goal of $1 million for the NCCF, with $450,000 having already been raised from Spears&#x27; ticket sales and merchandise. Participants were entered for a chance to win a spin class with Spears herself. The event ultimately went on to raise $553,130. The fundraising ultimately led to the development of the NCCF Britney Spears Campus in Las Vegas, which saw its grand opening on November 4, 2017. Spears also regularly participates in Spirit Day to combat bullying of LGBTQ youth and bullying.

In March 2020, Spears was participating in the #DoYourPartChallenge, which entails helping people with anything they might need during the COVID-19 pandemic. She told fans to send her messages on Instagram if they need supportive words during the coronavirus pandemic, with Spears picking three fans. In February 2024, Spears partnered with New York City dessert shop Glace, to create the &quot;Britney Brûlée&quot; dessert, with a portion of the proceeds from its sales being donated to The Trevor Project.

==Discography==
* &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Oops!... I Did It Again&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Britney&quot; (2001)
* &quot;In the Zone&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Blackout&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Circus&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Femme Fatale&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Britney Jean&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Glory&quot; (2016)

==Filmography==

* &quot;Longshot&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Crossroads&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Austin Powers in Goldmember&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Pauly Shore Is Dead&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Fahrenheit 9/11&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Corporate Animals&quot; (2019)

==Concerts and residencies==
===Tours===
* ...Baby One More Time Tour (1999)
* (You Drive Me) Crazy Tour (2000)
* Oops!... I Did It Again Tour (2000–2001)
* Dream Within a Dream Tour (2001–2002)
* The Onyx Hotel Tour (2004)
* The M+M&#x27;s Tour (2007)
* The Circus Starring Britney Spears (2009)
* Femme Fatale Tour (2011)
* (2017)
* Piece of Me Tour (2018)

===Residencies===
* (2013–2017)

==Written works==
* &quot;Heart to Heart&quot; (with Lynne Spears) (2000)
* &quot;A Mother&#x27;s Gift&quot; (with Lynne Spears) (2001)
* &quot;Crossroads Diary&quot; (with Felicia Culotta) (2002)
* &quot;The Woman in Me&quot; (2023)

==See also==

* Artists with the most number-one European singles
* &quot;Forbes&quot; Celebrity 100
* List of artists who reached number one in the United States
* List of best-selling singles
* List of &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones
* List of dancers
* List of highest-certified music artists in the United States
* List of most expensive music videos
* List of most-followed Twitter accounts
* &quot;Time&quot; 100

==References==
===Citations===
===Book sources===
* 
*
* 
* 
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="0" end="19" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Jean Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375931" start="98" end="113" title="Princess of Pop" label="Princess of Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="195" end="234" title="world&amp;#x27;s best-selling music artists" label="world&amp;#x27;s best-selling music artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q130601845" start="236" end="274" title="Cultural impact of Britney Spears" label="An influential figure in popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q739138" start="312" end="320" title="teen pop" label="teen pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q687284" start="407" end="418" title="Star Search" label="Star Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070749" start="435" end="456" title="The Mickey Mouse Club" label="The Mickey Mouse Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q27184" start="483" end="495" title="Jive Records" label="Jive Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q190911" start="555" end="576" title="...Baby One More Time (album)" label="...Baby One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q152999" start="600" end="623" title="Oops!... I Did It Again (album)" label="Oops!... I Did It Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="652" end="683" title="List of best-selling albums" label="best-selling albums of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q208207" start="811" end="818" title="Britney (album)" label="Britney"/>
<link wikidata="Q27166" start="842" end="853" title="In the Zone" label="In the Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192755" start="935" end="943" title="Blackout (Britney Spears album)" label="Blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="983" end="992" title="Masterpiece" label="best work"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1030" end="1055" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q19345" start="1084" end="1090" title="Circus (Britney Spears album)" label="Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167554" start="1114" end="1126" title="Femme Fatale (Britney Spears album)" label="Femme Fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315424" start="1169" end="1186" title="concert residency" label="concert residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077150" start="1239" end="1251" title="Britney Jean" label="Britney Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q26213106" start="1275" end="1280" title="Glory (Britney Spears album)" label="Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q155016" start="1356" end="1377" title="...Baby One More Time" label="...Baby One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q733931" start="1391" end="1414" title="Oops!... I Did It Again (song)" label="Oops!... I Did It Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q861337" start="1428" end="1448" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Slave 4 U" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Slave 4 U"/>
<link wikidata="Q379751" start="1462" end="1467" title="Toxic (song)" label="Toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380181" start="1481" end="1491" title="Gimme More" label="Gimme More"/>
<link wikidata="Q323991" start="1505" end="1514" title="Womanizer (song)" label="Womanizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q229553" start="1528" end="1529" title="3 (Britney Spears song)" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q115800" start="1543" end="1561" title="Hold It Against Me" label="Hold It Against Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q81275" start="1579" end="1597" title="Scream &amp;amp; Shout" label="Scream &amp;amp; Shout"/>
<link wikidata="Q682718" start="1786" end="1801" title="conservatorship" label="conservatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="1832" end="1841" title="mental breakdown" label="breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q107482964" start="1856" end="1893" title="Britney Spears conservatorship case" label="legal battle over her conservatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q105419788" start="1990" end="2012" title="Framing Britney Spears" label="Framing Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q123142255" start="2196" end="2211" title="The Woman in Me (memoir)" label="The Woman in Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="2241" end="2288" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;The New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q641786" start="2373" end="2383" title="Crossroads (2002 film)" label="Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997527" start="2411" end="2428" title="Britney Spears products" label="numerous products"/>
<link wikidata="Q130234707" start="2454" end="2461" title="Fantasy (fragrance)" label="Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362329" start="2467" end="2488" title="Elizabeth Arden, Inc." label="Elizabeth Arden, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="2612" end="2629" title="Nielsen SoundScan" label="Nielsen SoundScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351425" start="2701" end="2710" title="List of awards and nominations received by Britney Spears" label="accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="2721" end="2733" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="2738" end="2760" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="2766" end="2788" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="2796" end="2830" title="Billboard Music Award" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879031" start="2846" end="2862" title="Billboard Millennium Award" label="Millennium Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q821861" start="2869" end="2905" title="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award" label="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="2924" end="2946" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="2954" end="2963" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q130732494" start="3008" end="3046" title="Billboard&amp;#x27;s Greatest Pop Stars of the 21st Century" label="Greatest Pop Stars of the 21st Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3139" end="3152" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="3174" end="3180" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3208" end="3249" title="Forbes list of the world&amp;#x27;s highest-paid musicians#Female" label="world&amp;#x27;s highest-paid female musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="3292" end="3298" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3375" end="3379" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="3410" end="3450" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q846178" start="3627" end="3646" title="McComb, Mississippi" label="McComb, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q96816262" start="3668" end="3706" title="Jamie Spears" label="James &amp;quot;Jamie&amp;quot; Parnell Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036419" start="3711" end="3730" title="Lynne Irene Bridges" label="Lynne Irene Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q11854686" start="3889" end="3907" title="Bryan Spears" label="Bryan James Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q55497" start="3912" end="3929" title="Jamie Lynn Spears" label="Jamie Lynn Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q210181" start="3944" end="3954" title="Bible Belt" label="Bible Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="3984" end="4009" title="evangelical Protestantism" label="evangelical Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="4078" end="4094" title="Southern Baptist" label="Southern Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="4163" end="4172" title="Kabbalist" label="Kabbalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4246" end="4257" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215497" start="4409" end="4424" title="Kevin Federline" label="Kevin Federline"/>
<link wikidata="Q107482964" start="4507" end="4522" title="Britney Spears conservatorship dispute" label="conservatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="4692" end="4699" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q986205" start="4789" end="4808" title="Kentwood, Louisiana" label="Kentwood, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606480" start="4934" end="4953" title="What Child Is This?" label="What Child Is This?"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="4967" end="4979" title="kindergarten" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290841" start="5159" end="5171" title="Béla Károlyi" label="Béla Károlyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="5389" end="5396" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070749" start="5450" end="5471" title="The Mickey Mouse Club" label="The Mickey Mouse Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248009" start="5684" end="5719" title="Professional Performing Arts School" label="Professional Performing Arts School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383398" start="5857" end="5866" title="Ruthless!" label="Ruthless!"/>
<link wikidata="Q687284" start="5944" end="5955" title="Star Search" label="Star Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="6115" end="6133" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="6135" end="6152" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q193815" start="6154" end="6166" title="Ryan Gosling" label="Ryan Gosling"/>
<link wikidata="Q229426" start="6168" end="6180" title="Keri Russell" label="Keri Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q538409" start="6186" end="6195" title="JC Chasez" label="JC Chasez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896401" start="6292" end="6308" title="Parklane Academy" label="Parklane Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q931165" start="6425" end="6433" title="Clueless" label="Clueless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662634" start="6453" end="6460" title="cliques" label="cliques"/>
<link wikidata="Q750053" start="6562" end="6572" title="homecoming" label="homecoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215299" start="6577" end="6593" title="Winter Formal" label="Christmas formal"/>
<link wikidata="Q730887" start="6668" end="6680" title="Lou Pearlman" label="Lou Pearlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532145" start="6710" end="6719" title="Innosense" label="Innosense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766401" start="6772" end="6785" title="Larry Rudolph" label="Larry Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="6848" end="6863" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q155412" start="7045" end="7057" title="Toni Braxton" label="Toni Braxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="7326" end="7341" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="7350" end="7361" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="7411" end="7418" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q233817" start="7428" end="7441" title="Debbie Gibson" label="Debbie Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233886" start="7454" end="7461" title="Tiffany Darwish" label="Tiffany"/>
<link wikidata="Q27184" start="7503" end="7515" title="Jive Records" label="Jive Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="7568" end="7575" title="A&amp;amp;R" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460910" start="7887" end="7901" title="I Have Nothing" label="I Have Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101884" start="8225" end="8237" title="Clive Calder" label="Clive Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="8299" end="8310" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089707" start="8531" end="8546" title="Cheiron Studios" label="Cheiron Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q318223" start="8647" end="8657" title="Max Martin" label="Max Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q372570" start="8659" end="8669" title="Denniz Pop" label="Denniz Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q384159" start="8675" end="8686" title="Rami Yacoub" label="Rami Yacoub"/>
<link wikidata="Q190911" start="8895" end="8927" title="L&amp;#x27;Oreal Hair Zone Mall Tour" label="L&amp;#x27;Oreal Hair Zone Mall Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="9098" end="9103" title="NSYNC" label="NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q190911" start="9135" end="9156" title="...Baby One More Time (album)" label="...Baby One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="9235" end="9260" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="9289" end="9297" title="Music recording sales certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="9305" end="9346" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q155016" start="9534" end="9555" title="...Baby One More Time" label="...Baby One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="9840" end="9869" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472550" start="9999" end="10019" title="best-selling singles" label="best-selling singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="10084" end="10090" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q935283" start="10106" end="10139" title="Best Female Pop Vocal Performance" label="Best Female Pop Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628569" start="10343" end="10405" title="List of million-selling singles in the United Kingdom" label="25th-most successful song of all time in British chart history"/>
<link wikidata="Q158585" start="10517" end="10537" title="(You Drive Me) Crazy" label="(You Drive Me) Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190911" start="10623" end="10644" title="...Baby One More Time (album)" label="...Baby One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q426240" start="10863" end="10889" title="...Baby One More Time Tour" label="...Baby One More Time Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369551" start="11043" end="11068" title="(You Drive Me) Crazy Tour" label="(You Drive Me) Crazy Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q152999" start="11172" end="11195" title="Oops!... I Did It Again (album)" label="Oops!... I Did It Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="11340" end="11357" title="Nielsen SoundScan" label="Nielsen SoundScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486861" start="11521" end="11534" title="Rob Sheffield" label="Rob Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="11754" end="11769" title="rock &amp;amp; roll" label="rock &amp;amp; roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q733931" start="11823" end="11846" title="Oops!... I Did It Again (song)" label="Oops!... I Did It Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q683419" start="11997" end="12002" title="Lucky (Britney Spears song)" label="Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027891" start="12146" end="12166" title="Best Pop Vocal Album" label="Best Pop Vocal Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141112" start="12259" end="12287" title="Oops!... I Did It Again Tour" label="Oops!... I Did It Again Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997527" start="12358" end="12393" title="Britney Spears products" label="Britney Spears&amp;#x27; Heart to Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q822575" start="12475" end="12502" title="2000 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2000 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="12820" end="12837" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="12897" end="12914" title="distance learning" label="distance learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895891" start="12924" end="12958" title="University of Nebraska High School" label="University of Nebraska High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156427" start="12986" end="13001" title="Destin, Florida" label="Destin, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q123142255" start="13003" end="13021" title="The Woman in Me (memoir)" label="In her 2023 memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="13055" end="13063" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744526" start="13363" end="13396" title="American Music Awards of 2001" label="28th Annual American Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133749" start="13409" end="13420" title="Rock in Rio" label="Rock in Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q104877749" start="13478" end="13507" title="Super Bowl XXXV halftime show" label="Super Bowl XXXV halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="13521" end="13530" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="13608" end="13613" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049315" start="13675" end="13695" title="A Mother&amp;#x27;s Gift" label="A Mother&amp;#x27;s Gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q208207" start="13733" end="13740" title="Britney (album)" label="Britney"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="13836" end="13841" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q866207" start="13846" end="13858" title="the Neptunes" label="the Neptunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="14064" end="14087" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="14091" end="14099" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q943715" start="14475" end="14488" title="Overprotected" label="Overprotected"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="14579" end="14599" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q861337" start="14630" end="14650" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Slave 4 U" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Slave 4 U"/>
<link wikidata="Q849690" start="14748" end="14775" title="2001 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2001 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q88905445" start="14812" end="14826" title="Bhagavan Antle" label="Bhagavan Antle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716137" start="14840" end="14853" title="Burmese python" label="albino python"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="14935" end="14939" title="PETA" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q507529" start="15415" end="15440" title="Dream Within a Dream Tour" label="Dream Within a Dream Tour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15515" end="15534" title="pièce de résistance" label="pièce de résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="15717" end="15721" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15729" end="15742" title="Living Proof: The Farewell Tour" label="Farewell Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="15788" end="15794" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q641786" start="15925" end="15935" title="Crossroads (2002 film)" label="Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q572144" start="16637" end="16651" title="Cry Me a River (Justin Timberlake song)" label="Cry Me a River"/>
<link wikidata="Q513151" start="16688" end="16704" title="Justified (album)" label="solo debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q984294" start="16907" end="16918" title="Wade Robson" label="Wade Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="16923" end="16934" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44707" start="16951" end="16961" title="Fred Durst" label="Fred Durst"/>
<link wikidata="Q869842" start="17261" end="17270" title="Everytime" label="Everytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q460234" start="17314" end="17326" title="Annet Artani" label="Annet Artani"/>
<link wikidata="Q849845" start="17428" end="17450" title="2003 MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="17456" end="17474" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q542497" start="17493" end="17506" title="Like a Virgin (song)" label="Like a Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="17550" end="17557" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q804471" start="17741" end="17748" title="Blender (magazine)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q27166" start="17874" end="17885" title="In the Zone" label="In the Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q266786" start="18001" end="18005" title="Vibe (magazine)" label="Vibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="18133" end="18136" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q837719" start="18727" end="18747" title="Me Against the Music" label="Me Against the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q379751" start="18791" end="18796" title="Toxic (song)" label="Toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q740968" start="18841" end="18861" title="Best Dance Recording" label="Best Dance Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q869842" start="18869" end="18878" title="Everytime" label="Everytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q829726" start="18896" end="18906" title="Outrageous (song)" label="Outrageous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747750" start="18971" end="19000" title="A Little White Wedding Chapel" label="A Little White Wedding Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="19004" end="19013" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="19015" end="19021" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="19040" end="19048" title="annulled" label="annulled"/>
<link wikidata="Q692254" start="19207" end="19226" title="the Onyx Hotel Tour" label="the Onyx Hotel Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q708232" start="19413" end="19433" title="arthroscopic surgery" label="arthroscopic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719589" start="19566" end="19581" title="Kabbalah Centre" label="Kabbalah Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q215497" start="19666" end="19681" title="Kevin Federline" label="Kevin Federline"/>
<link wikidata="Q507985" start="19830" end="19842" title="Shar Jackson" label="Shar Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19994" end="20020" title="Britney and Kevin: Chaotic" label="Britney and Kevin: Chaotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="20064" end="20067" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q125965039" start="20424" end="20431" title="Curious (fragrance)" label="Curious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362329" start="20438" end="20453" title="Elizabeth Arden, Inc." label="Elizabeth Arden"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20587" end="20616" title="Greatest Hits: My Prerogative" label="Greatest Hits: My Prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="20648" end="20665" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="20711" end="20724" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q311241" start="20728" end="20739" title="Bobby Brown" label="Bobby Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q826459" start="20753" end="20767" title="My Prerogative" label="My Prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q734086" start="20918" end="20935" title="Do Somethin&amp;#x27;" label="Do Somethin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q752360" start="21073" end="21100" title="Someday (I Will Understand)" label="Someday (I Will Understand)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21274" end="21299" title="B in the Mix: The Remixes" label="B in the Mix: The Remixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212135" start="21805" end="21821" title="Will &amp;amp; Grace" label="Will &amp;amp; Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003295" start="21842" end="21855" title="Buy, Buy Baby" label="Buy, Buy Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="22055" end="22075" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="22114" end="22124" title="Demi Moore" label="Demi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q10544831" start="22132" end="22173" title="More Demi Moore" label="August 1991 &amp;quot;Vanity Fair&amp;quot; cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="22565" end="22579" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260022" start="22629" end="22648" title="drug rehabilitation" label="drug rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="22661" end="22668" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708222" start="22773" end="22793" title="Tarzana, Los Angeles" label="Tarzana, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q648898" start="22936" end="22950" title="House of Blues" label="House of Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140830" start="22966" end="22985" title="The M+M&amp;#x27;s Tour" label="The M+M&amp;#x27;s Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q191485" start="23148" end="23161" title="Louis Vuitton" label="Louis Vuitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q213487" start="23239" end="23245" title="Hummer" label="Hummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192755" start="23437" end="23445" title="Blackout (Britney Spears album)" label="Blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881977" start="24062" end="24090" title="2008 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="2008 MTV Europe Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="24157" end="24166" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q380181" start="24215" end="24225" title="Gimme More" label="Gimme More"/>
<link wikidata="Q585049" start="24240" end="24267" title="2007 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2007 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q717044" start="24492" end="24503" title="Piece of Me" label="Piece of Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q845925" start="24669" end="24682" title="Break the Ice (Britney Spears song)" label="Break the Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052562" start="25053" end="25080" title="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center" label="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q123171259" start="25231" end="25248" title="visitation rights" label="visitation rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169282" start="25411" end="25444" title="Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center" label="Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640177" start="25456" end="25489" title="5150 (involuntary psychiatric hold)" label="5150 involuntary psychiatric hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q682718" start="25547" end="25562" title="conservatorship" label="conservatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q96816262" start="25582" end="25594" title="Jamie Spears" label="Jamie Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q147235" start="25758" end="25779" title="How I Met Your Mother" label="How I Met Your Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699307" start="25800" end="25812" title="Ten Sessions" label="Ten Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q745807" start="26100" end="26122" title="2008 MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q313388" start="26159" end="26169" title="Jonah Hill" label="Jonah Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091031" start="26206" end="26223" title="Best Female Video" label="Best Female Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q617869" start="26225" end="26239" title="Best Pop Video" label="Best Pop Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065651" start="26245" end="26262" title="MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year" label="Video of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="26483" end="26496" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q19345" start="26812" end="26818" title="Circus (Britney Spears album)" label="Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="27136" end="27158" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q323991" start="27401" end="27410" title="Womanizer (song)" label="Womanizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q824436" start="27967" end="28001" title="The Circus Starring Britney Spears" label="The Circus Starring Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q627760" start="28186" end="28208" title="The Singles Collection (Britney Spears album)" label="The Singles Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q229553" start="28261" end="28262" title="3 (Britney Spears song)" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031925" start="28569" end="28582" title="Candie&amp;#x27;s" label="Candie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="28657" end="28673" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q152178" start="28740" end="28744" title="Glee (TV series)" label="Glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567420" start="28765" end="28781" title="Britney/Brittany" label="Britney/Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28818" end="28832" title="Nielsen ratings#Ratings/share and total viewers" label="Nielsen rating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28880" end="28897" title="Nielsen ratings#Demographics" label="18–49 demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167554" start="29034" end="29046" title="Femme Fatale (Britney Spears album)" label="Femme Fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="29229" end="29241" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="29246" end="29259" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="29364" end="29368" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q115800" start="29473" end="29491" title="Hold It Against Me" label="Hold It Against Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="29710" end="29722" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184920" start="29749" end="29768" title="Till the World Ends" label="Till the World Ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q179715" start="29874" end="29884" title="I Wanna Go" label="I Wanna Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q130826" start="30077" end="30085" title="Criminal (Britney Spears song)" label="Criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29065" start="30303" end="30321" title="2011 England riots" label="2011 England riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="30611" end="30618" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q830734" start="30637" end="30644" title="S&amp;amp;M (song)" label="S&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q664480" start="31025" end="31047" title="When the Sun Goes Down (Selena Gomez &amp;amp; the Scene album)" label="When the Sun Goes Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q726076" start="31064" end="31092" title="Selena Gomez &amp;amp; the Scene" label="Selena Gomez &amp;amp; the Scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q174360" start="31132" end="31149" title="Femme Fatale Tour" label="Femme Fatale Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q774443" start="31243" end="31251" title="Pollstar" label="Pollstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q821861" start="31491" end="31527" title="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award" label="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q572513" start="31535" end="31562" title="2011 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2011 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31623" end="31655" title="B in the Mix: The Remixes Vol. 2" label="B in the Mix: The Remixes Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q185465" start="31911" end="31922" title="Paula Abdul" label="Paula Abdul"/>
<link wikidata="Q851618" start="31942" end="31955" title="The X Factor (American season 2)" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q940089" start="31963" end="31971" title="The X Factor (American TV series)" label="USA show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453652" start="31981" end="31993" title="The X Factor" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162629" start="32009" end="32021" title="Simon Cowell" label="Simon Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q604575" start="32023" end="32032" title="L.A. Reid" label="L.A. Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q41173" start="32055" end="32066" title="Demi Lovato" label="Demi Lovato"/>
<link wikidata="Q167696" start="32081" end="32099" title="Nicole Scherzinger" label="Nicole Scherzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q42493" start="32238" end="32248" title="Katy Perry" label="Katy Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="32345" end="32348" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="32373" end="32386" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8160" start="32445" end="32465" title="Carly Rose Sonenclar" label="Carly Rose Sonenclar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776445" start="32548" end="32560" title="The X Factor (American season 3)" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q202536" start="32581" end="32594" title="Paulina Rubio" label="Paulina Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q81275" start="32631" end="32649" title="Scream &amp;amp; Shout" label="Scream &amp;amp; Shout"/>
<link wikidata="Q185610" start="32661" end="32670" title="will.i.am" label="will.i.am"/>
<link wikidata="Q83515" start="32747" end="32757" title="Willpower (will.i.am album)" label="#willpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q473873" start="33124" end="33128" title="Vevo" label="Vevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="33195" end="33201" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077150" start="33418" end="33430" title="Britney Jean" label="Britney Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q185610" start="33469" end="33478" title="will.i.am" label="will.i.am"/>
<link wikidata="Q13462665" start="33865" end="33874" title="Ooh La La (Britney Spears song)" label="Ooh La La"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253366" start="33909" end="33921" title="The Smurfs 2" label="The Smurfs 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="34008" end="34028" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342565" start="34081" end="34117" title="Planet Hollywood Resort &amp;amp; Casino" label="Planet Hollywood Resort &amp;amp; Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="34392" end="34403" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q27184" start="34430" end="34442" title="Jive Records" label="Jive Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971773" start="34479" end="34499" title="RCA/Jive Label Group" label="RCA/Jive Label Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971773" start="34520" end="34535" title="RCA/Jive Label Group" label="BMG Label Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077150" start="34567" end="34579" title="Britney Jean" label="Britney Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="34947" end="34977" title="Billboard 200" label="U.S. &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="35147" end="35162" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q14900372" start="35305" end="35315" title="Work Bitch" label="Work Bitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="35450" end="35479" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q115800" start="35782" end="35800" title="Hold It Against Me" label="Hold It Against Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="35873" end="35889" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131715" start="36024" end="36031" title="Perfume (Britney Spears song)" label="Perfume"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="36114" end="36143" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="36240" end="36251" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549385" start="36303" end="36310" title="Bangerz" label="Bangerz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010167" start="36383" end="36415" title="40th People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards" label="40th People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048038" start="36423" end="36440" title="Microsoft Theater" label="Microsoft Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982302" start="37083" end="37103" title="Good Morning Britain (2014 TV programme)" label="Good Morning Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315424" start="37177" end="37194" title="concert residency" label="concert residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342565" start="37198" end="37224" title="Planet Hollywood Las Vegas" label="Planet Hollywood Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18719384" start="37291" end="37306" title="Charlie Ebersol" label="Charlie Ebersol"/>
<link wikidata="Q19796137" start="37408" end="37420" title="Pretty Girls (Britney Spears and Iggy Azalea song)" label="Pretty Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748803" start="37433" end="37444" title="Iggy Azalea" label="Iggy Azalea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="37474" end="37503" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865422" start="37607" end="37646" title="2015 Billboard Music Awards" label="2015 &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q312674" start="37896" end="37911" title="Giorgio Moroder" label="Giorgio Moroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892411" start="37937" end="37944" title="Déjà Vu (Giorgio Moroder album)" label="Déjà Vu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37983" end="37999" title="Tom&amp;#x27;s Diner#Giorgio Moroder version" label="Tom&amp;#x27;s Diner"/>
<link wikidata="Q20078794" start="38222" end="38245" title="2015 Teen Choice Awards" label="2015 Teen Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q391629" start="38309" end="38326" title="Teen Choice Awards" label="Teen Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="38408" end="38414" title="the CW" label="the CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q16913682" start="38428" end="38443" title="Jane the Virgin" label="Jane the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729296" start="38501" end="38515" title="Gina Rodriguez" label="Gina Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348943" start="38747" end="38748" title="V (American magazine)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q958151" start="38913" end="38926" title="Mario Testino" label="Mario Testino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050023" start="39192" end="39198" title="Casual game" label="casual"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="39199" end="39208" title="Role-playing video game" label="role-play"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39235" end="39265" title="Britney Spears: American Dream" label="Britney Spears: American Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450081" start="39293" end="39303" title="Glu Mobile" label="Glu Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="39337" end="39340" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79576" start="39345" end="39356" title="Google Play" label="Google Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074866" start="39429" end="39468" title="2016 Billboard Music Awards" label="2016 &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879031" start="39531" end="39569" title="Billboard Millennium Award" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Millennium Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894496" start="39628" end="39635" title="Make Me (Britney Spears song)" label="Make Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511893" start="39716" end="39722" title="G-Eazy" label="G-Eazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26213106" start="39741" end="39746" title="Glory (Britney Spears album)" label="Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="39816" end="39819" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q22815135" start="39871" end="39898" title="2016 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2016 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q21427772" start="40171" end="40189" title="Me, Myself &amp;amp; I (G-Eazy and Bebe Rexha song)" label="Me, Myself &amp;amp; I"/>
<link wikidata="Q778079" start="40236" end="40248" title="Marie Claire" label="Marie Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27680519" start="40944" end="40957" title="Slumber Party (song)" label="Slumber Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q434745" start="41019" end="41026" title="Tinashe" label="Tinashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q107406565" start="41099" end="41110" title="Sam Asghari" label="Sam Asghari"/>
<link wikidata="Q27868160" start="41211" end="41243" title="43rd People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards" label="43rd People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q483325" start="41364" end="41379" title="Ellen DeGeneres" label="Ellen DeGeneres"/>
<link wikidata="Q839150" start="41390" end="41414" title="The Ellen DeGeneres Show" label="The Ellen DeGeneres Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q210703" start="41580" end="41599" title="Israeli Labor Party" label="Israeli Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864522" start="42009" end="42039" title="2017 Radio Disney Music Awards" label="2017 Radio Disney Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="42163" end="42172" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="42198" end="42204" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40715" start="42553" end="42567" title="Jennifer Lopez" label="Jennifer Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q379751" start="42591" end="42596" title="Toxic (song)" label="Toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14900372" start="42613" end="42623" title="Work Bitch" label="Work Bitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q406497" start="42691" end="42741" title="Dick Clark&amp;#x27;s New Year&amp;#x27;s Rockin&amp;#x27; Eve" label="Dick Clark&amp;#x27;s New Year&amp;#x27;s Rockin&amp;#x27; Eve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42859" end="42873" title="Fantasy (fragrance)#Sunset Fantasy" label="Sunset Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29053158" start="42893" end="42909" title="Piece of Me Tour" label="Piece of Me Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q187844" start="43076" end="43083" title="Pitbull (rapper)" label="Pitbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q495327" start="43092" end="43106" title="supporting act" label="supporting act"/>
<link wikidata="Q774443" start="43167" end="43175" title="Pollstar" label="Pollstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q895795" start="43562" end="43567" title="Kenzo (brand)" label="Kenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513594" start="43767" end="43787" title="GLAAD Vanguard Award" label="GLAAD Vanguard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266111" start="43795" end="43812" title="GLAAD Media Award" label="GLAAD Media Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44137" end="44148" title="Britney Spears products#Fragrances" label="Prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854509" start="44273" end="44281" title="Park MGM" label="Park MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="44423" end="44438" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q9209" start="44485" end="44507" title="United States Grand Prix" label="Formula One Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="44511" end="44517" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q96816262" start="44770" end="44775" title="Jamie Spears" label="Jamie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="45607" end="45611" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q47899" start="45613" end="45625" title="Paris Hilton" label="Paris Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="45631" end="45642" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="45675" end="45705" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q54959009" start="45753" end="45777" title="West Hollywood City Hall" label="West Hollywood City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="46564" end="46581" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q95739235" start="46654" end="46663" title="Mood Ring (Britney Spears song)" label="Mood Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q537098" start="47201" end="47210" title="fiduciary" label="fiduciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896431" start="47355" end="47369" title="Bessemer Trust" label="Bessemer Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q101483058" start="47565" end="47586" title="Swimming in the Stars" label="Swimming in the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q104149519" start="47603" end="47610" title="Matches (Britney Spears and Backstreet Boys song)" label="Matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q105419788" start="47686" end="47708" title="Framing Britney Spears" label="Framing Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="47729" end="47731" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="48301" end="48319" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q434706" start="49155" end="49171" title="Elizabeth Warren" label="Elizabeth Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q887841" start="49176" end="49189" title="Bob Casey Jr." label="Bob Casey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5766401" start="49320" end="49333" title="Larry Rudolph" label="Larry Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q108104007" start="49676" end="49695" title="Mathew Rosengart" label="Mathew S. Rosengart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056337" start="50253" end="50280" title="Certified Public Accountant" label="Certified Public Accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="51167" end="51193" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="51559" end="51569" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q113625345" start="51594" end="51608" title="Hold Me Closer (Elton John and Britney Spears song)" label="Hold Me Closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562766" start="51658" end="51669" title="Tiny Dancer" label="Tiny Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="51824" end="51853" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q81275" start="51943" end="51961" title="Scream &amp;amp; Shout" label="Scream &amp;amp; Shout"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="52010" end="52026" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920379" start="52322" end="52358" title="Ventura County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Office" label="Ventura County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="52492" end="52501" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="52655" end="52662" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q185610" start="52730" end="52739" title="will.i.am" label="will.i.am"/>
<link wikidata="Q120731652" start="52769" end="52787" title="Mind Your Business (song)" label="Mind Your Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q112872112" start="53453" end="53483" title="List of largest book deals" label="biggest book deals of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q123142255" start="53503" end="53518" title="The Woman in Me (memoir)" label="The Woman in Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084390" start="53841" end="53851" title="Charli XCX" label="Charli XCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q20051697" start="53856" end="53870" title="Julia Michaels" label="Julia Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="53923" end="53936" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="54578" end="54585" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="54587" end="54600" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="54606" end="54621" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460910" start="54796" end="54810" title="I Have Nothing" label="I Have Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="54913" end="54925" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072075" start="55648" end="55677" title="That&amp;#x27;s the Way Love Goes (Janet Jackson song)" label="That&amp;#x27;s the Way Love Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="56678" end="56693" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="56695" end="56707" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="56709" end="56720" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="56722" end="56734" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131433" start="56736" end="56748" title="Shania Twain" label="Shania Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q690974" start="56750" end="56756" title="Brandy Norwood" label="Brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="56758" end="56765" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q488353" start="56767" end="56784" title="Natalie Imbruglia" label="Natalie Imbruglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="56786" end="56790" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="56796" end="56802" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q83287" start="56848" end="56860" title="Selena Gomez" label="Selena Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q151892" start="56865" end="56878" title="Ariana Grande" label="Ariana Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="56926" end="56929" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q739138" start="57055" end="57063" title="teen pop" label="teen pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="57541" end="57548" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="57619" end="57623" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="57940" end="57950" title="electropop" label="electropop"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="57955" end="57966" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529400" start="58008" end="58013" title="urban contemporary" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="58018" end="58025" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q170435" start="58149" end="58160" title="trance music" label="Euro trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="58162" end="58168" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503406" start="58174" end="58194" title="Middle Eastern music" label="Middle Eastern music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="58282" end="58298" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q167696" start="59823" end="59841" title="Nicole Scherzinger" label="Nicole Scherzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864883" start="60111" end="60122" title="Barry Weiss" label="Barry Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q310735" start="60188" end="60198" title="ad-libbing" label="ad-libbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q318223" start="60337" end="60340" title="Max Martin" label="Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708257" start="60666" end="60672" title="Bustle (magazine)" label="Bustle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="60874" end="60881" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q37137" start="60924" end="60933" title="contralto" label="contralto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063547" start="60934" end="60945" title="Voice type" label="vocal range"/>
<link wikidata="Q190911" start="61166" end="61187" title="...Baby One More Time (album)" label="...Baby One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q27184" start="61290" end="61302" title="Jive Records" label="Jive Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q372570" start="61482" end="61492" title="Denniz Pop" label="Denniz Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="61760" end="61767" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q366804" start="62205" end="62218" title="William Orbit" label="William Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077150" start="62262" end="62274" title="Britney Jean" label="Britney Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q784762" start="62552" end="62561" title="Auto-Tune" label="Auto-Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="63014" end="63030" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751250" start="63214" end="63232" title="The Michigan Daily" label="The Michigan Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="63533" end="63553" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="63821" end="63836" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="63852" end="63858" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060468" start="64145" end="64156" title="Danity Kane" label="Danity Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q102385" start="64161" end="64179" title="the Pussycat Dolls" label="the Pussycat Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260860" start="65311" end="65324" title="Las Vegas Sun" label="Las Vegas Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352612" start="65333" end="65344" title="Robin Leach" label="Robin Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307207" start="65835" end="65845" title="Refinery29" label="Refinery29"/>
<link wikidata="Q499188" start="65994" end="66016" title="Los Angeles Daily News" label="Los Angeles Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034298" start="67492" end="67501" title="teen idol" label="teen idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="67513" end="67526" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="67648" end="67660" title="vaudevillian" label="vaudevillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14957233" start="67823" end="67832" title="hot pants" label="hot pants"/>
<link wikidata="Q41403" start="67850" end="67859" title="Teletubby" label="Teletubby"/>
<link wikidata="Q464203" start="67876" end="67903" title="American Family Association" label="American Family Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q233817" start="68291" end="68304" title="Debbie Gibson" label="Debbie Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130750875" start="68758" end="68765" title="rockism" label="rockism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="69022" end="69035" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q861544" start="69915" end="69953" title="I&amp;#x27;m Not a Girl, Not Yet a Woman" label="wasn&amp;#x27;t a girl and not yet a woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q952554" start="70298" end="70307" title="LA Weekly" label="LA Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71086" end="71115" title="Gimme More#Live performances" label="performance the previous year"/>
<link wikidata="Q286707" start="71129" end="71145" title="Business Insider" label="Business Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="71721" end="71724" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q157015" start="71796" end="71799" title="FHM" label="FHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q27921999" start="71808" end="71838" title="FHM&amp;#x27;s 100 Sexiest Women (UK)" label="100 Sexiest Women in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156550" start="71882" end="71889" title="Complex (magazine)" label="Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="72258" end="72264" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q40221" start="72348" end="72356" title="gay icon" label="gay icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513594" start="72379" end="72399" title="GLAAD Vanguard Award" label="GLAAD Vanguard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266111" start="72407" end="72425" title="GLAAD Media Awards" label="GLAAD Media Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q249838" start="72816" end="72820" title="Vice (magazine)" label="Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="73063" end="73075" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="73224" end="73232" title="HuffPost" label="HuffPost"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="73348" end="73354" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="73594" end="73598" title="Camp (style)" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="73645" end="73655" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="73723" end="73730" title="Tabloid journalism" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q156624" start="73745" end="73754" title="paparazzi" label="paparazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="73782" end="73793" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783580" start="73869" end="73881" title="Harvey Levin" label="Harvey Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630118" start="73904" end="73907" title="TMZ" label="TMZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40715" start="74201" end="74215" title="Jennifer Lopez" label="Jennifer Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="74254" end="74260" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q743162" start="74710" end="74724" title="Tucker Carlson" label="Tucker Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="74753" end="74767" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="74776" end="74784" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="74914" end="74927" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q221852" start="75019" end="75034" title="Fahrenheit 9/11" label="Fahrenheit 9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="75068" end="75088" title="The Washington Times" label="The Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="75423" end="75440" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="75492" end="75507" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011448" start="75687" end="75696" title="DREAM Act" label="DREAM Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="75734" end="75746" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="76172" end="76199" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="76217" end="76221" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375931" start="76828" end="76843" title="Princess of Pop" label="Princess of Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q212464" start="77123" end="77144" title="New Kids on the Block" label="New Kids on the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792617" start="77470" end="77484" title="Maura Johnston" label="Maura Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q472870" start="77976" end="77983" title="Glamour (magazine)" label="Glamour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486861" start="78672" end="78685" title="Rob Sheffield" label="Rob Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="79096" end="79114" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q168992" start="79116" end="79131" title="Jessica Simpson" label="Jessica Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q187832" start="79137" end="79148" title="Mandy Moore" label="Mandy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="79322" end="79333" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q326246" start="79464" end="79481" title="Genie in a Bottle" label="Genie in a Bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626553" start="79567" end="79591" title="I Wanna Love You Forever" label="I Wanna Love You Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q667701" start="79645" end="79657" title="Sweet Kisses" label="Sweet Kisses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032057" start="79721" end="79726" title="Candy (Mandy Moore song)" label="Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641941" start="80115" end="80120" title="Dazed" label="Dazed"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="80601" end="80621" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="80807" end="80810" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q130732494" start="81174" end="81212" title="Billboard&amp;#x27;s Greatest Pop Stars of the 21st Century" label="Greatest Pop Stars of the 21st Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q42493" start="81282" end="81292" title="Katy Perry" label="Katy Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403494" start="81294" end="81308" title="Meghan Trainor" label="Meghan Trainor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41173" start="81310" end="81321" title="Demi Lovato" label="Demi Lovato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495947" start="81323" end="81332" title="Kelly Key" label="Kelly Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q259055" start="81334" end="81351" title="Kristinia DeBarge" label="Kristinia DeBarge"/>
<link wikidata="Q178943" start="81353" end="81365" title="Little Boots" label="Little Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084390" start="81367" end="81377" title="Charli XCX" label="Charli XCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281146" start="81379" end="81392" title="Chappell Roan" label="Chappell Roan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234174" start="81394" end="81410" title="Marina Diamandis" label="Marina Diamandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121062" start="81412" end="81422" title="the Weeknd" label="the Weeknd"/>
<link wikidata="Q734756" start="81424" end="81438" title="Tegan and Sara" label="Tegan and Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q207177" start="81440" end="81450" title="Pixie Lott" label="Pixie Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q117970" start="81452" end="81458" title="Grimes" label="Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83287" start="81460" end="81472" title="Selena Gomez" label="Selena Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q231726" start="81474" end="81490" title="Hailee Steinfeld" label="Hailee Steinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q23893181" start="81492" end="81505" title="Pabllo Vittar" label="Pabllo Vittar"/>
<link wikidata="Q434745" start="81507" end="81514" title="Tinashe" label="Tinashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q200194" start="81516" end="81532" title="Victoria Justice" label="Victoria Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q72832" start="81534" end="81540" title="Cassie Ventura" label="Cassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060726" start="81559" end="81568" title="Slothrust" label="Slothrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q756220" start="81570" end="81583" title="the Saturdays" label="the Saturdays"/>
<link wikidata="Q28148022" start="81585" end="81592" title="Normani" label="Normani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="81594" end="81605" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212772" start="81607" end="81613" title="Cheryl (singer)" label="Cheryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q37150" start="81615" end="81627" title="Lana Del Rey" label="Lana Del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q56755505" start="81629" end="81636" title="Ava Max" label="Ava Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q15123969" start="81638" end="81647" title="Sam Smith" label="Sam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q28840001" start="81653" end="81666" title="Rina Sawayama" label="Rina Sawayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q572513" start="81679" end="81706" title="2011 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2011 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="81708" end="81717" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q162629" start="81996" end="82008" title="Simon Cowell" label="Simon Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q657672" start="82424" end="82437" title="Electra Heart" label="Electra Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q270303" start="82520" end="82535" title="Porcelain Black" label="Porcelain Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="82598" end="82612" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q229760" start="82614" end="82622" title="Rita Ora" label="Rita Ora"/>
<link wikidata="Q61917094" start="82657" end="82670" title="Only Want You (Rita Ora song)" label="Only Want You"/>
<link wikidata="Q869842" start="82712" end="82721" title="Everytime" label="Everytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="82768" end="82777" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="82935" end="82944" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="83070" end="83081" title="Celine Dion" label="Celine Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="83214" end="83220" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40715" start="83394" end="83408" title="Jennifer Lopez" label="Jennifer Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="" start="83416" end="83442" title="Jennifer Lopez: All I Have" label="Jennifer Lopez: All I Have"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450" start="83444" end="83454" title="Bruno Mars" label="Bruno Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374043" start="83462" end="83484" title="Bruno Mars at Park MGM" label="Bruno Mars at Park MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="83490" end="83505" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="" start="83512" end="83545" title="Backstreet Boys: Larger Than Life" label="Backstreet Boys: Larger Than Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="83783" end="83798" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137254" start="83839" end="83853" title="Country Strong" label="Country Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q162202" start="84234" end="84245" title="Nicki Minaj" label="Nicki Minaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q302762" start="84410" end="84423" title="Barry Manilow" label="Barry Manilow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550877" start="84443" end="84453" title="15 Minutes (Barry Manilow album)" label="15 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q301061" start="84761" end="84772" title="Bebo Norman" label="Bebo Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971480" start="84813" end="84820" title="Britney (Bebo Norman song)" label="Britney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="84933" end="84938" title="Salon.com" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q199945" start="85235" end="85253" title="Alicia Silverstone" label="Alicia Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q284047" start="85255" end="85273" title="Christy Turlington" label="Christy Turlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q199369" start="85279" end="85293" title="Naomi Campbell" label="Naomi Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q811145" start="85341" end="85355" title="navel piercing" label="navel piercing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="85441" end="85453" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="85458" end="85480" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="85486" end="85508" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q821861" start="85524" end="85560" title="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award" label="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="85568" end="85602" title="Billboard Music Awards" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879031" start="85618" end="85634" title="Billboard Millennium Award" label="Millennium Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266111" start="85679" end="85696" title="GLAAD Media Award" label="GLAAD Media Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513594" start="85704" end="85718" title="GLAAD Vanguard Award" label="Vanguard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="85738" end="85760" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="85793" end="85815" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331013" start="86041" end="86064" title="Richmond Times-Dispatch" label="Richmond Times-Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="86265" end="86281" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="86363" end="86401" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="best-selling music artists of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q229553" start="86954" end="86955" title="3 (Britney Spears song)" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q115800" start="86980" end="86998" title="Hold It Against Me" label="Hold It Against Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="87231" end="87241" title="Dance Club Songs" label="Dance Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945643" start="87436" end="87444" title="Skechers" label="Skechers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="87487" end="87492" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="87714" end="87721" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q160009" start="87723" end="87727" title="Pink (singer)" label="Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q47122" start="87733" end="87749" title="Enrique Iglesias" label="Enrique Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q863486" start="87825" end="87850" title="Britney&amp;#x27;s Dance Beat" label="Britney&amp;#x27;s Dance Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031925" start="87962" end="87975" title="Candie&amp;#x27;s" label="Candie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="88305" end="88309" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011854" start="88311" end="88327" title="Make Up For Ever" label="Make Up For Ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410238" start="88333" end="88347" title="Plenty of Fish" label="Plenty of Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="88487" end="88493" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q611991" start="88543" end="88556" title="Twister (game)" label="Twister Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605172" start="88684" end="88691" title="Ray Kay" label="Ray Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q681319" start="88839" end="88845" title="Circus (Britney Spears song)" label="Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q895795" start="88917" end="88922" title="Kenzo (brand)" label="Kenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q235509" start="89107" end="89122" title="Elizabeth Arden" label="Elizabeth Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q125965039" start="89124" end="89131" title="Curious (fragrance)" label="Curious"/>
<link wikidata="Q130234707" start="89260" end="89267" title="Fantasy (fragrance)" label="Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997527" start="89316" end="89324" title="Radiance (fragrance)" label="Radiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450081" start="89535" end="89545" title="Glu Mobile" label="Glu Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="" start="89589" end="89619" title="Britney Spears: American Dream" label="Britney Spears: American Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="89690" end="89693" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="89698" end="89705" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="90456" end="90473" title="September 11 attacks" label="terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="90999" end="91003" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q189758" start="91152" end="91163" title="Marvin Gaye" label="Marvin Gaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517476" start="91177" end="91197" title="What&amp;#x27;s Going On (Marvin Gaye song)" label="What&amp;#x27;s Going On"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="91297" end="91314" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941636" start="91351" end="91363" title="Music Rising" label="Music Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050859" start="91557" end="91567" title="United Way" label="United Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q147505" start="92114" end="92120" title="Zappos" label="Zappos"/>
<link wikidata="Q965132" start="92692" end="92702" title="Spirit Day" label="Spirit Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="92725" end="92729" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q240126" start="92741" end="92749" title="bullying" label="bullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="92891" end="92908" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425406" start="93240" end="93258" title="The Trevor Project" label="The Trevor Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q190911" start="93285" end="93306" title="...Baby One More Time (album)" label="...Baby One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q152999" start="93328" end="93351" title="Oops!... I Did It Again (album)" label="Oops!... I Did It Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q208207" start="93373" end="93380" title="Britney (album)" label="Britney"/>
<link wikidata="Q27166" start="93402" end="93413" title="In the Zone" label="In the Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192755" start="93435" end="93443" title="Blackout (Britney Spears album)" label="Blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q19345" start="93465" end="93471" title="Circus (Britney Spears album)" label="Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167554" start="93493" end="93505" title="Femme Fatale (Britney Spears album)" label="Femme Fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077150" start="93527" end="93539" title="Britney Jean" label="Britney Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q26213106" start="93561" end="93566" title="Glory (Britney Spears album)" label="Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977774" start="93606" end="93614" title="Longshot (film)" label="Longshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q641786" start="93636" end="93646" title="Crossroads (2002 film)" label="Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q498910" start="93668" end="93695" title="Austin Powers in Goldmember" label="Austin Powers in Goldmember"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604806" start="93717" end="93736" title="Pauly Shore Is Dead" label="Pauly Shore Is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q221852" start="93758" end="93773" title="Fahrenheit 9/11" label="Fahrenheit 9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080340" start="93795" end="93812" title="Corporate Animals" label="Corporate Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q426240" start="93870" end="93896" title="...Baby One More Time Tour" label="...Baby One More Time Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369551" start="93906" end="93931" title="(You Drive Me) Crazy Tour" label="(You Drive Me) Crazy Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141112" start="93941" end="93969" title="Oops!... I Did It Again Tour" label="Oops!... I Did It Again Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q507529" start="93984" end="94009" title="Dream Within a Dream Tour" label="Dream Within a Dream Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q692254" start="94024" end="94043" title="The Onyx Hotel Tour" label="The Onyx Hotel Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140830" start="94053" end="94072" title="The M+M&amp;#x27;s Tour" label="The M+M&amp;#x27;s Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q824436" start="94082" end="94116" title="The Circus Starring Britney Spears" label="The Circus Starring Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q174360" start="94126" end="94143" title="Femme Fatale Tour" label="Femme Fatale Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q29053158" start="94162" end="94178" title="Piece of Me Tour" label="Piece of Me Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036419" start="94273" end="94285" title="Lynne Spears" label="Lynne Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049315" start="94302" end="94322" title="A Mother&amp;#x27;s Gift" label="A Mother&amp;#x27;s Gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q123142255" start="94425" end="94440" title="The Woman in Me (memoir)" label="The Woman in Me"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94471" end="94520" title="European Hot 100 Singles#Most number-one singles" label="Artists with the most number-one European singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467229" start="94523" end="94555" title="Forbes Celebrity 100" label="&amp;quot;Forbes&amp;quot; Celebrity 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845766" start="94558" end="94617" title="List of artists who reached number one in the United States" label="List of artists who reached number one in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472550" start="94620" end="94648" title="List of best-selling singles" label="List of best-selling singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q176752" start="94651" end="94722" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones" label="List of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615651" start="94725" end="94740" title="List of dancers" label="List of dancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607495" start="94743" end="94803" title="List of highest-certified music artists in the United States" label="List of highest-certified music artists in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663496" start="94806" end="94841" title="List of most expensive music videos" label="List of most expensive music videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135974" start="94844" end="94882" title="List of most-followed Twitter accounts" label="List of most-followed Twitter accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="94885" end="94905" title="Time 100" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; 100"/>
</links>
</doc>
