<doc id="3463" wikidata="Q225" url="?curid=3463" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>Bosnia and Herzegovina (), sometimes known as Bosnia-Herzegovina and informally as Bosnia, is a country in Southeast Europe. Situated on the Balkan Peninsula, it borders Serbia to the east, Montenegro to the southeast, and Croatia to the north and southwest. In the south it has a coast on the Adriatic Sea. Bosnia has a moderate continental climate with hot summers and cold, snowy winters. In the central and eastern regions, the geography is mountainous, in the northwest it is moderately hilly, and in the northeast it is predominantly flat. Herzegovina, the smaller, southern region, has a Mediterranean climate and is mostly mountainous. Sarajevo is the capital and the largest city.

The area has been inhabited since at least the Upper Paleolithic, but evidence suggests that during the Neolithic age, permanent human settlements were established, including those that belonged to the Butmir, Kakanj, and Vučedol cultures. After the arrival of the first Indo-Europeans, the area was populated by several Illyrian and Celtic civilizations. The ancestors of the South Slavic peoples that populate the area today arrived during the 6th through the 9th century. In the 12th century, the Banate of Bosnia was established; by the 14th century, this had evolved into the Kingdom of Bosnia. In the mid-15th century, it was annexed into the Ottoman Empire, under whose rule it remained until the late 19th century; the Ottomans brought Islam to the region. From the late 19th century until World War I, the country was annexed into the Austro-Hungarian monarchy. In the interwar period, Bosnia and Herzegovina was part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. After World War II, it was granted full republic status in the newly formed Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In 1992, following the breakup of Yugoslavia, the republic proclaimed independence. This was followed by the Bosnian War, which lasted until late 1995 and ended with the signing of the Dayton Agreement.

The country is home to three main ethnic groups: Bosniaks are the largest group, Serbs the second-largest, and Croats the third-largest. Minorities include Jews, Roma, Albanians, Montenegrins, Ukrainians and Turks. Bosnia and Herzegovina has a bicameral legislature and a presidency made up of one member from each of the three major ethnic groups. However, the central government&#x27;s power is highly limited, as the country is largely decentralized. It comprises two autonomous entities—the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska—and a third unit, the Brčko District, governed by its own local government.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a developing country. Its economy is dominated by industry and agriculture, followed by tourism and the service sector. Tourism has increased significantly in recent years. The country has a social-security and universal-healthcare system, and primary and secondary education is free. Already part of the Council of Europe and the United Nations, Bosnia and Herzegovina is an EU candidate country and has also been a candidate for NATO membership since April 2010.

==Etymology==
The first preserved widely acknowledged mention of a form of the name &quot;Bosnia&quot; is in , a politico-geographical handbook written by the Byzantine emperor Constantine VII in the mid-10th century (between 948 and 952) describing the &quot;small land&quot; ( in Greek) of &quot;Bosona&quot; (), where the Serbs dwell. Bosnia was also mentioned in the &quot;DAI&quot; (χωριον βοσονα, small land of Bosnia), as a region of Baptized Serbia. The section of the handbook is devoted to the Serbian prince&#x27;s lands, and Bosnia is treated as a separate territory, though one that is particularly dependent on Serbs.

The name of the land is believed to derive from the name of the river Bosna that courses through the Bosnian heartland. According to philologist Anton Mayer, the name &quot;Bosna&quot; could derive from Illyrian *&quot;Bass-an-as&quot;, which in turn could derive from the Proto-Indo-European root &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;the running water&quot;. According to the English medievalist William Miller, the Slavic settlers in Bosnia &quot;adapted the Latin designation ... Basante, to their own idiom by calling the stream Bosna and themselves &quot;Bosniaks&quot;&quot;.

The name &quot;Herzegovina&quot; means &quot;herzog&#x27;s [land]&quot;, and &quot;herzog&quot; derives from the German word for &quot;duke&quot;. It originates from the title of a 15th-century Bosnian magnate, Stjepan Vukčić Kosača, who was &quot;Herceg [Herzog] of Hum and the Coast&quot; (1448). Hum (formerly called Zachlumia) was an early medieval principality that had been conquered by the Bosnian Banate in the first half of the 14th century. When the Ottomans took over administration of the region, they called it the Sanjak of Herzegovina (&quot;Hersek&quot;). It was included within the Bosnia Eyalet until the formation of the short-lived Herzegovina Eyalet in the 1830s, which reemerged in the 1850s, after which the administrative region became commonly known as &quot;Bosnia and Herzegovina&quot;.

On initial proclamation of independence in 1992, the country&#x27;s official name was the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but following the 1995 Dayton Agreement and the new constitution that accompanied it, the official name was changed to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

==History==

===Early history===
Bosnia has been inhabited by humans since at least the Paleolithic, as one of the oldest cave paintings was found in Badanj cave. Major Neolithic cultures such as the Butmir and Kakanj were present along the river Bosna dated from –. The bronze culture of the Illyrians, an ethnic group with a distinct culture and art form, started to organize itself in today&#x27;s Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Kosovo, Montenegro and Albania.

From the 8th century BCE, Illyrian tribes evolved into kingdoms. The earliest recorded kingdom in Illyria was the Enchele in the 8th century BCE. The Autariatae under Pleurias (337 BCE) were considered to have been a kingdom. The Kingdom of the Ardiaei (originally a tribe from the Neretva valley region) began at 230 BCE and ended at 167 BCE. The most notable Illyrian kingdoms and dynasties were those of Bardylis of the Dardani and of Agron of the Ardiaei who created the last and best-known Illyrian kingdom. Agron ruled over the Ardiaei and had extended his rule to other tribes as well.

From the 7th century BCE, bronze was replaced by iron, after which only jewelry and art objects were still made out of bronze. Illyrian tribes, under the influence of Hallstatt cultures to the north, formed regional centers that were slightly different. Parts of Central Bosnia were inhabited by the Daesitiates tribe, most commonly associated with the Central Bosnian cultural group. The Iron Age Glasinac-Mati culture is associated with the Autariatae tribe.

A very important role in their life was the cult of the dead, which is seen in their careful burials and burial ceremonies, as well as the richness of their burial sites. In northern parts, there was a long tradition of cremation and burial in shallow graves, while in the south the dead were buried in large stone or earth tumuli (natively called &quot;gromile&quot;) that in Herzegovina were reaching monumental sizes, more than 50 m wide and 5 m high. &quot;Japodian tribes&quot; had an affinity to decoration (heavy, oversized necklaces out of yellow, blue or white glass paste, and large bronze fibulas, as well as spiral bracelets, diadems and helmets out of bronze foil).

In the 4th century BCE, the first invasion of Celts is recorded. They brought the technique of the pottery wheel, new types of fibulas and different bronze and iron belts. They only passed on their way to Greece, so their influence in Bosnia and Herzegovina is negligible. Celtic migrations displaced many Illyrian tribes from their former lands, but some Celtic and Illyrian tribes mixed. Concrete historical evidence for this period is scarce, but overall it appears the region was populated by a number of different peoples speaking distinct languages.

In the Neretva Delta in the south, there were important Hellenistic influences of the Illyrian Daors tribe. Their capital was &quot;Daorson&quot; in Ošanići near Stolac. Daorson, in the 4th century BCE, was surrounded by megalithic, 5 m high stonewalls (as large as those of Mycenae in Greece), composed of large trapezoid stone blocks. Daors made unique bronze coins and sculptures.

Conflict between the Illyrians and Romans started in 229 BCE, but Rome did not complete its annexation of the region until AD 9. It was precisely in modern-day Bosnia and Herzegovina that Rome fought one of the most difficult battles in its history since the Punic Wars, as described by the Roman historian Suetonius. This was the Roman campaign against Illyricum, known as . The conflict arose after an attempt to recruit Illyrians, and a revolt spanned for four years (6–9 AD), after which they were subdued. In the Roman period, Latin-speaking settlers from the entire Roman Empire settled among the Illyrians, and Roman soldiers were encouraged to retire in the region.

Following the split of the Empire between 337 and 395 AD, Dalmatia and Pannonia became parts of the Western Roman Empire. The region was conquered by the Ostrogoths in 455 AD. It subsequently changed hands between the Alans and the Huns. By the 6th century, Emperor Justinian I had reconquered the area for the Byzantine Empire. Slavs overwhelmed the Balkans in the 6th and 7th centuries. Illyrian cultural traits were adopted by the South Slavs, as evidenced in certain customs and traditions, placenames, etc.

===Middle Ages===


The Early Slavs raided the Western Balkans, including Bosnia, in the 6th and early 7th century (amid the Migration Period), and were composed of small tribal units drawn from a single Slavic confederation known to the Byzantines as the &quot;Sclaveni&quot; (whilst the related &quot;Antes&quot;, roughly speaking, colonized the eastern portions of the Balkans).
Tribes recorded by the ethnonyms of &quot;Serb&quot; and &quot;Croat&quot; are described as a second, latter, migration of different people during the second quarter of the 7th century who could or could not have been particularly numerous; these early &quot;Serb&quot; and &quot;Croat&quot; tribes, whose exact identity is subject to scholarly debate, came to predominate over the Slavs in the neighbouring regions. Croats &quot;settled in area roughly corresponding to modern Croatia, and probably also including most of Bosnia proper, apart from the eastern strip of the Drina valley&quot; while Serbs &quot;corresponding to modern south-western Serbia (later known as Raška), and gradually extended their rule into the territories of Duklja and Hum&quot;.

Bosnia is also believed to be first mentioned &quot;as a land (horion Bosona)&quot; in Byzantine Emperor Constantine Porphyrogenitus&#x27; &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot; in the mid 10th century, at the end of a chapter entitled &quot;Of the Serbs and the country in which they now dwell&quot;. This has been scholarly interpreted in several ways and used especially by the Serb national ideologists to prove Bosnia as originally a &quot;Serb&quot; land. Other scholars have asserted the inclusion of Bosnia in the chapter to merely be the result of Serbian Grand Duke Časlav&#x27;s temporary rule over Bosnia at the time, while also pointing out Porphyrogenitus does not say anywhere explicitly that Bosnia is a &quot;Serb land&quot;. In fact, the very translation of the critical sentence where the word &quot;Bosona&quot; (Bosnia) appears is subject to varying interpretation. In time, Bosnia formed a unit under its own ruler, who called himself Bosnian. Bosnia, along with other territories, became part of Duklja in the 11th century, although it retained its own nobility and institutions.

In the High Middle Ages, political circumstance led to the area being contested between the Kingdom of Hungary and the Byzantine Empire. Following another shift of power between the two in the early 12th century, Bosnia found itself outside the control of both and emerged as the Banate of Bosnia (under the rule of local &quot;bans&quot;). The first Bosnian ban known by name was Ban Borić. The second was Ban Kulin, whose rule marked the start of a controversy involving the Bosnian Church – considered heretical by the Roman Catholic Church. In response to Hungarian attempts to use church politics regarding the issue as a way to reclaim sovereignty over Bosnia, Kulin held a council of local church leaders to renounce the heresy and embraced Catholicism in 1203. Despite this, Hungarian ambitions remained unchanged long after Kulin&#x27;s death in 1204, waning only after an unsuccessful invasion in 1254. During this time, the population was called &quot;Dobri Bošnjani&quot; (&quot;Good Bosnians&quot;). The names Serb and Croat, though occasionally appearing in peripheral areas, were not used in Bosnia proper.

Bosnian history from then until the early 14th century was marked by a power struggle between the Šubić and Kotromanić families. This conflict came to an end in 1322, when Stephen II Kotromanić became &quot;Ban&quot;. By the time of his death in 1353, he was successful in annexing territories to the north and west, as well as Zahumlje and parts of Dalmatia. He was succeeded by his ambitious nephew Tvrtko who, following a prolonged struggle with nobility and inter-family strife, gained full control of the country in 1367. By the year 1377, Bosnia was elevated into a kingdom with the coronation of Tvrtko as the first Bosnian King in Mile near Visoko in the Bosnian heartland.

Following his death in 1391, however, Bosnia fell into a long period of decline. The Ottoman Empire had started its conquest of Europe and posed a major threat to the Balkans throughout the first half of the 15th century. Finally, after decades of political and social instability, the Kingdom of Bosnia ceased to exist in 1463 after its conquest by the Ottoman Empire.

There was a general awareness in medieval Bosnia, at least amongst the nobles, that they shared a joint state with Serbia and that they belonged to the same ethnic group. That awareness diminished over time, due to differences in political and social development, but it was kept in Herzegovina and parts of Bosnia which were a part of Serbian state.

===Ottoman Empire===

The Ottoman conquest of Bosnia marked a new era in the country&#x27;s history and introduced drastic changes in the political and cultural landscape. The Ottomans incorporated Bosnia as an integral province of the Ottoman Empire with its historical name and territorial integrity. Within Bosnia, the Ottomans introduced a number of key changes in the territory&#x27;s socio-political administration; including a new landholding system, a reorganization of administrative units, and a complex system of social differentiation by class and religious affiliation.

Following Ottoman occupation, there was a steady flow of people out of Bosnia and a large number of abandoned villages in Bosnia are mentioned in the Ottoman registers, while those who stayed eventually became Muslims. Many Catholics in Bosnia fled to neighboring Catholic lands in the early Ottoman occupation. The evidence indicates that the early Muslim conversions in Ottoman Bosnia in the 15th–16th century were among the locals who stayed rather than mass Muslim settlements from outside Bosnia. In Herzegovina, many Orthodox people had also embraced Islam. By the late 16th and early 17th century, Muslims are considered to have become an absolute majority in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Albanian Catholic priest Pjetër Mazreku reported in 1624 that there were 450,000 Muslims, 150,000 Catholics and 75,000 Eastern Orthodox in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There was a lack of Orthodox Church activity in Bosnia proper in the pre-Ottoman period. An Orthodox Christian population in Bosnia was introduced as a direct result of Ottoman policy. From the 15th century and onwards, Orthodox Christians (Orthodox Vlachs and non-Vlach Orthodox Serbs) from Serbia and other regions settled in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Favored by the Ottomans over the Catholics, many Orthodox churches were allowed to be built in Bosnia by the Ottomans. Quite a few Vlachs also became Islamized in Bosnia, and some (mainly in Croatia) became Catholics.

The four centuries of Ottoman rule also had a drastic impact on Bosnia&#x27;s population make-up, which changed several times as a result of the empire&#x27;s conquests, frequent wars with European powers, forced and economic migrations, and epidemics. A native Slavic-speaking Muslim community emerged and eventually became the largest of the ethno-religious groups due to a lack of strong Christian church organizations and continuous rivalry between the Orthodox and Catholic churches, while the indigenous Bosnian Church disappeared altogether (ostensibly by conversion of its members to Islam). The Ottomans referred to them as &quot;kristianlar&quot; while the Orthodox and Catholics were called &quot;gebir&quot; or &quot;kafir&quot;, meaning &quot;unbeliever&quot;. The Bosnian Franciscans (and the Catholic population as a whole) were protected by official imperial decrees and in accordance and the full extent of Ottoman laws; however, in effect, these often merely affected arbitrary rule and behavior of powerful local elite.

As the Ottoman Empire continued its rule in the Balkans (Rumelia), Bosnia was somewhat relieved of the pressures of being a frontier province and experienced a period of general welfare. A number of cities, such as Sarajevo and Mostar, were established and grew into regional centers of trade and urban culture and were then visited by Ottoman traveler Evliya Çelebi in 1648. Within these cities, various Ottoman Sultans financed the construction of many works of Bosnian architecture such as the country&#x27;s first library in Sarajevo, madrassas, a school of Sufi philosophy, and a clock tower (&quot;Sahat Kula&quot;), bridges such as the Stari Most, the Emperor&#x27;s Mosque and the Gazi Husrev-beg Mosque.

Furthermore, several Bosnian Muslims played influential roles in the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s cultural and political history during this time. Bosnian recruits formed a large component of the Ottoman ranks in the battles of Mohács and Krbava field, while numerous other Bosnians rose through the ranks of the Ottoman military to occupy the highest positions of power in the Empire, including admirals such as Matrakçı Nasuh; generals such as Isa-Beg Ishaković, Gazi Husrev-beg, Telli Hasan Pasha and Sarı Süleyman Pasha; administrators such as Ferhad Pasha Sokolović and Osman Gradaščević; and Grand Viziers such as the influential Sokollu Mehmed Pasha and Damat Ibrahim Pasha. Some Bosnians emerged as Sufi mystics, scholars such as Muhamed Hevaji Uskufi Bosnevi, Ali Džabić; and poets in the Turkish, Albanian, Arabic, and Persian languages.

However, by the late 17th century the Empire&#x27;s military misfortunes caught up with the country, and the end of the Great Turkish War with the treaty of Karlowitz in 1699 again made Bosnia the Empire&#x27;s westernmost province. The 18th century was marked by further military failures, numerous revolts within Bosnia, and several outbreaks of plague.
The Porte&#x27;s efforts at modernizing the Ottoman state were met with distrust growing to hostility in Bosnia, where local aristocrats stood to lose much through the proposed Tanzimat reforms. This, combined with frustrations over territorial, political concessions in the north-east, and the plight of Slavic Muslim refugees arriving from the Sanjak of Smederevo into Bosnia Eyalet, culminated in a partially unsuccessful revolt by Husein Gradaščević, who endorsed a Bosnia Eyalet autonomous from the authoritarian rule of the Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II, who persecuted, executed and abolished the Janissaries and reduced the role of autonomous Pashas in Rumelia. Mahmud II sent his Grand vizier to subdue Bosnia Eyalet and succeeded only with the reluctant assistance of Ali Pasha Rizvanbegović. Related rebellions were extinguished by 1850, but the situation continued to deteriorate.

New nationalist movements appeared in Bosnia by the middle of the 19th century. Shortly after Serbia&#x27;s breakaway from the Ottoman Empire in the early 19th century, Serbian and Croatian nationalism rose up in Bosnia, and such nationalists made irredentist claims to Bosnia&#x27;s territory. This trend continued to grow in the rest of the 19th and 20th centuries.

Agrarian unrest eventually sparked the Herzegovinian rebellion, a widespread peasant uprising, in 1875. The conflict rapidly spread and came to involve several Balkan states and Great Powers, a situation that led to the Congress of Berlin and the Treaty of Berlin in 1878.

===Austria-Hungary===
At the Congress of Berlin in 1878, the Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister Gyula Andrássy obtained the occupation and administration of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and he also obtained the right to station garrisons in the Sanjak of Novi Pazar, which would remain under Ottoman administration until 1908, when the Austro-Hungarian troops withdrew from the Sanjak.

Although Austro-Hungarian officials quickly came to an agreement with the Bosnians, tensions remained and a mass emigration of Bosnians occurred. However, a state of relative stability was reached soon enough and Austro-Hungarian authorities were able to embark on a number of social and administrative reforms they intended would make Bosnia and Herzegovina into a &quot;model&quot; colony.

Habsburg rule had several key concerns in Bosnia. It tried to dissipate the South Slav nationalism by disputing the earlier Serb and Croat claims to Bosnia and encouraging identification of Bosnian or Bosniak identity. Habsburg rule also tried to provide for modernisation by codifying laws, introducing new political institutions, establishing and expanding industries.

Austria–Hungary began to plan the annexation of Bosnia, but due to international disputes the issue was not resolved until the annexation crisis of 1908. Several external matters affected the status of Bosnia and its relationship with Austria–Hungary. A bloody coup occurred in Serbia in 1903, which brought a radical anti-Austrian government into power in Belgrade. Then in 1908, the revolt in the Ottoman Empire raised concerns that the Istanbul government might seek the outright return of Bosnia and Herzegovina. These factors caused the Austro-Hungarian government to seek a permanent resolution of the Bosnian question sooner, rather than later.

Taking advantage of the turmoil in the Ottoman Empire, Austro-Hungarian diplomacy tried to obtain provisional Russian approval for changes over the status of Bosnia and Herzegovina and published the annexation proclamation on 6 October 1908. Despite international objections to the Austro-Hungarian annexation, Russians and their client state, Serbia, were compelled to accept the Austro-Hungarian annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 1909.

In 1910, Habsburg Emperor Franz Joseph proclaimed the first constitution in Bosnia, which led to relaxation of earlier laws, elections and formation of the Bosnian parliament and growth of new political life.

On 28 June 1914, Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian Serb member of the revolutionary movement Young Bosnia, assassinated the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, in Sarajevo—an event that was the spark that set off World War I. At the end of the war, the Bosnian Muslims had lost more men per capita than any other ethnic group in the Habsburg Empire whilst serving in the Bosnian-Herzegovinian Infantry of the Austro-Hungarian Army. Nonetheless, Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole managed to escape the conflict relatively unscathed.

The Austro-Hungarian authorities established an auxiliary militia known as the Schutzkorps with a moot role in the empire&#x27;s policy of anti-Serb repression. Schutzkorps, predominantly recruited among the Bosnian Muslim population, were tasked with hunting down rebel Serbs (the &quot;Chetniks&quot; and &quot;Komitadji&quot;) and became known for their persecution of Serbs particularly in Serb populated areas of eastern Bosnia, where they partly retaliated against Serbian Chetniks who in fall 1914 had carried out attacks against the Muslim population in the area. The proceedings of the Austro-Hungarian authorities led to around 5,500 citizens of Serb ethnicity in Bosnia and Herzegovina being arrested, and between 700 and 2,200 died in prison while 460 were executed. Around 5,200 Serb families were forcibly expelled from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

===Kingdom of Yugoslavia===

Following World War I, Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the South Slav Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (soon renamed Yugoslavia). Political life in Bosnia and Herzegovina at this time was marked by two major trends: social and economic unrest over property redistribution and the formation of several political parties that frequently changed coalitions and alliances with parties in other Yugoslav regions.

The dominant ideological conflict of the Yugoslav state, between Croatian regionalism and Serbian centralization, was approached differently by Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s major ethnic groups and was dependent on the overall political atmosphere. The political reforms brought about in the newly established Yugoslavian kingdom saw few benefits for the Bosnian Muslims; according to the 1910 final census of land ownership and population according to religious affiliation conducted in Austria-Hungary, Muslims owned 91.1%, Orthodox Serbs owned 6.0%, Croat Catholics owned 2.6% and others, 0.3% of the property. Following the reforms, Bosnian Muslims were dispossessed of a total of 1,175,305 hectares of agricultural and forest land.

Although the initial split of the country into 33 oblasts erased the presence of traditional geographic entities from the map, the efforts of Bosnian politicians, such as Mehmed Spaho, ensured the six oblasts carved up from Bosnia and Herzegovina corresponded to the six sanjaks from Ottoman times and, thus, matched the country&#x27;s traditional boundary as a whole.

The establishment of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929, however, brought the redrawing of administrative regions into banates or &quot;banovinas&quot; that purposely avoided all historical and ethnic lines, removing any trace of a Bosnian entity. Serbo-Croat tensions over the structuring of the Yugoslav state continued, with the concept of a separate Bosnian division receiving little or no consideration.

The Cvetković-Maček Agreement that created the Croatian banate in 1939 encouraged what was essentially a partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina between Croatia and Serbia. However the rising threat of Adolf Hitler&#x27;s Nazi Germany forced Yugoslav politicians to shift their attention. Following a period that saw attempts at appeasement, the signing of the Tripartite Treaty, and a coup d&#x27;état, Yugoslavia was finally invaded by Germany on 6 April 1941.

===World War II (1941–45)===

Once the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was conquered by German forces in World War II, all of Bosnia and Herzegovina was ceded to the Nazi puppet regime, the Independent State of Croatia (NDH) led by the Ustaše. The NDH leaders embarked on a campaign of extermination of Serbs, Jews, Romani as well as dissident Croats, and, later, Josip Broz Tito&#x27;s Partisans by setting up a number of death camps. The regime systematically and brutally massacred Serbs in villages in the countryside, using a variety of tools. The scale of the violence meant that approximately every sixth Serb living in Bosnia and Herzegovina was the victim of a massacre and virtually every Serb had a family member that was killed in the war, mostly by the Ustaše. The experience had a profound impact in the collective memory of Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. An estimated 209,000 Serbs or 16.9% of its Bosnia population were killed on the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina during the war.

The Ustaše recognized both Catholicism and Islam as the national religions, but held the position Eastern Orthodox Church, as a symbol of Serb identity, was their greatest foe. Although Croats were by far the largest ethnic group to constitute the Ustaše, the Vice President of the NDH and leader of the Yugoslav Muslim Organization Džafer Kulenović was a Muslim, and Muslims in total constituted nearly 12% of the Ustaše military and civil service authority.

Many Serbs themselves took up arms and joined the Chetniks, a Serb nationalist movement with the aim of establishing an ethnically homogeneous &#x27;Greater Serbian&#x27; state within the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The Chetniks, in turn, pursued a genocidal campaign against ethnic Muslims and Croats, as well as persecuting a large number of communist Serbs and other Communist sympathizers, with the Muslim populations of Bosnia, Herzegovina and Sandžak being a primary target. Once captured, Muslim villagers were systematically massacred by the Chetniks. Of the 75,000 Muslims who died in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the war, approximately 30,000 (mostly civilians) were killed by the Chetniks. Massacres against Croats were smaller in scale but similar in action. Between 64,000 and 79,000 Bosnian Croats were killed between April 1941 to May 1945. Of these, about 18,000 were killed by the Chetniks.

A percentage of Muslims served in Nazi &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; units. These units were responsible for massacres of Serbs in northwest and eastern Bosnia, most notably in Vlasenica. On 12 October 1941, a group of 108 prominent Sarajevan Muslims signed the Resolution of Sarajevo Muslims by which they condemned the persecution of Serbs organized by the Ustaše, made distinction between Muslims who participated in such persecutions and the Muslim population as a whole, presented information about the persecutions of Muslims by Serbs, and requested security for all citizens of the country, regardless of their identity.

Starting in 1941, Yugoslav communists under the leadership of Josip Broz Tito organized their own multi-ethnic resistance group, the Partisans, who fought against both Axis and Chetnik forces. On 29 November 1943, the Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia (AVNOJ) with Tito at its helm held a founding conference in Jajce where Bosnia and Herzegovina was reestablished as a republic within the Yugoslavian federation in its Habsburg borders. During the entire course of World War II in Yugoslavia, 64.1% of all Bosnian Partisans were Serbs, 23% were Muslims and 8.8% Croats.

Military success eventually prompted the Allies to support the Partisans, resulting in the successful Maclean Mission, but Tito declined their offer to help and relied on his own forces instead. All the major military offensives by the antifascist movement of Yugoslavia against Nazis and their local supporters were conducted in Bosnia and Herzegovina and its peoples bore the brunt of the fighting. More than 300,000 people died in Bosnia and Herzegovina in World War II, or more than 10% of the population. At the end of the war, the establishment of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, with the constitution of 1946, officially made Bosnia and Herzegovina one of six constituent republics in the new state.

===Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (1945–1992)===

Due to its central geographic position within the Yugoslavian federation, post-war Bosnia was selected as a base for the development of the military defense industry. This contributed to a large concentration of arms and military personnel in Bosnia; a significant factor in the war that followed the break-up of Yugoslavia in the 1990s. However, Bosnia&#x27;s existence within Yugoslavia, for the large part, was relatively peaceful and very prosperous, with high employment, a strong industrial and export oriented economy, a good education system and social and medical security for every citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Several international corporations operated in Bosnia—Volkswagen as part of TAS (car factory in Sarajevo, from 1972), Coca-Cola (from 1975), SKF Sweden (from 1967), Marlboro (a tobacco factory in Sarajevo), and Holiday Inn hotels. Sarajevo was the site of the 1984 Winter Olympics.

During the 1950s and 1960s, Bosnia was a political backwater of Yugoslavia. In the 1970s, a strong Bosnian political elite arose, fueled in part by Tito&#x27;s leadership in the Non-Aligned Movement and Bosnians serving in Yugoslavia&#x27;s diplomatic corps. While working within the Socialist system, politicians such as Džemal Bijedić, Branko Mikulić and Hamdija Pozderac reinforced and protected the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their efforts proved key during the turbulent period following Tito&#x27;s death in 1980, and are today considered some of the early steps towards Bosnian independence. However, the republic did not escape the increasingly nationalistic climate of the time. With the fall of communism and the start of the breakup of Yugoslavia, doctrine of tolerance began to lose its potency, creating an opportunity for nationalist elements in the society to spread their influence.

===Bosnian War (1992–1995)===


On 18 November 1990, multi-party parliamentary elections were held throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. A second round followed on 25 November, resulting in a national assembly where communist power was replaced by a coalition of three ethnically based parties. Following Slovenia and Croatia&#x27;s declarations of independence from Yugoslavia, a significant split developed among the residents of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the issue of whether to remain within Yugoslavia (overwhelmingly favored by Serbs) or seek independence (overwhelmingly favored by Muslims and Croats).

The Serb members of parliament, consisting mainly of the Serb Democratic Party members, abandoned the central parliament in Sarajevo, and formed the Assembly of the Serb People of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 24 October 1991, which marked the end of the three-ethnic coalition that governed after the elections in 1990. This Assembly established the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in part of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992. It was renamed Republika Srpska in August 1992. On 18 November 1991, the party branch in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the ruling party in the Republic of Croatia, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), proclaimed the existence of the Croatian Community of Herzeg-Bosnia in a separate part of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the Croatian Defence Council (HVO) as its military branch. It went unrecognized by the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which declared it illegal.

A declaration of the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 15 October 1991 was followed by a referendum for independence on 29 February and 1 March 1992, which was boycotted by the great majority of Serbs. The turnout in the independence referendum was 63.4 per cent and 99.7 per cent of voters voted for independence. Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence on 3 March 1992 and received international recognition the following month on 6 April 1992. The Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was admitted as a member state of the United Nations on 22 May 1992. Serbian leader Slobodan Milošević and Croatian leader Franjo Tuđman are believed to have agreed on a partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 1991, with the aim of establishing Greater Serbia and Greater Croatia.

Following Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s declaration of independence, Bosnian Serb militias mobilized in different parts of the country. Government forces were poorly equipped and unprepared for the war. International recognition of Bosnia and Herzegovina increased diplomatic pressure for the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army (JNA) to withdraw from the republic&#x27;s territory, which they officially did in June 1992. The Bosnian Serb members of the JNA simply changed insignia, formed the Army of Republika Srpska (VRS), and continued fighting. Armed and equipped from JNA stockpiles in Bosnia, supported by volunteers and various paramilitary forces from Serbia, and receiving extensive humanitarian, logistical and financial support from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Republika Srpska&#x27;s offensives in 1992 managed to place much of the country under its control. The Bosnian Serb advance was accompanied by the ethnic cleansing of Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats from VRS-controlled areas. Dozens of concentration camps were established in which inmates were subjected to violence and abuse, including rape. The ethnic cleansing culminated in the Srebrenica massacre of more than 8,000 Bosniak men and boys in July 1995, which was ruled to have been a genocide by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Bosniak and Bosnian Croat forces also committed war crimes against civilians from different ethnic groups, though on a smaller scale. Most of the Bosniak and Croat atrocities were committed during the Croat–Bosniak War, a sub-conflict of the Bosnian War that pitted the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (ARBiH) against the HVO. The Bosniak-Croat conflict ended in March 1994, with the signing of the Washington Agreement, leading to the creation of a joint Bosniak-Croat Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which amalgamated HVO-held territory with that held by the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (ARBiH).

===Recent history===

On 4 February 2014, the protests against the Government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, one of the country&#x27;s two entities, dubbed the Bosnian Spring, the name being taken from the Arab Spring, began in the northern town of Tuzla. Workers from several factories that had been privatised and gone bankrupt assembled to demand action over jobs, unpaid salaries and pensions. Soon protests spread to the rest of the Federation, with violent clashes reported in close to 20 towns, the biggest of which were Sarajevo, Zenica, Mostar, Bihać, Brčko and Tuzla. The Bosnian news media reported that hundreds of people had been injured during the protests, including dozens of police officers, with bursts of violence in Sarajevo, in the northern city of Tuzla, in Mostar in the south, and in Zenica in central Bosnia. The same level of unrest or activism did not occur in Republika Srpska, but hundreds of people also gathered in support of protests in the city of Banja Luka against its separate government.

The protests marked the largest outbreak of public anger over high unemployment and two decades of political inertia in the country since the end of the Bosnian War in 1995. According to a report made by Christian Schmidt of the Office of High Representative in late 2021, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been experiencing intensified political and ethnic tensions, which could potentially break the country apart and slide it back into war once again. The European Union fears this will lead to further Balkanization in the region.

On 15 December 2022, Bosnia and Herzegovina was recognised by the European Union as a candidate country for accession following the decision of the European Council.

==Geography==

Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the western Balkans, bordering Croatia () to the north and west, Serbia () to the east, and Montenegro () to the southeast. It has a coastline about long surrounding the town of Neum. It lies between latitudes 42° and 46° N, and longitudes 15° and 20° E.

The country&#x27;s name comes from the two alleged regions Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose border was never defined. Historically, Bosnia&#x27;s official name never included any of its many regions until the Austro-Hungarian occupation.

The country is mostly mountainous, encompassing the central Dinaric Alps. The northeastern parts reach into the Pannonian Basin, while in the south it borders the Adriatic. The Dinaric Alps generally run in a southeast–northwest direction, and get higher towards the south. The highest point of the country is the peak of Maglić at , on the Montenegrin border. Other major mountains include Volujak, Zelengora, Lelija, Lebršnik, Orjen, Kozara, Grmeč, Čvrsnica, Prenj, Vran, Vranica, Velež, Vlašić, Cincar, Romanija, Jahorina, Bjelašnica, Treskavica and Trebević. The geological composition of the Dinaric chain of mountains in Bosnia consists primarily of limestone (including Mesozoic limestone), with deposits of iron, coal, zinc, manganese, bauxite, lead, and salt present in some areas, especially in central and northern Bosnia.

Overall, nearly 50% of Bosnia and Herzegovina is forested. Most forest areas are in the centre, east and west parts of Bosnia. Herzegovina has a drier Mediterranean climate, with dominant karst topography. Northern Bosnia (Posavina) contains very fertile agricultural land along the Sava river and the corresponding area is heavily farmed. This farmland is a part of the Pannonian Plain stretching into neighboring Croatia and Serbia. The country has only of coastline, around the town of Neum in the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton. Although the city is surrounded by Croatian peninsulas, by international law, Bosnia and Herzegovina has a right of passage to the outer sea.

Sarajevo is the capital and largest city. Other major cities include Banja Luka and Prijedor in the northwest region known as Bosanska Krajina, Tuzla, Bijeljina, Doboj and Brčko in the northeast, Zenica in the central part of the country, and Mostar, the largest city in the southern region of Herzegovina.

There are seven major rivers in Bosnia and Herzegovina:

===Biodiversity===
Phytogeographically, Bosnia and Herzegovina belongs to the Boreal Kingdom and is shared between the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region and Adriatic province of the Mediterranean Region. According to the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina can be subdivided into four ecoregions: Balkan mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests, Pannonian mixed forests and Illyrian deciduous forests. The country had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.99/10, ranking it 89th globally out of 172 countries. In Bosnia and Herzegovina forest cover is around 43% of the total land area, equivalent to 2,187,910 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 2,210,000 hectares (ha) in 1990. For the year 2015, 74% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership and 26% private ownership.

==Politics==
===Government===

As a result of the Dayton Agreement, the civilian peace implementation is supervised by the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina selected by the Peace Implementation Council (PIC). The High Representative is the highest political authority in the country. The High Representative has many governmental and legislative powers, including the dismissal of elected and non-elected officials. Due to the vast powers of the High Representative over Bosnian politics and essential veto powers, the position has also been compared to that of a viceroy.

Politics take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democracy, whereby executive power is exercised by the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Legislative power is vested in both the Council of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Members of the Parliamentary Assembly are chosen according to a proportional representation (PR) system.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a liberal democracy. It has several levels of political structuring, according to the Dayton Agreement. The most important of these levels is the division of the country into two entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina covers 51% of Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s total area, while Republika Srpska covers 49%. The entities, based largely on the territories held by the two warring sides at the time, were formally established by the Dayton Agreement in 1995 because of the tremendous changes in Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s ethnic structure. At the national level, there exists only a finite set of exclusive or joint competencies, whereas the majority of authority rests within the entities. Sumantra Bose describes Bosnia and Herzegovina as a consociational confederation.

The Brčko District in the north of the country was created in 2000, out of land from both entities. It officially belongs to both, but is governed by neither, and functions under a decentralized system of local government. For election purposes, Brčko District voters can choose to participate in either the Federation or Republika Srpska elections. The Brčko District has been praised for maintaining a multiethnic population and a level of prosperity significantly above the national average.

The third level of Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s political subdivision is manifested in cantons. They are unique to the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina entity, which consists of ten of them. Each has a cantonal government, which is under the law of the Federation as a whole. Some cantons are ethnically mixed and have special laws to ensure the equality of all constituent people.

The fourth level of political division in Bosnia and Herzegovina are the municipalities. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is divided into 79 municipalities, and Republika Srpska into 64. Municipalities also have their own local government, and are typically based on the most significant city or place in their territory. As such, many municipalities have a long tradition and history with their present boundaries. Some others, however, were only created following the recent war after traditional municipalities were split by the Inter-Entity Boundary Line. Each canton in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of several municipalities, which are divided into local communities.

Besides entities, cantons, and municipalities, Bosnia and Herzegovina also has four &quot;official&quot; cities. These are: Banja Luka, Mostar, Sarajevo and East Sarajevo. The territory and government of the cities of Banja Luka and Mostar corresponds to the municipalities of the same name, while the cities of Sarajevo and East Sarajevo officially consist of several municipalities. Cities have their own city government whose power is in between that of the municipalities and cantons (or the entity, in the case of Republika Srpska).

More recently, several central institutions have been established (such as a defense ministry, security ministry, state court, indirect taxation service and so on) in the process of transferring part of the jurisdiction from the entities to the state. The representation of the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina is by elites who represent the country&#x27;s three major groups, with each having a guaranteed share of power.

The Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina rotates among three members (Bosniak, Serb, Croat), each elected as the chair for an eight-month term within their four-year term as a member. The three members of the Presidency are elected directly by the people, with Federation voters voting for the Bosniak and the Croat and the Republika Srpska voters voting for the Serb.

The Chair of the Council of Ministers is nominated by the Presidency and approved by the parliamentary House of Representatives. The Chair of the Council of Ministers is then responsible for appointing a Foreign Minister, Minister of Foreign Trade and others as appropriate.

The Parliamentary Assembly is the lawmaking body in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It consists of two houses: the House of Peoples and the House of Representatives. The House of Peoples has 15 delegates chosen by parliaments of the entities, two-thirds of which come from the Federation (5 Bosniaks and 5 Croats) and one-third from the Republika Srpska (5 Serbs). The House of Representatives is composed of 42 Members elected by the people under a form of proportional representation, two-thirds elected from the Federation and one-third elected from Republika Srpska.

The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the supreme, final arbiter of legal matters. It is composed of nine members: four members are selected by the Federal House of Representatives, two by the National Assembly of Republika Srpska and three by the President of the European Court of Human Rights after consultation with the Presidency, who cannot be Bosnian citizens.

However, the highest political authority in the country is the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the chief executive officer for the international civilian presence in the country and is selected by the European Union. Since 1995, the High Representative has been able to bypass the elected parliamentary assembly, and since 1997 has been able to remove elected officials. The methods selected by the High Representative have been criticized as undemocratic. International supervision is to end when the country is deemed politically and democratically stable and self-sustaining.

Corruption in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a severe problem.

===Military===
The Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina (OSBiH) were unified into a single entity in 2005, with the merger of the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Army of Republika Srpska, which had defended their respective regions. The Ministry of Defence was formed in 2004.

The Bosnian military consists of the Bosnian Ground Forces and Air Force and Air Defense. The Ground Forces number 7,200 active and 5,000 reserve personnel. They are armed with a mix of American, Yugoslavian, Soviet, and European-made weaponry, vehicles, and military equipment. The Air Force and Air Defense Forces have 1,500 personnel and about 62 aircraft. The Air Defense Forces operate MANPADS hand-held missiles, surface-to-air missile (SAM) batteries, anti-aircraft cannons, and radar. The Army has recently adopted remodeled MARPAT uniforms, used by Bosnian soldiers serving with the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan. A domestic production program is now underway to ensure that army units are equipped with the correct ammunition.

Beginning in 2007, the Ministry of Defence undertook the army&#x27;s first ever international assistance mission, enlisting the military to serve with ISAF peace missions to Afghanistan, Iraq and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2007. Five officers, acting as officers/advisors, served in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 45 soldiers, mostly acting as base security and medical assistants, served in Afghanistan. 85 Bosnian soldiers served as base security in Iraq, occasionally conducting infantry patrols there as well. All three deployed groups have been commended by their respective international forces as well as the Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The international assistance operations are still ongoing.

The Air Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina was formed when elements of the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska Air Force were merged in 2006. The Air Force has seen improvements in the last few years with added funds for aircraft repairs and improved cooperation with the Ground Forces as well as to the citizens of the country. The Ministry of Defence is pursuing the acquisition of new aircraft including helicopters and perhaps even fighter jets.

===Foreign relations===

European Union integration is one of the main political objectives of Bosnia and Herzegovina; it initiated the Stabilisation and Association Process in 2007. Countries participating in the SAP have been offered the possibility to become, once they fulfill the necessary conditions, Member States of the EU. Bosnia and Herzegovina has been a candidate country for EU accession since December 2022. Accession talks are set to begin following the impeding of more reforms.

The implementation of the Dayton Agreement in 1995 has focused the efforts of policymakers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the international community, on regional stabilization in the countries-successors of the former Yugoslavia.

Within Bosnia and Herzegovina, relations with its neighbors of Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro have been fairly stable since the signing of the Dayton Agreement. On 23 April 2010, Bosnia and Herzegovina received the Membership Action Plan from NATO, which is the last step before full membership in the alliance. Full membership was initially expected in 2014 or 2015, depending on the progress of reforms. In December 2018, NATO approved a Bosnian Membership Action Plan.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is the 61st most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

==Demography==
According to the 1991 census, Bosnia and Herzegovina had a population of 4,369,319, while the 1996 World Bank Group census showed a decrease to 3,764,425. Large population migrations during the Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s have caused demographic shifts in the country. Between 1991 and 2013, political disagreements made it impossible to organize a census. A census had been planned for 2011, and then for 2012, but was delayed until October 2013. The 2013 census found a total population of 3,531,159 people, a drop of approximately 20% since 1991. The 2013 census figures include non-permanent Bosnian residents and for this reason are contested by Republika Srpska officials and Serb politicians (see Ethnic groups below).

===Largest cities===
=== Ethnic groups ===


Bosnia and Herzegovina is home to three ethnic &quot;constituent peoples&quot;, namely Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats, plus a number of smaller groups including Jews and Roma. According to data from the 2013 census published by the Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosniaks constitute 50.1% of the population, Serbs 30.8%, Croats 15.5% and others 2.7%, with the remaining respondents not declaring their ethnicity or not answering. The census results are contested by the Republika Srpska statistical office and by Bosnian Serb politicians. The dispute over the census concerns the inclusion of non-permanent Bosnian residents in the figures, which Republika Srpska officials oppose. The European Union&#x27;s statistics office, Eurostat, concluded in May 2016 that the census methodology used by the Bosnian statistical agency is in line with international recommendations.

===Languages===
Bosnia&#x27;s constitution does not specify any official languages. However, academics Hilary Footitt and Michael Kelly note the Dayton Agreement states it is &quot;done in Bosnian, Croatian, English and Serbian&quot;, and they describe this as the &quot;de facto recognition of three official languages&quot; at the state level. The equal status of Bosnian, Serbian and Croatian was verified by the Constitutional Court in 2000. It ruled the provisions of the Federation and Republika Srpska constitutions on language were incompatible with the state constitution, since they only recognised Bosnian and Croatian (in the case of the Federation) and Serbian (in the case of Republika Srpska) as official languages at the entity level. As a result, the wording of the entity constitutions was changed and all three languages were made official in both entities. The three standard languages are fully mutually intelligible and are known collectively under the appellation of Serbo-Croatian, despite this term not being formally recognized in the country. Use of one of the three languages has become a marker of ethnic identity. Michael Kelly and Catherine Baker argue: &quot;The three official languages of today&#x27;s Bosnian state...represent the symbolic assertion of national identity over the pragmatism of mutual intelligibility&quot;.

According to the 1992 European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (ECRML), Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the following minority languages: Albanian, Montenegrin, Czech, Italian, Hungarian, Macedonian, German, Polish, Romani, Romanian, Rusyn, Slovak, Slovene, Turkish, Ukrainian and Jewish (Yiddish and Ladino). The German minority in Bosnia and Herzegovina are mostly remnants of Danube Swabians, who settled in the area after the Habsburg monarchy claimed the Balkans from the Ottoman Empire. Due to expulsions and (forced) assimilation after the two World wars, the number of ethnic Germans in Bosnia and Herzegovina was drastically diminished.

In the 2013 census, 52.86% of the population consider their mother tongue Bosnian, 30.76% Serbian, 14.6% Croatian and 1.57% another language, with 0.21% not giving an answer.

===Religion===

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a religiously diverse country. According to the 2013 census, Muslims comprised 50.7% of the population, while Orthodox Christians made 30.7%, Catholic Christians 15.2%, 1.2% other and 1.1% atheist or agnostic, with the remainder not declaring or not answering the question. A 2012 survey found 54% of Bosnia&#x27;s Muslims were non-denominational, while 38% followed Sunnism.

===Urban areas===
Sarajevo is home to 419,957 inhabitants in its urban area which comprises the City of Sarajevo as well as the municipalities of Ilidža, Vogošća, Istočna Ilidža, Istočno Novo Sarajevo and Istočni Stari Grad. The metro area has a population of 555,210 and includes Sarajevo Canton, East Sarajevo and the municipalities of Breza, Kiseljak, Kreševo and Visoko.

=== Healthcare ===
According to the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Bosnia and Herzegovina has a low level of hunger, with a GHI score of less than 5.

==Economy==


During the Bosnian War, the economy suffered €200 billion in material damages, roughly €326.38 billion in 2022 (inflation adjusted). Bosnia and Herzegovina faces the dual-problem of rebuilding a war-torn country and introducing transitional liberal market reforms to its formerly mixed economy. One legacy of the previous era is a strong industry; under former republic president Džemal Bijedić and Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito, metal industries were promoted in the republic, resulting in the development of a large share of Yugoslavia&#x27;s plants; SR Bosnia and Herzegovina had a very strong industrial export oriented economy in the 1970s and 1980s, with large scale exports worth millions of US$.

For most of Bosnia&#x27;s history, agriculture has been conducted on privately owned farms; Fresh food has traditionally been exported from the republic.

The war in the 1990s, caused a dramatic change in the Bosnian economy. GDP fell by 60% and the destruction of physical infrastructure devastated the economy. With much of the production capacity unrestored, the Bosnian economy still faces considerable difficulties. Figures show GDP and per capita income increased 10% from 2003 to 2004; this and Bosnia&#x27;s shrinking national debt being negative trends, and high unemployment 38.7% and a large trade deficit remain cause for concern.

The national currency is the (Euro-pegged) convertible mark (KM), controlled by the currency board. Annual inflation is the lowest relative to other countries in the region at 1.9% in 2004. The international debt was $5.1 billion (as of 31 December 2014). Real GDP growth rate was 5% for 2004 according to the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Statistical Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has displayed positive progress in the previous years, which decisively moved its place from the lowest income equality rank of income equality rankings fourteen out of 193 nations.

According to Eurostat data, Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s PPS GDP per capita stood at 29 per cent of the EU average in 2010.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced a loan to Bosnia worth US$500 million to be delivered by Stand-By Arrangement. This was scheduled to be approved in September 2012.

The United States Embassy in Sarajevo produces the Country Commercial Guide – an annual report that delivers a comprehensive look at Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s commercial and economic environment, using economic, political, and market analysis.

By some estimates, grey economy is 25.5% of GDP.

In 2017, exports grew by 17% when compared to the previous year, totaling €5.65 billion. The total volume of foreign trade in 2017 amounted to €14.97 billion and increased by 14% compared to the previous year. Imports of goods increased by 12% and amounted to €9.32 billion. The coverage of imports by exports increased by 3% compared to the previous year and now it is 61 percent. In 2017, Bosnia and Herzegovina mostly exported car seats, electricity, processed wood, aluminium and furniture. In the same year, it mostly imported crude oil, automobiles, motor oil, coal and briquettes.

The unemployment rate in 2017 was 20.5%, but The Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies is predicting falling unemployment rate for the next few years. In 2018, the unemployment should be 19.4% and it should further fall to 18.8% in 2019. In 2020, the unemployment rate should go down to 18.3%.

On 31 December 2017, the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina issued the report on public debt of Bosnia and Herzegovina, stating the public debt was reduced by €389.97 million, or by more than 6% when compared to 31 December 2016. By the end of 2017, public debt was €5.92 billion, which amounted to 35.6 percent of GDP.

, there were 32,292 registered companies in the country, which together had revenues of €33.572 billion that same year.

In 2017, the country received €397.35 million in foreign direct investment, which equals to 2.5% of the GDP.

In 2017, Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked third in the world in terms of the number of new jobs created by foreign investment, relative to the number of inhabitants.

In 2018, Bosnia and Herzegovina exported goods worth 11.9 billion KM (€6.07 billion), which is 7.43% higher than in the same period in 2017, while imports amounted to 19.27 billion KM (€9.83 billion), which is 5.47% higher.

The average price of new apartments sold in the country in the first six months of 2018 is 1,639 km (€886.31) per square metre. This represents a jump of 3.5% from the previous year.

On 30 June 2018, public debt of Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted to about €6.04 billion, of which external debt is 70.56 percent, while the internal debt is 29.4 percent of total public indebtedness. The share of public debt in gross domestic product is 34.92 percent.

In the first 7 months of 2018, 811,660 tourists visited the country, a 12.2% jump when compared to the first 7 months of 2017. In the first 11 months of 2018, 1,378,542 tourists visited Bosnia-Herzegovina, an increase of 12.6%, and had 2,871,004 overnight hotel stays, a 13.8% increase from the previous year. Also, 71.8% of the tourists came from foreign countries. In the first seven months of 2019, 906,788 tourists visited the country, an 11.7% jump from the previous year.

In 2018, the total value of mergers and acquisitions in Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted to €404.6 million.

In 2018, 99.5 percent of enterprises in Bosnia and Herzegovina used computers in their business, while 99.3 percent had internet connections, according to a survey conducted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Statistics Agency.

In 2018, Bosnia and Herzegovina received 783.4 million KM (€400.64 million) in direct foreign investment, which was equivalent to 2.3% of GDP.

In 2018, the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina made a profit of 8,430,875 km (€4,306,347).

The World Bank predicted that the economy would grow 3.4% in 2019.

Bosnia and Herzegovina was placed 83rd on the Index of Economic Freedom for 2019. The total rating for Bosnia and Herzegovina is 61.9. This position represents some progress relative to the 91st place in 2018. This result is below the regional level, but still above the global average, making Bosnia and Herzegovina a &quot;moderately free&quot; country.

On 31 January 2019, total deposits in Bosnian banks were KM 21.9 billion (€11.20 billion), which represents 61.15% of nominal GDP.

In the second quarter of 2019, the average price of new apartments sold in Bosnia and Herzegovina was 1,606 km (€821.47) per square metre.

In the first six months of 2019, exports amounted to 5.829 billion KM (€2.98 billion), which is 0.1% less than in the same period of 2018, while imports amounted to 9.779 billion KM (€5.00 billion), which is by 4.5% more than in the same period of the previous year.

In the first six months of 2019, foreign direct investment amounted to 650.1 million KM (€332.34 million).

Bosnia and Herzegovina was ranked 80th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

As of 30 November 2023, Bosnia and Herzegovina had 1.3 million registered motor vehicles.

===Tourism===


According to projections by the World Tourism Organization, Bosnia and Herzegovina had the third highest tourism growth rate in the world between 1995 and 2020.

In 2017, 1,307,319 tourists visited Bosnia and Herzegovina, an increase of 13.7%, and had 2,677,125 overnight hotel stays, a 12.3% increase from the previous year. 71.5% of the tourists came from foreign countries.

In 2018, 1.883.772 tourists visited Bosnia and Herzegovina, an increase of 44,1%, and had 3.843.484 overnight hotel stays, a 43.5% increase from the previous year. Also, 71.2% of the tourists came from foreign countries.

In 2006, when ranking the best cities in the world, Lonely Planet placed Sarajevo, the national capital and host of the 1984 Winter Olympics, as #43 on the list. Tourism in Sarajevo is chiefly focused on historical, religious, and cultural aspects. In 2010, Lonely Planet&#x27;s &quot;Best in Travel&quot; nominated it as one of the top ten cities to visit that year. Sarajevo also won travel blog Foxnomad&#x27;s &quot;Best City to Visit&quot; competition in 2012, beating more than one hundred other cities around the entire world.

Međugorje has become one of the most popular pilgrimage sites for Catholics from around the world and has turned into Europe&#x27;s third most important religious place, where each year more than 1 million people visit. It has been estimated that 30 million pilgrims have come to Međugorje since the reputed apparitions began in 1981. Since 2019, pilgrimages to Međugorje have been officially authorized and organized by the Vatican.

Bosnia has also become an increasingly popular skiing and Ecotourism destination. The mountains that hosted the winter olympic games of Bjelašnica, Jahorina and Igman are the most visited skiing mountains in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Bosnia and Herzegovina remains one of the last undiscovered natural regions of the southern area of the Alps, with vast tracts of wild and untouched nature attracting adventurers and nature lovers. &quot;National Geographic&quot; named Bosnia and Herzegovina as the best mountain biking adventure destination for 2012. The central Bosnian Dinaric Alps are favored by hikers and mountaineers, as they contain both Mediterranean and Alpine climates. Whitewater rafting has become somewhat of a national pastime in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The primary rivers used for whitewater rafting in the country include the Vrbas, Tara, Drina, Neretva and Una. Meanwhile, the most prominent rivers are the Vrbas and Tara, as they both hosted The 2009 World Rafting Championship. The reason the Tara river is immensely popular for whitewater rafting is because it contains the deepest river canyon in Europe, the Tara River Canyon.

Most recently, the &quot;Huffington Post&quot; named Bosnia and Herzegovina the &quot;9th Greatest Adventure in the World for 2013&quot;, adding that the country boasts &quot;the cleanest water and air in Europe; the greatest untouched forests; and the most wildlife. The best way to experience is the three rivers trip, which purls through the best the Balkans have to offer.&quot;

==Infrastructure==

===Transport===

Sarajevo International Airport, also known as Butmir Airport, is the main international airport in Bosnia and Herzegovina, located southwest of the Sarajevo main railway station in the city of Sarajevo in the suburb of Butmir.

Railway operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina are successors of the Yugoslav Railways within the country boundaries following independence from the former Yugoslavia in 1992. Today, they are operated by the Railways of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (ŽFBiH) in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and by Republika Srpska Railways (ŽRS) in Republika Srpska.

===Telecommunications===
The Bosnian communications market was fully liberalised in January 2006. The three landline telephone operators predominantly provide services in their operating areas but have nationwide licenses for domestic and international calls. Mobile data services are also available, including high-speed EDGE, 3G and 4G services.

&quot;Oslobođenje&quot; (Liberation), founded in 1943, is one of the country&#x27;s longest running continuously circulating newspapers. There are many national publications, including the &quot;Dnevni avaz&quot; (Daily Voice), founded in 1995, and &quot;Jutarnje Novine&quot; (Morning News), to name but a few in circulation in Sarajevo. Other local periodicals include the Croatian &quot;Hrvatska riječ&quot; newspaper and Bosnian &quot;Start&quot; magazine, as well as &quot;Slobodna Bosna&quot; (&quot;Free Bosnia&quot;) and &quot;BH Dani&quot; (&quot;BH Days&quot;) weekly newspapers. &quot;Novi Plamen&quot;, a monthly magazine, was the most left-wing publication. International news station Al Jazeera maintains a sister channel catering to the Balkan region, Al Jazeera Balkans, broadcasting out of and based in Sarajevo. Since 2014, the N1 platform has broadcast as an affiliate of CNN International, with offices in Sarajevo, Zagreb and Belgrade.

As of 2021, Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked second highest in press freedom in the region, after Croatia, and is placed 58th internationally.

, there are 3,374,094 internet users in the country, or 95.55% of the entire population.

===Education===


Higher education has a long and rich tradition in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The first bespoke higher-education institution was a school of Sufi philosophy established by Gazi Husrev-beg in 1531. Numerous other religious schools then followed. In 1887, under the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a Sharia law school began a five-year program. In the 1940s, the University of Sarajevo became the city&#x27;s first secular higher education institute. In the 1950s, post-bachelaurate graduate degrees became available. Severely damaged during the war, it was recently rebuilt in partnership with more than 40 other universities. There are various other institutions of higher education, including: University Džemal Bijedić of Mostar, University of Banja Luka, University of Mostar, University of East Sarajevo, University of Tuzla, American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Academy of Sciences and Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is held in high regard as one of the most prestigious creative arts academies in the region.

Also, Bosnia and Herzegovina is home to several private and international higher education institutions, some of which are:
*Sarajevo School of Science and Technology
*International University of Sarajevo
*American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Sarajevo Graduate School of Business
*International Burch University
*United World College in Mostar

Primary schooling lasts for nine years. Secondary education is provided by general and technical secondary schools (typically Gymnasiums) where studies typically last for four years. All forms of secondary schooling include an element of vocational training. Pupils graduating from general secondary schools obtain the &quot;Matura&quot; and can enroll in any tertiary educational institution or academy by passing a qualification examination prescribed by the governing body or institution. Students graduating technical subjects obtain a Diploma.

==Culture==

===Architecture===
The architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina is largely influenced by four major periods where political and social changes influenced the creation of distinct cultural and architectural habits of the population. Each period made its influence felt and contributed to a greater diversity of cultures and architectural language in this region.

===Media===

Some television, magazines, and newspapers in Bosnia and Herzegovina are state-owned, and some are for-profit corporations funded by advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina guarantees freedom of speech.

As a country in transition with a post-war legacy and a complex domestic political structure, Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s media system is under transformation. In the early post-war period (1995–2005), media development was guided mainly by international donors and cooperation agencies, who invested to help reconstruct, diversify, democratize and professionalize media outlets.

Post-war developments included the establishment of an independent Communication Regulatory Agency, the adoption of a Press Code, the establishment of the Press Council, the decriminalization of libel and defamation, the introduction of a rather advanced Freedom of Access to Information Law, and the creation of a Public Service Broadcasting System from the formerly state-owned broadcaster.
Yet, internationally backed positive developments have been often obstructed by domestic elites, and the professionalisation of media and journalists has proceeded only slowly. High levels of partisanship and linkages between the media and the political systems hinder the adherence to professional code of conducts.

===Literature===

Bosnia and Herzegovina has a rich literature, including the Nobel Prize winner Ivo Andrić and poets such as Antun Branko Šimić, Aleksa Šantić, Jovan Dučić and Mak Dizdar, writers such as Zlatko Topčić, Meša Selimović, Semezdin Mehmedinović, Miljenko Jergović, Isak Samokovlija, Safvet-beg Bašagić, Abdulah Sidran, Petar Kočić, Aleksandar Hemon and Nedžad Ibrišimović.

The National Theater was founded in 1919 in Sarajevo and its first director was dramatist Branislav Nušić. Magazines such as &quot;Novi Plamen&quot; or &quot;Sarajevske sveske&quot; are some of the more prominent publications covering cultural and literary themes.

By the late 1950s, Ivo Andrić&#x27;s works had been translated into a number of languages. In 1958, the Association of Writers of Yugoslavia nominated Andrić as its first ever candidate for the Nobel Prize in Literature

===Art===

The art of Bosnia and Herzegovina was always evolving and ranged from the original medieval tombstones called Stećci to paintings in Kotromanić court. Twenty stećak necropolis sites in Bosnia and Herzegovina were added on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2006. However, only with the arrival of Austro-Hungarians did the painting renaissance in Bosnia really begin to flourish. The first educated artists from European academies appeared with the beginning of the 20th century. Among those are: Gabrijel Jurkić, Petar Šain, Roman Petrović and Lazar Drljača.

After World War II, artists like Mersad Berber and Safet Zec rose in popularity.

In 2007, Ars Aevi, a museum of contemporary art that includes works by renowned world artists, was founded in Sarajevo.

===Music===


Typical Bosnian songs are &quot;ganga, rera&quot;, and the traditional Slavic music for the folk dances such as &quot;kolo&quot;, while from the Ottoman era the most popular is Sevdalinka. Pop and Rock music has a tradition here as well, with the more famous musicians including Dino Zonić, Goran Bregović, Davorin Popović, Kemal Monteno, Zdravko Čolić, Elvir Laković Laka, Edo Maajka, Hari Varešanović, Dino Merlin, Mladen Vojičić Tifa, Željko Bebek, etc. Other composers such as Đorđe Novković, Al&#x27; Dino, Haris Džinović, Kornelije Kovač, and many rock and pop bands, for example, Bijelo Dugme, Crvena jabuka, Divlje jagode, Indexi, Plavi orkestar, Zabranjeno Pušenje, Ambasadori, Dubioza kolektiv, who were among the leading ones in the former Yugoslavia. Bosnia is home to the composer Dušan Šestić, the creator of the National Anthem of Bosnia and Herzegovina and father of singer Marija Šestić, to the jazz musician, educator and Bosnian jazz ambassador Sinan Alimanović, composer Saša Lošić and pianist Saša Toperić. In the villages, especially in Herzegovina, Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats play the ancient gusle. The gusle is used mainly to recite epic poems in a usually dramatic tone.

Probably the most distinctive and identifiably &quot;Bosnian&quot; of music, Sevdalinka is a kind of emotional, melancholic folk song that often describes sad subjects such as love and loss, the death of a dear person or heartbreak. Sevdalinkas were traditionally performed with a saz, a Turkish string instrument, which was later replaced by the accordion. However the more modern arrangement is typically a vocalist accompanied by the accordion along with snare drums, upright bass, guitars, clarinets and violins.

Rural folk traditions in Bosnia and Herzegovina include the shouted, polyphonic ganga and &quot;ravne pjesme&quot; (&quot;flat song&quot;) styles, as well as instruments like a droneless bagpipe, wooden flute and šargija. The gusle, an instrument found throughout the Balkans, is also used to accompany ancient Slavic epic poems. There are also Bosnian folk songs in the Ladino language, derived from the area&#x27;s Jewish population.

&quot;Bosnian roots music&quot; came from Central Bosnia, Posavina, the Drina valley and Kalesija. It is usually performed by singers with two violinists and a šargija player. These bands first appeared around World War I and became popular in the 1960s. This is the third oldest music after the Sevdalinka and ilahija. Self-taught people, mostly in two or three members of the different choices of old instruments, mostly in the violin, sacking, saz, drums, flutes () or wooden flute, as others have already called, the original performers of Bosnian music that can not be written notes, transmitted by ear from generation to generation, family is usually hereditary. It is thought to be brought from Persia-Kalesi tribe that settled in the area of the present Sprečanski valleys and hence probably the name Kalesija. In this part of Bosnia, it is the most common. This kind of music was enjoyed by all three peoples in Bosnia, Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats, and it contributed a lot to reconcile people socializing, entertainment and other organizations through festivals. In Kalesija, it is maintained each year with the Original Bosnian Festival music.

===Cinema and theatre===
Sarajevo is internationally renowned for its eclectic and diverse selection of festivals. The Sarajevo Film Festival was established in 1995, during the Bosnian War and has become the premier and largest film festival in the Balkans and Southeast Europe.

Bosnia has a rich cinematic and film heritage, dating back to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia; many Bosnian filmmakers have achieved international prominence and some have won international awards ranging from the Academy Awards to multiple Palme d&#x27;Ors and Golden Bears. Some notable Bosnian screenwriters, directors and producers are Danis Tanović (known for the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award winning 2001 film &quot;No Man&#x27;s Land&quot; and Silver Bear Grand Jury Prize winning 2016 film &quot;Death in Sarajevo&quot;), Jasmila Žbanić (won Golden Bear, Academy Award and BAFTA nominated 2020 film &quot;Quo Vadis, Aida?&quot;), Emir Kusturica (won two Palme d&#x27;Ors at Cannes), Zlatko Topčić, Ademir Kenović, Ahmed Imamović, Pjer Žalica, Aida Begić, etc.

===Cuisine===

Bosnian cuisine uses many spices, in moderate quantities. Most dishes are light, as they are boiled; the sauces are fully natural, consisting of little more than the natural juices of the vegetables in the dish. Typical ingredients include tomatoes, potatoes, onions, garlic, peppers, cucumbers, carrots, cabbage, mushrooms, spinach, zucchini, dried beans, fresh beans, plums, milk, paprika and cream called pavlaka. Bosnian cuisine is balanced between Western and Eastern influences. As a result of the Ottoman administration for almost 500 years, Bosnian food is closely related to Turkish, Greek and other former Ottoman and Mediterranean cuisines. However, because of years of Austrian rule, there are many influences from Central Europe. Typical meat dishes include primarily beef and lamb. Some local specialties are ćevapi, burek, dolma, sarma, pilav, goulash, ajvar and a whole range of Eastern sweets. Ćevapi is a grilled dish of minced meat, a type of kebab, popular in former Yugoslavia and considered a national dish in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia. Local wines come from Herzegovina where the climate is suitable for growing grapes. Herzegovinian &quot;loza&quot; (similar to Italian Grappa but less sweet) is very popular. Plum (&quot;rakija&quot;) or apple (&quot;jabukovača&quot;) alcohol beverages are produced in the north. In the south, distilleries used to produce vast quantities of brandy and supply all of ex-Yugoslav alcohol factories (brandy is the base of most alcoholic drinks).

Coffeehouses, where Bosnian coffee is served in džezva with rahat lokum and sugar cubes, are common in Sarajevo and every city in the country. Coffee drinking is a favorite Bosnian pastime and part of the culture. Bosnia and Herzegovina is the ninth country in the entire world by per capita coffee consumption.

===Sports===


Bosnia and Herzegovina has produced many athletes. The most important international sporting event in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina were the 14th Winter Olympics, held in Sarajevo from 7 to 19 February 1984.

The Borac handball club has won seven Yugoslav Handball Championships, as well as the European Cup in 1976 and the International Handball Federation Cup in 1991.

Amel Mekić, Bosnian judoka, became European champion in 2011. Track and field athlete Amel Tuka won bronze and silver medals in 800 metres at the 2015 and 2019 IAAF World Athletics Championships and Hamza Alić won the silver medal in shot put at the 2013 European Indoor Championships.

The Bosna Royal basketball club from Sarajevo were European Champions in 1979. The Yugoslavia men&#x27;s national basketball team, which won medals in every world championship from 1963 through 1990, included Bosnian players such as FIBA Hall of Famers Dražen Dalipagić and Mirza Delibašić. Bosnia and Herzegovina regularly qualifies for the European Championship in Basketball, with players including Mirza Teletović, Nihad Đedović and Jusuf Nurkić. The Bosnia and Herzegovina national under-16 team won two gold medals in 2015, winning both 2015 European Youth Summer Olympic Festival as well as the 2015 FIBA Europe Under-16 Championship.

Women&#x27;s basketball club Jedinstvo Aida from Tuzla won the Women&#x27;s European Club Championship in 1989 and Ronchetti Cup final in 1990, led by Razija Mujanović, three times best female European basketball player, and Mara Lakić

The Bosnian chess team was Champion of Yugoslavia seven times, in addition to club ŠK Bosna winning four European Chess Club Cups. Chess grandmaster Borki Predojević has also won two European Championships. The most impressive success of Bosnian Chess was a runner-up position at the 31st Chess Olympiad in 1994 in Moscow, featuring Grandmasters Predrag Nikolić, Ivan Sokolov and Bojan Kurajica.

Middle-weight boxer Marijan Beneš has won several Championships of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Yugoslav Championships and the European Championship. In 1978, he won the World Title against Elisha Obed from The Bahamas.

Association football is the most popular sport in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It dates from 1903, but its popularity grew significantly after World War I. Bosnian clubs FK Sarajevo and Željezničar won the Yugoslav Championship, while the Yugoslav national football team included Bosnian players of all ethnic backgrounds and generations, such as Safet Sušić, Zlatko Vujović, Mehmed Baždarević, Davor Jozić, Faruk Hadžibegić, Predrag Pašić, Blaž Slišković, Vahid Halilhodžić, Dušan Bajević, Ivica Osim, Josip Katalinski, Tomislav Knez, Velimir Sombolac and numerous others. The Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team played at the 2014 FIFA World Cup, its first major tournament. Players on the team again includes notable players of all country&#x27;s ethnic background, such as then and now captains Emir Spahić, Zvjezdan Misimović and Edin Džeko, defenders like Ognjen Vranješ, Sead Kolašinac and Toni Šunjić, midfielders like Miralem Pjanić and Senad Lulić, striker Vedad Ibišević, etc. Former Bosnian footballers include Hasan Salihamidžić, who became only the second Bosnian to ever win a UEFA Champions League trophy, after Elvir Baljić. He made 234 appearances and scored 31 goals for German club FC Bayern Munich. Sergej Barbarez, who played for several clubs in the German Bundesliga. including Borussia Dortmund, Hamburger SV and Bayer Leverkusen was joint-top scorer in the 2000–01 Bundesliga season with 22 goals. Meho Kodro spent most of his career playing in Spain, most notably with Real Sociedad and FC Barcelona. Elvir Rahimić made 302 appearances for Russian club CSKA Moscow with whom he won the UEFA Cup in 2005.
Milena Nikolić, member of the women&#x27;s national team, was the 2013–14 UEFA Women&#x27;s Champions League top scorer.

Bosnia and Herzegovina was the world champion of volleyball at the 2004 Summer Paralympics and volleyball at the 2012 Summer Paralympics. Many among those on the team lost their legs in the Bosnian War. Its national sitting volleyball team is one of the dominant forces in the sport worldwide, winning nine European Championships, three World Championships and two Paralympic gold medals.

Tennis is also gaining a lot of popularity after the recent successes of Damir Džumhur and Mirza Bašić at Grand Slam level. Other notable tennis players who have represented Bosnia and Herzegovina are Tomislav Brkić, Amer Delić and Mervana Jugić-Salkić.

==See also==

* Outline of Bosnia and Herzegovina

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* Allcock, John B., Marko Milivojevic, et al. &quot;Conflict in the Former Yugoslavia: An Encyclopedia&quot; (1998)
* 
* (Also at Project Gutenberg)
* 
* 
* Okey, Robin. &quot;Taming Balkan Nationalism: The Habsburg &#x27;Civilizing&#x27; Mission in Bosnia, 1878–1914&quot; (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007)
* Phillips, Douglas A. &quot;Bosnia and Herzegovina&quot; (Philadelphia: Chelsea House, 2004).
==External links==
* Bosnia and Herzegovina from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot; (archived 3 July 2008)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="0" end="22" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="46" end="64" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia-Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="83" end="89" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="107" end="123" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="141" end="157" title="Balkans" label="Balkan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="170" end="176" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="190" end="200" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="223" end="230" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="294" end="306" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="308" end="314" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="330" end="349" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="546" end="557" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="595" end="616" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="644" end="652" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="738" end="755" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="795" end="804" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017984" start="893" end="899" title="Butmir culture" label="Butmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12752486" start="901" end="907" title="Kakanj culture" label="Kakanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q922829" start="913" end="928" title="Vučedol culture" label="Vučedol culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="962" end="976" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Indo-Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="1012" end="1019" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="1025" end="1031" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="1051" end="1088" title="Early Slavs" label="ancestors of the South Slavic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627069" start="1191" end="1207" title="Banate of Bosnia" label="Banate of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980623" start="1272" end="1289" title="Kingdom of Bosnia" label="Kingdom of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1340" end="1354" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735662" start="1356" end="1384" title="Ottoman Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="under whose rule it remained"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276739" start="1435" end="1440" title="Islam in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1489" end="1500" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="1518" end="1560" title="Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="annexed into the Austro-Hungarian monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="1569" end="1584" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="1625" end="1646" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1654" end="1666" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="1724" end="1764" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="1789" end="1810" title="breakup of Yugoslavia" label="breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947346" start="1812" end="1848" title="1992 Bosnian independence referendum" label="the republic proclaimed independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="1875" end="1886" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="1951" end="1967" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788249" start="1993" end="2017" title="ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="three main ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="2019" end="2027" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="2051" end="2056" title="Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="2081" end="2087" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q662535" start="2126" end="2130" title="History of the Jews in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980602" start="2132" end="2136" title="Romani people in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641228" start="2138" end="2183" title="National minorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Albanians, Montenegrins, Ukrainians and Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="2214" end="2223" title="bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q844944" start="2242" end="2252" title="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="2465" end="2501" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="2506" end="2522" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q194483" start="2545" end="2559" title="Brčko District" label="Brčko District"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="2628" end="2646" title="developing country" label="developing country"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="2931" end="2948" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2957" end="2971" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q894452" start="2973" end="3022" title="Accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina is an EU candidate country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3057" end="3061" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="3182" end="3188" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="3251" end="3268" title="List of Byzantine emperors" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="3269" end="3284" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="3374" end="3379" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q337693" start="3596" end="3610" title="Časlav of Serbia" label="Serbian prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="3795" end="3800" title="Bosna (river)" label="Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="3858" end="3869" title="Philology" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35976" start="3928" end="3936" title="Illyrian language" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15730496" start="4113" end="4127" title="William Miller (historian)" label="William Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312266" start="4510" end="4531" title="Stjepan Vukčić Kosača" label="Stjepan Vukčić Kosača"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="4619" end="4628" title="Zachlumia" label="Zachlumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418370" start="4827" end="4848" title="Sanjak of Herzegovina" label="Sanjak of Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055400" start="4898" end="4911" title="Bosnia Eyalet" label="Bosnia Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055396" start="4951" end="4969" title="Herzegovina Eyalet" label="Herzegovina Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947346" start="5125" end="5161" title="1992 Bosnian independence referendum" label="proclamation of independence in 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274468" start="5204" end="5238" title="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="5263" end="5279" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291601" start="5292" end="5304" title="Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5472" end="5483" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840605" start="5534" end="5545" title="Badanj Cave" label="Badanj cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017984" start="5584" end="5590" title="Butmir culture" label="Butmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12752486" start="5595" end="5601" title="Kakanj culture" label="Kakanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="5631" end="5636" title="Bosna (river)" label="Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="5677" end="5686" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="5785" end="5793" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="5795" end="5802" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="5828" end="5834" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="5836" end="5842" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="5844" end="5854" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="5859" end="5866" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="5967" end="5974" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088762" start="6114" end="6121" title="Ardiaei" label="Ardiaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="6151" end="6158" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q808052" start="6276" end="6299" title="Bardylis" label="Bardylis of the Dardani"/>
<link wikidata="Q397382" start="6307" end="6327" title="Agron of Illyria" label="Agron of the Ardiaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="6630" end="6647" title="Hallstatt culture" label="Hallstatt culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254432" start="6763" end="6774" title="Daesitiates" label="Daesitiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q31365449" start="6816" end="6846" title="Central Bosnian cultural group" label="Central Bosnian cultural group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612818" start="6861" end="6882" title="Glasinac-Mati culture" label="Glasinac-Mati culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q784432" start="6906" end="6916" title="Autariatae" label="Autariatae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="7249" end="7255" title="Tumulus" label="tumuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q324926" start="7525" end="7532" title="Fibula (brooch)" label="fibulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="7651" end="7656" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="7704" end="7717" title="Potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="pottery wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q649179" start="7911" end="7926" title="List of ancient tribes in Illyria" label="Illyrian tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q677753" start="8169" end="8182" title="Neretva Delta" label="Neretva Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="8218" end="8229" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43951417" start="8257" end="8262" title="Daorson" label="Daors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026587" start="8324" end="8330" title="Stolac" label="Stolac"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="8383" end="8391" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="8437" end="8444" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="8582" end="8588" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988" start="8806" end="8816" title="Punic Wars" label="Punic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="8854" end="8863" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="8901" end="8910" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="9119" end="9131" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="9322" end="9342" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="9376" end="9386" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="9440" end="9445" title="Alans" label="Alans"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="9454" end="9458" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="9488" end="9499" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9533" end="9549" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="9759" end="9770" title="Early Slavs" label="Early Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="9860" end="9876" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257426" start="9997" end="10005" title="Sclaveni" label="Sclaveni"/>
<link wikidata="Q571813" start="10038" end="10043" title="Antes people" label="Antes"/>
<link wikidata="Q599110" start="10789" end="10794" title="Raška (region)" label="Raška"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252942" start="10855" end="10861" title="Duklja" label="Duklja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="10866" end="10869" title="Zachlumia" label="Hum"/>
<link wikidata="Q337693" start="11452" end="11458" title="Časlav of Serbia" label="Časlav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252942" start="11895" end="11901" title="Duklja" label="Duklja"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="11987" end="12003" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="12072" end="12090" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627069" start="12260" end="12276" title="Banate of Bosnia" label="Banate of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="12308" end="12312" title="Ban (title)" label="bans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881841" start="12361" end="12370" title="Ban Borić" label="Ban Borić"/>
<link wikidata="Q389903" start="12387" end="12396" title="Ban Kulin" label="Ban Kulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q894479" start="12457" end="12471" title="Bosnian Church" label="Bosnian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12502" end="12523" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952977" start="12949" end="12957" title="Bošnjani" label="Bošnjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q378793" start="13201" end="13206" title="Šubić family" label="Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q178438" start="13211" end="13221" title="Kotromanić dynasty" label="Kotromanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q965795" start="13275" end="13296" title="Stephen II, Ban of Bosnia" label="Stephen II Kotromanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q319605" start="13504" end="13510" title="Tvrtko I of Bosnia" label="Tvrtko"/>
<link wikidata="Q277789" start="13726" end="13738" title="List of rulers of Bosnia" label="Bosnian King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647173" start="13752" end="13758" title="Visoko during the Middle Ages" label="Visoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="13871" end="13885" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q698985" start="13902" end="13920" title="Ottoman wars in Europe" label="conquest of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="13953" end="13960" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416014" start="14535" end="14561" title="Ottoman conquest of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Ottoman conquest of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="15303" end="15310" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="15616" end="15624" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200172" start="15813" end="15827" title="Pjetër Mazreku" label="Pjetër Mazreku"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="15972" end="15987" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="16202" end="16208" title="Vlachs" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q894479" start="17033" end="17047" title="Bosnian Church" label="Bosnian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="17309" end="17320" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="17620" end="17627" title="Rumelia" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="17778" end="17786" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="17791" end="17797" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202308" start="17916" end="17929" title="Evliya Çelebi" label="Evliya Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566104" start="18027" end="18047" title="Architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="18102" end="18111" title="Madrasa" label="madrassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117149" start="18125" end="18140" title="Sufi philosophy" label="Sufi philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188528" start="18206" end="18216" title="Stari Most" label="Stari Most"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628496" start="18222" end="18243" title="Emperor&amp;#x27;s Mosque" label="Emperor&amp;#x27;s Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255835" start="18252" end="18274" title="Gazi Husrev-beg Mosque" label="Gazi Husrev-beg Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147507" start="18381" end="18398" title="political history" label="political history"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="18498" end="18504" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q694379" start="18509" end="18521" title="Battle of Krbava Field" label="Krbava field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115413" start="18683" end="18697" title="Matrakçı Nasuh" label="Matrakçı Nasuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q666227" start="18716" end="18733" title="Isa Bey Ishaković" label="Isa-Beg Ishaković"/>
<link wikidata="Q453455" start="18735" end="18750" title="Gazi Husrev Bey" label="Gazi Husrev-beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755483" start="18752" end="18769" title="Telli Hasan Pasha" label="Telli Hasan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062010" start="18774" end="18793" title="Sarı Süleyman Pasha" label="Sarı Süleyman Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q31189679" start="18818" end="18840" title="Ferhad Pasha Sokolović" label="Ferhad Pasha Sokolović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107077" start="18845" end="18862" title="Osman Gradaščević" label="Osman Gradaščević"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="18874" end="18880" title="Vizier" label="Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q298419" start="18906" end="18926" title="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha" label="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q951058" start="18931" end="18950" title="Damat Ibrahim Pasha" label="Damat Ibrahim Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="18977" end="18981" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026528" start="19008" end="19037" title="Muhamed Hevaji Uskufi Bosnevi" label="Muhamed Hevaji Uskufi Bosnevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724765" start="19039" end="19049" title="Ali Džabić" label="Ali Džabić"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="19068" end="19075" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="19077" end="19085" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="19087" end="19093" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="19099" end="19115" title="Persian language" label="Persian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="19239" end="19256" title="Great Turkish War" label="Great Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q192303" start="19266" end="19285" title="treaty of Karlowitz" label="treaty of Karlowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="19652" end="19660" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="19780" end="19786" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="19787" end="19793" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813999" start="19821" end="19840" title="Sanjak of Smederevo" label="Sanjak of Smederevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055400" start="19846" end="19859" title="Bosnia Eyalet" label="Bosnia Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q470948" start="19910" end="19928" title="Husein Gradaščević" label="Husein Gradaščević"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="20020" end="20029" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="20074" end="20085" title="Janissary" label="Janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q184951" start="20121" end="20126" title="Pasha" label="Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="20159" end="20171" title="Grand vizier" label="Grand vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276263" start="20248" end="20271" title="Ali Pasha Rizvanbegović" label="Ali Pasha Rizvanbegović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258726" start="20772" end="20795" title="Herzegovina uprising (1875–1877)" label="Herzegovinian rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="20953" end="20971" title="Congress of Berlin" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="20980" end="20996" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="21048" end="21054" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="21068" end="21084" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q313557" start="21102" end="21116" title="Gyula Andrássy" label="Gyula Andrássy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233295" start="21246" end="21266" title="Sanjak of Novi Pazar" label="Sanjak of Novi Pazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="21293" end="21300" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="21781" end="21794" title="Habsburg Monarchy" label="Habsburg rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="21982" end="21989" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q167246" start="22280" end="22297" title="Bosnian Crisis" label="annexation crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403418" start="22405" end="22418" title="May Coup (Serbia)" label="A bloody coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="22510" end="22518" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="22592" end="22600" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="23283" end="23295" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010895" start="23413" end="23431" title="Diet of Bosnia" label="Bosnian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q80492" start="23484" end="23499" title="Gavrilo Princip" label="Gavrilo Princip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="23503" end="23515" title="Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q505205" start="23553" end="23565" title="Young Bosnia" label="Young Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="23567" end="23579" title="Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="23621" end="23645" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="23700" end="23711" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q657605" start="23858" end="23888" title="Bosnian-Herzegovinian Infantry" label="Bosnian-Herzegovinian Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="23896" end="23917" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276646" start="24099" end="24110" title="Schutzkorps" label="Schutzkorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284134" start="24159" end="24168" title="Anti-Serb sentiment" label="anti-Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="24308" end="24316" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q117406" start="24333" end="24342" title="Komitadji" label="Komitadji"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="24392" end="24397" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="24976" end="25013" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q989018" start="25159" end="25182" title="Distribution (economics)" label="property redistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="25500" end="25512" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="26108" end="26114" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292464" start="26229" end="26241" title="Mehmed Spaho" label="Mehmed Spaho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26546" end="26553" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia#Subdivisions" label="banates"/>
<link wikidata="Q806922" start="26563" end="26572" title="Banovina (region)" label="banovinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382617" start="26841" end="26866" title="Cvetković–Maček Agreement" label="Cvetković-Maček Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q601252" start="26884" end="26899" title="Banovina of Croatia" label="Croatian banate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932088" start="26942" end="26977" title="partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="27035" end="27047" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="27055" end="27067" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="27194" end="27211" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118311" start="27219" end="27235" title="Yugoslav coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="27392" end="27404" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="27477" end="27505" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="27523" end="27529" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="27561" end="27586" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="campaign of extermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="27603" end="27609" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="27651" end="27666" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="27674" end="27683" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="27710" end="27721" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="death camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="28402" end="28425" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283948" start="28637" end="28653" title="Džafer Kulenović" label="Džafer Kulenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q746607" start="28914" end="28928" title="Greater Serbia" label="Greater Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565489" start="29009" end="29027" title="Chetnik war crimes in World War II" label="genocidal campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="29104" end="29113" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q579132" start="29209" end="29216" title="Sandžak" label="Sandžak"/>
<link wikidata="Q141482" start="29709" end="29730" title="13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar (1st Croatian)" label="&amp;quot;Waffen-SS&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017988" start="29839" end="29848" title="Vlasenica" label="Vlasenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593147" start="29924" end="29954" title="Resolution of Sarajevo Muslims" label="Resolution of Sarajevo Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="30459" end="30463" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="30509" end="30571" title="Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia" label="Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258429" start="30632" end="30637" title="Jajce" label="Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="30786" end="30812" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="World War II in Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="30933" end="30939" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797295" start="30994" end="31009" title="Maclean Mission" label="Maclean Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="31450" end="31490" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261894" start="31501" end="31521" title="1946 Yugoslav Constitution" label="constitution of 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="31949" end="31997" title="Bosnian War" label="the war that followed the break-up of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="32355" end="32365" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="32419" end="32428" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075" start="32466" end="32474" title="Marlboro (cigarette)" label="Marlboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717882" start="32512" end="32523" title="Holiday Inn" label="Holiday Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9657" start="32561" end="32581" title="1984 Winter Olympics" label="1984 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="32762" end="32782" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q965595" start="32906" end="32920" title="Džemal Bijedić" label="Džemal Bijedić"/>
<link wikidata="Q898698" start="32922" end="32936" title="Branko Mikulić" label="Branko Mikulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490658" start="32941" end="32957" title="Hamdija Pozderac" label="Hamdija Pozderac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015972" start="33173" end="33193" title="Independence Day (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Bosnian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="33332" end="33353" title="breakup of Yugoslavia" label="breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067054" start="33549" end="33584" title="1990 Bosnian general election" label="multi-party parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604031" start="33685" end="33702" title="Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="national assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="33798" end="33806" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="33811" end="33818" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137457" start="34082" end="34089" title="Muslims (ethnic group)" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164533" start="34161" end="34182" title="Serb Democratic Party (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Serb Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q63685" start="34253" end="34306" title="National Assembly (Republika Srpska)" label="Assembly of the Serb People of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16761250" start="34579" end="34595" title="Republika Srpska (1992–1995)" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="34728" end="34753" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q334731" start="34793" end="34828" title="Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia" label="Croatian Community of Herzeg-Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35895" start="34900" end="34924" title="Croatian Defence Council" label="Croatian Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176455" start="34983" end="35019" title="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947346" start="35145" end="35172" title="1992 Bosnian independence referendum" label="referendum for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274468" start="35512" end="35546" title="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="35585" end="35599" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="35631" end="35649" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q183703" start="35670" end="35683" title="Franjo Tuđman" label="Franjo Tuđman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932088" start="35717" end="35752" title="partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q746607" start="35797" end="35811" title="Greater Serbia" label="Greater Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384816" start="35816" end="35831" title="Greater Croatia" label="Greater Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="36127" end="36154" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="36321" end="36345" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="36576" end="36606" title="Serbia and Montenegro" label="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="36608" end="36624" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="36755" end="36771" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="36987" end="37006" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="Srebrenica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="37092" end="37100" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="37108" end="37165" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069736" start="37375" end="37392" title="Croat–Bosniak War" label="Croat–Bosniak War"/>
<link wikidata="Q593467" start="37444" end="37492" title="Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378244" start="37590" end="37610" title="Washington Agreement (1994)" label="Washington Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="37661" end="37697" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q687076" start="37758" end="37804" title="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712344" start="37861" end="37869" title="2014 unrest in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506097" start="37882" end="37936" title="Government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="38035" end="38046" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="38078" end="38083" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="38357" end="38365" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q184046" start="38367" end="38373" title="Zenica" label="Zenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="38375" end="38381" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q204434" start="38383" end="38388" title="Bihać" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q322828" start="38390" end="38395" title="Brčko" label="Brčko"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="38810" end="38820" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q107018" start="39059" end="39076" title="Christian Schmidt (politician)" label="Christian Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q470446" start="39084" end="39113" title="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Office of High Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="39307" end="39321" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q471191" start="39354" end="39367" title="Balkanization" label="Balkanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q894452" start="39492" end="39501" title="Accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union" label="accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="39532" end="39548" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="39607" end="39614" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="39626" end="39633" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="39660" end="39666" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="39687" end="39697" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q320623" start="39773" end="39777" title="Neum" label="Neum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317511" start="39805" end="39808" title="42nd parallel north" label="42°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256544" start="39813" end="39818" title="46th parallel north" label="46° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700643" start="39835" end="39838" title="15th meridian east" label="15°"/>
<link wikidata="Q796502" start="39843" end="39848" title="20th meridian east" label="20° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="39910" end="39916" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="39921" end="39932" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="40147" end="40159" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="40199" end="40214" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="40250" end="40258" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q837723" start="40409" end="40415" title="Maglić (mountain)" label="Maglić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501518" start="40478" end="40485" title="Volujak (mountain)" label="Volujak"/>
<link wikidata="Q619701" start="40487" end="40496" title="Zelengora" label="Zelengora"/>
<link wikidata="Q45046" start="40498" end="40504" title="Lelija" label="Lelija"/>
<link wikidata="Q44945" start="40506" end="40514" title="Lebršnik" label="Lebršnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757305" start="40516" end="40521" title="Orjen" label="Orjen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785758" start="40523" end="40529" title="Kozara" label="Kozara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547157" start="40531" end="40536" title="Grmeč" label="Grmeč"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267542" start="40538" end="40546" title="Čvrsnica" label="Čvrsnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276211" start="40548" end="40553" title="Prenj" label="Prenj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445913" start="40555" end="40559" title="Vran" label="Vran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392085" start="40561" end="40568" title="Vranica" label="Vranica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291525" start="40570" end="40575" title="Velež (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Velež"/>
<link wikidata="Q425929" start="40577" end="40583" title="Vlašić (Bosnian mountain)" label="Vlašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092206" start="40585" end="40591" title="Cincar" label="Cincar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817516" start="40593" end="40601" title="Romanija" label="Romanija"/>
<link wikidata="Q187944" start="40603" end="40611" title="Jahorina" label="Jahorina"/>
<link wikidata="Q879414" start="40613" end="40623" title="Bjelašnica" label="Bjelašnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508343" start="40625" end="40635" title="Treskavica" label="Treskavica"/>
<link wikidata="Q612240" start="40640" end="40648" title="Trebević" label="Trebević"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="40743" end="40752" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="40764" end="40772" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="40802" end="40806" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="40808" end="40812" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="40814" end="40818" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="40820" end="40829" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="40831" end="40838" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="40840" end="40844" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="40850" end="40854" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="41110" end="41115" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q975995" start="41145" end="41153" title="Posavina" label="Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="41205" end="41209" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q18273" start="41423" end="41449" title="Herzegovina-Neretva Canton" label="Herzegovina-Neretva Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q686268" start="41558" end="41574" title="right of passage" label="right of passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="41594" end="41602" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="41663" end="41673" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q323986" start="41678" end="41686" title="Prijedor" label="Prijedor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779054" start="41720" end="41736" title="Bosanska Krajina" label="Bosanska Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="41738" end="41743" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q207801" start="41745" end="41754" title="Bijeljina" label="Bijeljina"/>
<link wikidata="Q169247" start="41756" end="41761" title="Doboj" label="Doboj"/>
<link wikidata="Q322828" start="41766" end="41771" title="Brčko" label="Brčko"/>
<link wikidata="Q184046" start="41790" end="41796" title="Zenica" label="Zenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="41837" end="41843" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="41888" end="41899" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q771220" start="41978" end="41997" title="Phytogeography" label="Phytogeographically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092732" start="42037" end="42051" title="Boreal Kingdom" label="Boreal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q968104" start="42103" end="42122" title="Circumboreal Region" label="Circumboreal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="42152" end="42172" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="42191" end="42217" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="42293" end="42302" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079316" start="42305" end="42325" title="Balkan mixed forests" label="Balkan mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845967" start="42327" end="42358" title="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests" label="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q771194" start="42360" end="42383" title="Pannonian mixed forests" label="Pannonian mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269041" start="42388" end="42414" title="Illyrian deciduous forests" label="Illyrian deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="42439" end="42471" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="42568" end="42580" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="42786" end="42802" title="State ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="42811" end="42828" title="Private property" label="private ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="42881" end="42897" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q470446" start="42954" end="43000" title="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157377" start="43017" end="43045" title="Peace Implementation Council" label="Peace Implementation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154049" start="43315" end="43331" title="Politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="43346" end="43350" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="43408" end="43415" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="43458" end="43471" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="43472" end="43496" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="43506" end="43521" title="Executive (government)" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176455" start="43542" end="43588" title="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="43590" end="43607" title="Legislature" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604031" start="43659" end="43707" title="Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="43773" end="43800" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="43843" end="43860" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="43927" end="43943" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="44034" end="44070" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="44075" end="44091" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636959" start="44609" end="44622" title="Sumantra Bose" label="Sumantra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="44676" end="44689" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194483" start="44696" end="44710" title="Brčko District" label="Brčko District"/>
<link wikidata="Q18279" start="45276" end="45283" title="Cantons of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706302" start="45649" end="45663" title="Municipalities of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665769" start="46116" end="46142" title="Inter-Entity Boundary Line" label="Inter-Entity Boundary Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="46403" end="46413" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="46415" end="46421" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="46423" end="46431" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q147556" start="46436" end="46449" title="Istočno Sarajevo" label="East Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="46895" end="46911" title="defence minister" label="defense ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771708" start="46945" end="46957" title="indirect tax" label="indirect tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q848335" start="47250" end="47255" title="Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q844944" start="47263" end="47299" title="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="47329" end="47336" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="47338" end="47342" title="Serbs" label="Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="47344" end="47349" title="Croats" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16020744" start="47633" end="47666" title="Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Chair of the Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q320268" start="47732" end="47756" title="House of Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718547" start="48012" end="48028" title="House of Peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989753" start="48473" end="48519" title="Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651269" start="48633" end="48665" title="House of Representatives of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federal House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q63685" start="48678" end="48715" title="National Assembly (Republika Srpska)" label="National Assembly of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="48750" end="48780" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383594" start="48975" end="48992" title="executive officer" label="executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="49071" end="49085" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49353" end="49447" title="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina#Conditions for closure of the Office of the High Representative" label="is to end when the country is deemed politically and democratically stable and self-sustaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986674" start="49450" end="49486" title="Corruption in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Corruption in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q276294" start="49528" end="49566" title="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q593467" start="49641" end="49689" title="Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="49698" end="49722" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294493" start="49773" end="49792" title="Ministry of Defence (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q276294" start="49851" end="49872" title="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q569328" start="49877" end="49902" title="Air Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Air Force and Air Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465101" start="50205" end="50212" title="Man-portable air-defense system" label="MANPADS"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="50233" end="50255" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570019" start="50347" end="50353" title="MARPAT" label="MARPAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="50406" end="50445" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="50456" end="50467" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="50771" end="50775" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="50784" end="50816" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623743" start="51482" end="51508" title="Republika Srpska Air Force" label="Republika Srpska Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q37726" start="51660" end="51673" title="Army" label="Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q894452" start="51864" end="51890" title="Accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union" label="European Union integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259507" start="51975" end="52012" title="Stabilisation and Association Process" label="Stabilisation and Association Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="52361" end="52377" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="52554" end="52571" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="52637" end="52644" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="52646" end="52652" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="52657" end="52667" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52789" end="52811" title="Enlargement of NATO#Membership Action Plan" label="Membership Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="52817" end="52821" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="53140" end="53158" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435635" start="53193" end="53204" title="1991 population census in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="1991 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="53370" end="53383" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630162" start="53627" end="53638" title="2013 population census in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788249" start="54000" end="54019" title="Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="constituent peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="54034" end="54042" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="54044" end="54049" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="54054" end="54060" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q662535" start="54104" end="54108" title="History of the Jews in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980602" start="54113" end="54117" title="Romani people in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54175" end="54222" title="Statistical system of Bosnia and Herzegovina#The Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BHAS)" label="Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="54431" end="54447" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="54474" end="54486" title="Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="54647" end="54661" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="54688" end="54696" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="54980" end="54996" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="55024" end="55031" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="55033" end="55041" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="55055" end="55062" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989753" start="55251" end="55271" title="Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="55312" end="55322" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="55722" end="55739" title="standard language" label="standard language"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="55751" end="55772" title="Mutual intelligibility" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="55825" end="55839" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="56217" end="56268" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="56346" end="56354" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="56356" end="56367" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="56369" end="56374" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="56376" end="56383" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="56385" end="56394" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="56396" end="56406" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="56408" end="56414" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="56416" end="56422" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="56424" end="56430" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="56432" end="56440" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="56442" end="56447" title="Rusyn language" label="Rusyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="56449" end="56455" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="56457" end="56464" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="56466" end="56473" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="56475" end="56484" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="56497" end="56504" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="56509" end="56515" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Ladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q699958" start="56587" end="56602" title="Danube Swabians" label="Danube Swabians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="56638" end="56655" title="Austrian Empire" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="56685" end="56699" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="56708" end="56718" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="expulsions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="56723" end="56744" title="Persecution of Germans" label="(forced) assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="56759" end="56768" title="World war" label="World war"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="57134" end="57141" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="57183" end="57202" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="57215" end="57234" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="57262" end="57269" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="57273" end="57281" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731064" start="57401" end="57419" title="non-denominational Muslim" label="non-denominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="57440" end="57447" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunnism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="57468" end="57476" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57546" end="57562" title="Sarajevo#Municipalities and city government" label="City of Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q247962" start="57596" end="57602" title="Ilidža" label="Ilidža"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017946" start="57604" end="57611" title="Vogošća" label="Vogošća"/>
<link wikidata="Q613811" start="57613" end="57627" title="Istočna Ilidža" label="Istočna Ilidža"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276516" start="57629" end="57650" title="Istočno Novo Sarajevo" label="Istočno Novo Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272654" start="57655" end="57673" title="Istočni Stari Grad" label="Istočni Stari Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422994" start="57679" end="57689" title="Sarajevo metropolitan area" label="metro area"/>
<link wikidata="Q18276" start="57731" end="57746" title="Sarajevo Canton" label="Sarajevo Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q147556" start="57748" end="57761" title="Istočno Sarajevo" label="East Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q911568" start="57788" end="57793" title="Breza, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Breza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018000" start="57795" end="57803" title="Kiseljak" label="Kiseljak"/>
<link wikidata="Q972698" start="57805" end="57812" title="Kreševo" label="Kreševo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193229" start="57817" end="57823" title="Visoko" label="Visoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="58003" end="58014" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q965595" start="58372" end="58386" title="Džemal Bijedić" label="Džemal Bijedić"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="58391" end="58399" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="58410" end="58425" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q208545" start="58550" end="58575" title="Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="SR Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="58696" end="58699" title="USD" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="59228" end="59241" title="Government debt" label="national debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="59305" end="59318" title="Balance of trade" label="trade deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179620" start="59389" end="59405" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark" label="convertible mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q496819" start="59430" end="59444" title="currency board" label="currency board"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="59602" end="59610" title="Gross domestic product" label="Real GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184535" start="59656" end="59694" title="Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q683667" start="59897" end="59921" title="List of countries by income equality" label="income equality rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="59965" end="59973" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="60082" end="60109" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080874" start="60183" end="60203" title="IMF Stand-By Arrangement" label="Stand-By Arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369968" start="60263" end="60284" title="Embassy of the United States, Sarajevo" label="United States Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="60288" end="60296" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="60527" end="60539" title="Informal economy" label="grey economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="60667" end="60680" title="International trade" label="foreign trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="60837" end="60867" title="balance of trade" label="coverage of imports by exports"/>
<link wikidata="Q220223" start="60988" end="60996" title="car seat" label="car seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="60999" end="61010" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609891" start="61012" end="61026" title="wood processing" label="processed wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="61028" end="61037" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="61042" end="61051" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="61090" end="61099" title="Petroleum" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="61101" end="61112" title="Car" label="automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q193784" start="61114" end="61123" title="motor oil" label="motor oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="61125" end="61129" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153022" start="61134" end="61143" title="briquette" label="briquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754711" start="61192" end="61247" title="The Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies" label="The Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176455" start="61481" end="61527" title="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="61959" end="61984" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="63369" end="63393" title="mergers and acquisitions" label="mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="63752" end="63777" title="direct foreign investment" label="direct foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="63918" end="63928" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="64028" end="64053" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="65033" end="65056" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="65206" end="65232" title="World Tourism Organization" label="World Tourism Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="65826" end="65839" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="65847" end="65855" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="65861" end="65877" title="Capital city" label="national capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9657" start="65894" end="65914" title="1984 Winter Olympics" label="1984 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q94950" start="66309" end="66318" title="Medjugorje" label="Međugorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="66375" end="66384" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="66734" end="66741" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="66802" end="66812" title="Ecotourism" label="Ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q879414" start="66880" end="66890" title="Bjelašnica" label="Bjelašnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q187944" start="66892" end="66900" title="Jahorina" label="Jahorina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110607" start="66905" end="66910" title="Igman" label="Igman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="67076" end="67080" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="67176" end="67195" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="67303" end="67323" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Bosnian Dinaric Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="67385" end="67398" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="67403" end="67409" title="Alpine climate" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207238" start="67420" end="67438" title="Rafting" label="Whitewater rafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="67464" end="67480" title="national sport" label="national pastime"/>
<link wikidata="Q126712" start="67582" end="67587" title="Vrbas (river)" label="Vrbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q730378" start="67589" end="67593" title="Tara (Drina)" label="Tara"/>
<link wikidata="Q186901" start="67595" end="67600" title="Drina" label="Drina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="67602" end="67609" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="67614" end="67617" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604090" start="67700" end="67735" title="International Rafting Federation" label="The 2009 World Rafting Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="67842" end="67854" title="canyon" label="river canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574575" start="67870" end="67887" title="Tara River Canyon" label="Tara River Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="67915" end="67930" title="HuffPost" label="Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q740392" start="68311" end="68341" title="Sarajevo International Airport" label="Sarajevo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="68385" end="68406" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333848" start="68459" end="68488" title="Sarajevo main railway station" label="Sarajevo main railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="68504" end="68512" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288954" start="68530" end="68536" title="Butmir" label="Butmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q900778" start="68606" end="68623" title="Yugoslav Railways" label="Yugoslav Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="68686" end="68703" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80988" start="68745" end="68797" title="Railways of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Railways of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="68813" end="68849" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q80990" start="68857" end="68882" title="Republika Srpska Railways" label="Republika Srpska Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="68892" end="68908" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="68980" end="68991" title="Economic liberalization" label="liberalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="69019" end="69027" title="landline" label="landline"/>
<link wikidata="Q204833" start="69233" end="69237" title="Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution" label="EDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="69239" end="69241" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="69246" end="69248" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261176" start="69266" end="69277" title="Oslobođenje" label="Oslobođenje"/>
<link wikidata="Q278311" start="69455" end="69466" title="Dnevni avaz" label="Dnevni avaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q743551" start="69650" end="69664" title="Hrvatska riječ" label="Hrvatska riječ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69699" end="69704" title="Start (Bosnian magazine)" label="Start"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992391" start="69856" end="69867" title="Novi Plamen" label="Novi Plamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="69958" end="69968" title="Al Jazeera Media Network" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531248" start="69981" end="69995" title="sister channel" label="sister channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="70012" end="70018" title="Balkans" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283847" start="70027" end="70045" title="Al Jazeera Balkans" label="Al Jazeera Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378741" start="70106" end="70117" title="N1 (TV channel)" label="N1 platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282786" start="70151" end="70168" title="CNN International" label="CNN International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="70196" end="70202" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="70207" end="70215" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="70278" end="70291" title="freedom of the press" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="70313" end="70320" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4329723" start="70467" end="70483" title="Education in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="70604" end="70608" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q453455" start="70635" end="70650" title="Gazi Husrev Bey" label="Gazi Husrev-beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="70727" end="70750" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="70754" end="70760" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q572286" start="70817" end="70839" title="University of Sarajevo" label="University of Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="71000" end="71003" title="Bosnian War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471118" start="71151" end="71186" title="University Džemal Bijedić of Mostar" label="University Džemal Bijedić of Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587312" start="71188" end="71212" title="University of Banja Luka" label="University of Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303102" start="71214" end="71234" title="University of Mostar" label="University of Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470528" start="71236" end="71263" title="University of East Sarajevo" label="University of East Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578569" start="71265" end="71284" title="University of Tuzla" label="University of Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745313" start="71286" end="71331" title="American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265720" start="71340" end="71394" title="Academy of Sciences and Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Academy of Sciences and Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422990" start="71621" end="71662" title="Sarajevo School of Science and Technology" label="Sarajevo School of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443302" start="71664" end="71700" title="International University of Sarajevo" label="International University of Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745313" start="71702" end="71747" title="American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422982" start="71749" end="71785" title="Sarajevo Graduate School of Business" label="Sarajevo Graduate School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048890" start="71787" end="71817" title="International Burch University" label="International Burch University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682978" start="71819" end="71849" title="United World College in Mostar" label="United World College in Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="71977" end="71987" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="Gymnasiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="72089" end="72108" title="vocational education" label="vocational training"/>
<link wikidata="Q694222" start="72176" end="72182" title="Matura" label="Matura"/>
<link wikidata="Q217577" start="72391" end="72398" title="Diploma" label="Diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566104" start="72437" end="72475" title="architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="72921" end="72932" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="72934" end="72946" title="Subscription business model" label="subscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291601" start="72986" end="73024" title="Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="73036" end="73053" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330546" start="73061" end="73082" title="Transition economy" label="country in transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154049" start="73112" end="73148" title="politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="complex domestic political structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="74228" end="74239" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q47561" start="74247" end="74257" title="Ivo Andrić" label="Ivo Andrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277590" start="74276" end="74294" title="Antun Branko Šimić" label="Antun Branko Šimić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285173" start="74296" end="74309" title="Aleksa Šantić" label="Aleksa Šantić"/>
<link wikidata="Q302819" start="74311" end="74322" title="Jovan Dučić" label="Jovan Dučić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050195" start="74327" end="74337" title="Mak Dizdar" label="Mak Dizdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471266" start="74355" end="74368" title="Zlatko Topčić" label="Zlatko Topčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q315677" start="74370" end="74384" title="Meša Selimović" label="Meša Selimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500516" start="74386" end="74407" title="Semezdin Mehmedinović" label="Semezdin Mehmedinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q715932" start="74409" end="74426" title="Miljenko Jergović" label="Miljenko Jergović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294485" start="74428" end="74444" title="Isak Samokovlija" label="Isak Samokovlija"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433216" start="74446" end="74464" title="Safvet-beg Bašagić" label="Safvet-beg Bašagić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364268" start="74466" end="74480" title="Abdulah Sidran" label="Abdulah Sidran"/>
<link wikidata="Q715945" start="74482" end="74493" title="Petar Kočić" label="Petar Kočić"/>
<link wikidata="Q738114" start="74495" end="74511" title="Aleksandar Hemon" label="Aleksandar Hemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272535" start="74516" end="74534" title="Nedžad Ibrišimović" label="Nedžad Ibrišimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q597948" start="74541" end="74557" title="Sarajevo National Theatre" label="National Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="74581" end="74589" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q315136" start="74627" end="74642" title="Branislav Nušić" label="Branislav Nušić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992391" start="74668" end="74679" title="Novi Plamen" label="Novi Plamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q113576435" start="74907" end="74943" title="Association of Writers of Yugoslavia" label="Association of Writers of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="74997" end="75022" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450219" start="75039" end="75068" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina art" label="art of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q63724" start="75145" end="75151" title="Stećak" label="Stećci"/>
<link wikidata="Q178438" start="75168" end="75178" title="Kotromanić dynasty" label="Kotromanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="75331" end="75348" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516124" start="75531" end="75546" title="Gabrijel Jurkić" label="Gabrijel Jurkić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171773" start="75548" end="75558" title="Petar Šain" label="Petar Šain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594537" start="75560" end="75574" title="Roman Petrović" label="Roman Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219990" start="75579" end="75592" title="Lazar Drljača" label="Lazar Drljača"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="75601" end="75613" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276135" start="75628" end="75641" title="Mersad Berber" label="Mersad Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398595" start="75646" end="75655" title="Safet Zec" label="Safet Zec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625926" start="75686" end="75694" title="Ars Aevi" label="Ars Aevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q834566" start="75844" end="75849" title="Ganga (music)" label="ganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076115" start="75930" end="75934" title="Kolo (dance)" label="kolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q674684" start="75989" end="75999" title="Sevdalinka" label="Sevdalinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278558" start="76091" end="76101" title="Dino Zonić" label="Dino Zonić"/>
<link wikidata="Q193273" start="76103" end="76117" title="Goran Bregović" label="Goran Bregović"/>
<link wikidata="Q902791" start="76119" end="76134" title="Davorin Popović" label="Davorin Popović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285234" start="76136" end="76149" title="Kemal Monteno" label="Kemal Monteno"/>
<link wikidata="Q169179" start="76151" end="76164" title="Zdravko Čolić" label="Zdravko Čolić"/>
<link wikidata="Q380534" start="76166" end="76184" title="Elvir Laković Laka" label="Elvir Laković Laka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277579" start="76186" end="76196" title="Edo Maajka" label="Edo Maajka"/>
<link wikidata="Q744510" start="76198" end="76214" title="Hari Varešanović" label="Hari Varešanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q310679" start="76216" end="76227" title="Dino Merlin" label="Dino Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252189" start="76229" end="76248" title="Mladen Vojičić Tifa" label="Mladen Vojičić Tifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223595" start="76250" end="76262" title="Željko Bebek" label="Željko Bebek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277097" start="76293" end="76307" title="Đorđe Novković" label="Đorđe Novković"/>
<link wikidata="Q424832" start="76309" end="76322" title="Al&amp;#x27; Dino" label="Al&amp;#x27; Dino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435157" start="76324" end="76338" title="Haris Džinović" label="Haris Džinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q269170" start="76340" end="76355" title="Kornelije Kovač" label="Kornelije Kovač"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76366" end="76384" title="Musical ensemble#Rock and pop bands" label="rock and pop bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q753829" start="76399" end="76411" title="Bijelo Dugme" label="Bijelo Dugme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142185" start="76413" end="76426" title="Crvena jabuka" label="Crvena jabuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q93292" start="76428" end="76441" title="Divlje jagode" label="Divlje jagode"/>
<link wikidata="Q189979" start="76443" end="76449" title="Indexi" label="Indexi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190618" start="76451" end="76465" title="Plavi orkestar" label="Plavi orkestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q139061" start="76467" end="76485" title="Zabranjeno Pušenje" label="Zabranjeno Pušenje"/>
<link wikidata="Q456656" start="76487" end="76497" title="Ambasadori" label="Ambasadori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263054" start="76499" end="76515" title="Dubioza kolektiv" label="Dubioza kolektiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741844" start="76606" end="76618" title="Dušan Šestić" label="Dušan Šestić"/>
<link wikidata="Q188662" start="76639" end="76680" title="National Anthem of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="National Anthem of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q235875" start="76702" end="76715" title="Marija Šestić" label="Marija Šestić"/>
<link wikidata="Q15117914" start="76776" end="76792" title="Sinan Alimanović" label="Sinan Alimanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289073" start="76803" end="76813" title="Saša Lošić" label="Saša Lošić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429509" start="76826" end="76838" title="Saša Toperić" label="Saša Toperić"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="76871" end="76882" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q669370" start="76928" end="76933" title="gusle" label="gusle"/>
<link wikidata="Q717773" start="77291" end="77294" title="Bağlama" label="saz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="77597" end="77607" title="polyphony" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="77715" end="77722" title="Bagpipes" label="bagpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="77731" end="77736" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451473" start="77741" end="77748" title="šargija" label="šargija"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="77796" end="77803" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="77839" end="77845" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="77846" end="77850" title="epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="77851" end="77856" title="Poetry" label="poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="77899" end="77905" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Ladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028933" start="78007" end="78021" title="Central Bosnia" label="Central Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975995" start="78023" end="78031" title="Posavina" label="Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q186901" start="78037" end="78042" title="Drina" label="Drina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017926" start="78054" end="78062" title="Kalesija" label="Kalesija"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="78175" end="78186" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q783874" start="78276" end="78283" title="Nasheed" label="ilahija"/>
<link wikidata="Q935127" start="79239" end="79261" title="Sarajevo Film Festival" label="Sarajevo Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="79298" end="79309" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="79382" end="79398" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="79467" end="79488" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="79609" end="79623" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="79636" end="79651" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="79657" end="79668" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q313497" start="79735" end="79748" title="Danis Tanović" label="Danis Tanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="79782" end="79800" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q845235" start="79825" end="79843" title="No Man&amp;#x27;s Land (2001 film)" label="No Man&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q664212" start="79854" end="79882" title="Silver Bear Grand Jury Prize" label="Silver Bear Grand Jury Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q22034157" start="79907" end="79924" title="Death in Sarajevo" label="Death in Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83487" start="79933" end="79947" title="Jasmila Žbanić" label="Jasmila Žbanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="79984" end="79989" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q97765712" start="80016" end="80032" title="Quo Vadis, Aida?" label="Quo Vadis, Aida?"/>
<link wikidata="Q94882" start="80041" end="80055" title="Emir Kusturica" label="Emir Kusturica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="80085" end="80091" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471266" start="80094" end="80107" title="Zlatko Topčić" label="Zlatko Topčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437212" start="80109" end="80123" title="Ademir Kenović" label="Ademir Kenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695862" start="80125" end="80139" title="Ahmed Imamović" label="Ahmed Imamović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443607" start="80141" end="80152" title="Pjer Žalica" label="Pjer Žalica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827768" start="80154" end="80164" title="Aida Begić" label="Aida Begić"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="80455" end="80461" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201959" start="80463" end="80470" title="Capsicum" label="peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="80472" end="80480" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="80492" end="80499" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q83093" start="80501" end="80509" title="mushroom" label="mushroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q81464" start="80512" end="80519" title="spinach" label="spinach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533" start="80521" end="80529" title="zucchini" label="zucchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="80531" end="80542" title="bean" label="dried beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="80557" end="80561" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127593" start="80570" end="80577" title="paprika" label="paprika"/>
<link wikidata="Q326061" start="80595" end="80602" title="Smetana (dairy product)" label="pavlaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="80640" end="80647" title="Western culture" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149081" start="80652" end="80659" title="Eastern world" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q654493" start="80691" end="80698" title="Turkish cuisine" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q744027" start="80780" end="80785" title="Greek cuisine" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="80815" end="80828" title="Mediterranean cuisine" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071958" start="80914" end="80928" title="Central European cuisine" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="80977" end="80981" title="Lamb and mutton" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q945096" start="81010" end="81016" title="ćevapi" label="ćevapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196212" start="81018" end="81023" title="Börek" label="burek"/>
<link wikidata="Q339193" start="81025" end="81030" title="dolma" label="dolma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13434162" start="81032" end="81037" title="Sarma (food)" label="sarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q485796" start="81039" end="81044" title="Pilaf" label="pilav"/>
<link wikidata="Q205762" start="81046" end="81053" title="goulash" label="goulash"/>
<link wikidata="Q413449" start="81055" end="81060" title="ajvar" label="ajvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179010" start="81149" end="81154" title="kebab" label="kebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="81246" end="81252" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="81276" end="81287" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q693078" start="81389" end="81395" title="Grappa" label="Grappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="81596" end="81602" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="81679" end="81694" title="alcoholic drink" label="alcoholic drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q43022" start="81719" end="81733" title="Turkish coffee" label="Bosnian coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254441" start="81747" end="81753" title="Cezve" label="džezva"/>
<link wikidata="Q182339" start="81759" end="81770" title="Turkish delight" label="rahat lokum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042920" start="81775" end="81786" title="Cube sugar" label="sugar cubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="81802" end="81810" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="82111" end="82125" title="Sport" label="sporting event"/>
<link wikidata="Q200128" start="82133" end="82166" title="history of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="history of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9657" start="82176" end="82196" title="1984 Winter Olympics" label="14th Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="82206" end="82214" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094444" start="82248" end="82253" title="RK Borac Banja Luka" label="Borac"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="82254" end="82262" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q842567" start="82282" end="82312" title="Yugoslav Handball Championship" label="Yugoslav Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q330395" start="82330" end="82342" title="EHF Champions League" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134610" start="82346" end="82350" title="1975–76 European Cup (handball)" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q834840" start="82359" end="82396" title="EHF European League" label="International Handball Federation Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964870" start="82407" end="82417" title="Amel Mekić" label="Amel Mekić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711124" start="82442" end="82459" title="2011 European Judo Championships" label="European champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9149876" start="82493" end="82502" title="Amel Tuka" label="Amel Tuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026555" start="82553" end="82557" title="2015 World Championships in Athletics" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q15694436" start="82562" end="82601" title="2019 IAAF World Athletics Championships" label="2019 IAAF World Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441334" start="82606" end="82616" title="Hamza Alić" label="Hamza Alić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634369" start="82641" end="82649" title="2013 European Athletics Indoor Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s shot put" label="shot put"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814387" start="82657" end="82691" title="2013 European Athletics Indoor Championships" label="2013 European Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479090" start="82698" end="82709" title="KK Bosna Royal" label="Bosna Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="82710" end="82720" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411943" start="82745" end="82763" title="Euroleague Basketball" label="European Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737005" start="82767" end="82771" title="1978–79 FIBA European Champions Cup" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q931531" start="82777" end="82823" title="Yugoslavia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Yugoslavia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q586458" start="82927" end="82944" title="FIBA Hall of Fame" label="FIBA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q470639" start="82947" end="82963" title="Dražen Dalipagić" label="Dražen Dalipagić"/>
<link wikidata="Q470933" start="82968" end="82983" title="Mirza Delibašić" label="Mirza Delibašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q193141" start="83036" end="83071" title="EuroBasket" label="European Championship in Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q470698" start="83096" end="83111" title="Mirza Teletović" label="Mirza Teletović"/>
<link wikidata="Q781758" start="83113" end="83126" title="Nihad Đedović" label="Nihad Đedović"/>
<link wikidata="Q115915" start="83131" end="83143" title="Jusuf Nurkić" label="Jusuf Nurkić"/>
<link wikidata="Q20829107" start="83149" end="83194" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina men&amp;#x27;s national under-16 and under-17 basketball team" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina national under-16 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744947" start="83237" end="83280" title="Basketball at the 2015 European Youth Summer Olympic Festival" label="2015 European Youth Summer Olympic Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q20806277" start="83296" end="83334" title="2015 FIBA Europe Under-16 Championship" label="2015 FIBA Europe Under-16 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594394" start="83366" end="83380" title="ŽKK Jedinstvo Tuzla" label="Jedinstvo Aida"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="83386" end="83391" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q521068" start="83400" end="83439" title="EuroLeague Women" label="Women&amp;#x27;s European Club Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294518" start="83452" end="83465" title="Ronchetti Cup" label="Ronchetti Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642556" start="83488" end="83504" title="Razija Mujanović" label="Razija Mujanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845251" start="83562" end="83572" title="Mara Lakić" label="Mara Lakić"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="83586" end="83591" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950380" start="83601" end="83623" title="Yugoslav Chess Championship" label="Champion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082672" start="83657" end="83665" title="ŠK Bosna" label="ŠK Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q688875" start="83679" end="83702" title="European Chess Club Cup" label="European Chess Club Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q893855" start="83723" end="83739" title="Borki Predojević" label="Borki Predojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q287098" start="83858" end="83877" title="31st Chess Olympiad" label="31st Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="83889" end="83895" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q634635" start="83920" end="83935" title="Predrag Nikolić" label="Predrag Nikolić"/>
<link wikidata="Q709548" start="83937" end="83949" title="Ivan Sokolov (chess player)" label="Ivan Sokolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q891144" start="83954" end="83968" title="Bojan Kurajica" label="Bojan Kurajica"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="83985" end="83990" title="Boxing" label="boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728941" start="83991" end="84004" title="Marijan Beneš" label="Marijan Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q688127" start="84093" end="84114" title="European Amateur Boxing Championships" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q368389" start="84156" end="84167" title="Elisha Obed" label="Elisha Obed"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="84173" end="84184" title="The Bahamas" label="The Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="84187" end="84207" title="Association football" label="Association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="84325" end="84336" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q239663" start="84352" end="84363" title="FK Sarajevo" label="FK Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219929" start="84368" end="84379" title="FK Željezničar Sarajevo" label="Željezničar"/>
<link wikidata="Q163786" start="84388" end="84409" title="Yugoslav First League" label="Yugoslav Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="84421" end="84452" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslav national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q317536" start="84529" end="84540" title="Safet Sušić" label="Safet Sušić"/>
<link wikidata="Q207178" start="84542" end="84556" title="Zlatko Vujović" label="Zlatko Vujović"/>
<link wikidata="Q518054" start="84558" end="84575" title="Mehmed Baždarević" label="Mehmed Baždarević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178268" start="84577" end="84588" title="Davor Jozić" label="Davor Jozić"/>
<link wikidata="Q715966" start="84590" end="84606" title="Faruk Hadžibegić" label="Faruk Hadžibegić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393135" start="84608" end="84621" title="Predrag Pašić" label="Predrag Pašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q559997" start="84623" end="84637" title="Blaž Slišković" label="Blaž Slišković"/>
<link wikidata="Q463933" start="84639" end="84656" title="Vahid Halilhodžić" label="Vahid Halilhodžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q350447" start="84658" end="84671" title="Dušan Bajević" label="Dušan Bajević"/>
<link wikidata="Q366783" start="84673" end="84683" title="Ivica Osim" label="Ivica Osim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006897" start="84685" end="84701" title="Josip Katalinski" label="Josip Katalinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696178" start="84703" end="84716" title="Tomislav Knez" label="Tomislav Knez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919026" start="84718" end="84734" title="Velimir Sombolac" label="Velimir Sombolac"/>
<link wikidata="Q181190" start="84760" end="84805" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="84820" end="84839" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q253163" start="84991" end="85002" title="Emir Spahić" label="Emir Spahić"/>
<link wikidata="Q158243" start="85004" end="85022" title="Zvjezdan Misimović" label="Zvjezdan Misimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q153786" start="85027" end="85037" title="Edin Džeko" label="Edin Džeko"/>
<link wikidata="Q651967" start="85054" end="85068" title="Ognjen Vranješ" label="Ognjen Vranješ"/>
<link wikidata="Q127914" start="85070" end="85084" title="Sead Kolašinac" label="Sead Kolašinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319654" start="85089" end="85100" title="Toni Šunjić" label="Toni Šunjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q146907" start="85119" end="85133" title="Miralem Pjanić" label="Miralem Pjanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q453512" start="85138" end="85149" title="Senad Lulić" label="Senad Lulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q155604" start="85159" end="85173" title="Vedad Ibišević" label="Vedad Ibišević"/>
<link wikidata="Q153387" start="85215" end="85233" title="Hasan Salihamidžić" label="Hasan Salihamidžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="85284" end="85305" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q560001" start="85320" end="85332" title="Elvir Baljić" label="Elvir Baljić"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="85394" end="85410" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="FC Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q431455" start="85412" end="85427" title="Sergej Barbarez" label="Sergej Barbarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="85472" end="85482" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="85494" end="85511" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Borussia Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q51974" start="85513" end="85525" title="Hamburger SV" label="Hamburger SV"/>
<link wikidata="Q104761" start="85530" end="85546" title="Bayer 04 Leverkusen" label="Bayer Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q592630" start="85575" end="85593" title="2000–01 Bundesliga" label="2000–01 Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q380566" start="85616" end="85626" title="Meho Kodro" label="Meho Kodro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="85688" end="85701" title="Real Sociedad" label="Real Sociedad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="85706" end="85718" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q559993" start="85720" end="85733" title="Elvir Rahimić" label="Elvir Rahimić"/>
<link wikidata="Q176371" start="85772" end="85783" title="PFC CSKA Moscow" label="CSKA Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="85805" end="85813" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064036" start="85817" end="85821" title="2005 UEFA Cup Final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926755" start="85823" end="85837" title="Milena Nikolić" label="Milena Nikolić"/>
<link wikidata="Q511521" start="85853" end="85879" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="women&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240504" start="85889" end="85931" title="2013–14 UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Champions League" label="2013–14 UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85932" end="85942" title="UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Champions League#Top scorers by tournament" label="top scorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940447" start="85994" end="86035" title="volleyball at the 2004 Summer Paralympics" label="volleyball at the 2004 Summer Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300233" start="86040" end="86081" title="volleyball at the 2012 Summer Paralympics" label="volleyball at the 2012 Summer Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="86135" end="86146" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21088376" start="86152" end="86184" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina national sitting volleyball team" label="national sitting volleyball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q597628" start="86218" end="86227" title="Sitting volleyball" label="the sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065424" start="86310" end="86320" title="Volleyball at the Summer Paralympics" label="Paralympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="86335" end="86341" title="Tennis" label="Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158544" start="86408" end="86421" title="Damir Džumhur" label="Damir Džumhur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874826" start="86426" end="86437" title="Mirza Bašić" label="Mirza Bašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="86441" end="86451" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818939" start="86536" end="86550" title="Tomislav Brkić" label="Tomislav Brkić"/>
<link wikidata="Q462949" start="86552" end="86562" title="Amer Delić" label="Amer Delić"/>
<link wikidata="Q284270" start="86567" end="86587" title="Mervana Jugić-Salkić" label="Mervana Jugić-Salkić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112205" start="86606" end="86639" title="Outline of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Outline of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3464" wikidata="Q963" url="?curid=3464" title="Botswana">
<text>Botswana, officially the Republic of Botswana, is a landlocked country in Southern Africa. Botswana is topographically flat, with approximately 70 percent of its territory part of the Kalahari Desert. It is bordered by South Africa to the south and southeast, Namibia to the west and north, Zambia to the north and Zimbabwe to the northeast. With a population of slightly over 2.4 million people and a comparable land area to France, Botswana is one of the most sparsely populated countries in the world. It is essentially the nation-state of the Tswana people, who constitute nearly 80 percent of the population.

The Tswana ethnic group are descended mainly from Bantu-speaking peoples who migrated into southern Africa, including modern Botswana, in several waves before AD 600. In 1885, the British colonised the area and declared a protectorate named Bechuanaland. As part of the decolonisation of Africa, Bechuanaland became an independent Commonwealth republic under its current name on 30 September 1966. Since then, it has been a parliamentary republic with a consistent record of uninterrupted democratic elections, although the Botswana Democratic Party was the only ruling party from independence until 2024. , Botswana is the third-least corrupt country in Africa, according to the Corruption Perceptions Index published by Transparency International.

The economy is dominated by mining and tourism. Botswana has a per capita GDP (purchasing power parity) of about $20,158 . Botswana is the world&#x27;s biggest diamond-producing country. Its relatively high gross national income per capita (by some estimates the fourth-largest in Africa) gives the country a relatively high standard of living and the second-highest Human Development Index of continental Sub-Saharan Africa (after South Africa). Despite this, Botswana continues to grapple with high unemployment rates. Botswana is a member of the Southern African Customs Union, the Southern African Development Community, the Commonwealth of Nations and the United Nations.

==Etymology==
The country&#x27;s name means &quot;Land of the Tswana&quot;, referring to the dominant ethnic group in Botswana. The Constitution of Botswana recognizes a homogeneous Tswana state. The demonym &quot;Batswana&quot; was originally applied to the Tswana, and has also come to be used generally as a term for all citizens of Botswana. In Setswana, &quot;Batswana&quot; is grammatically plural; its singular form, which can refer to a single member of the Tswana or to a single citizen of Botswana, is &quot;Motswana&quot;. 

==History==
===Pre-history===

It is estimated that hominids lived in Botswana during the Pleistocene. Stone tools and animal remains indicate that all areas of the country were inhabited at least 400,000 years ago.

It was claimed to have been the birthplace of all modern humans from around 200,000 years ago. Evidence left by modern humans, such as cave paintings, is about 73,000 years old. The earliest known inhabitants of southern Africa are thought to have been the forebears of present-day San (&quot;Bushmen&quot;) and Khoi peoples. Both groups speak click languages from the small Khoe-Kwadi, Kx&#x27;a and Tuu language families whose members hunted, gathered and traded over long distances. When cattle were first introduced into southern Africa about 2,000 years ago, pastoralism became a major feature of the economy since the region had large grasslands free of tsetse flies.
It is unclear when Bantu-speaking peoples first moved into the country from the north, although AD 600 seems to be a consensus estimate. In that era, the ancestors of the modern-day Kalanga moved into what is now the north-eastern area of the country. These proto-Kalanga were closely connected to states in Zimbabwe as well as to the Mapungubwe state. One notable remanant of this period is Domboshaba ruins, a cultural and heritage site in Botswana initially occupied towards the end of the Great Zimbabwe period (1250–1450), with stone walls that have an average height of 1.8 metres. The site is a respected place for the people living in the region, and it is believed that the chief lived on the top of the hill with his helpers or assistants. These states, located outside of current Botswana&#x27;s borders, appear to have kept massive herds of cattle—apparently at numbers approaching modern cattle density—in what is now the Central District. This massive cattle-raising complex prospered until around 1300 and seems to have regressed following the collapse of Mapungubwe. During this era, the first Tswana-speaking groups, the Bakgalagadi, moved into the southern areas of the Kalahari. These various peoples were connected to trade routes that ran via the Limpopo River to the Indian Ocean; trade goods from Asia such as beads made their way to Botswana, most likely in exchange for ivory, gold and rhinoceros horn.

The Toutswemogala Hill Iron Age settlement&#x27;s radio-carbon dates range from the 7th to late 19th century, indicating it was occupied for more than 1,000 years. The hill was part of the formation of early states in southern Africa, with cattle as a major source of economy. The Toutswe settlement includes house-floors, large heaps of vitrified cow dung, and burials while the outstanding structure is the stone wall. Around 1000 AD, the Toutswe people moved into Botswana.

However, agriculture also played a vital role in the longevity of Toutswemogala Hill&#x27;s extended occupation, as many grain storage structures have also been found on the site. Many different stratified layers of housing floors further signal continuous occupation over hundreds of years. The arrival of the Tswana speakers&#x27; ancestors who came to control the region has yet to be dated precisely. Members of the Bakwena, a chieftaincy under a leader named Kgabo II, made their way into the southern Kalahari by AD 1500, at the latest, and his people drove the Bakgalagadi inhabitants west into the desert. Over the years, several offshoots of the Bakwena moved into adjoining territories. The Bangwaketse occupied areas to the west, while the Bangwato moved northeast into former Kalanga areas. Not long afterwards, a Bangwato offshoot known as the Batawana migrated into the Okavango Delta, probably in the 1790s.

===Mfecane and Batswana-Boer Wars===
The first written records relating to modern-day Botswana appear in 1824. These records show that the Bangwaketse had become the predominant power in the region. Under the rule of Makaba II, the Bangwaketse kept vast herds of cattle in well-protected desert areas, and used their military prowess to raid their neighbours. Other chiefdoms in the area, by this time, had capitals of 10,000 or so and were fairly prosperous. This equilibrium came to end during the Mfecane period, 1823–1843, when a succession of invading peoples from South Africa entered the country. Although the Bangwaketse were able to defeat the invading Bakololo in 1826, over time, all the major chiefdoms in Botswana were attacked, weakened and impoverished. The Bakololo and AmaNdebele raided repeatedly and took large numbers of cattle, women and children from the Batswana—most of whom were driven into the desert or sanctuary areas such as hilltops and caves. Only after 1843, when the Amandebele moved into western Zimbabwe, did this threat subside.

During the 1840s and 1850s, trade with Cape Colony-based merchants opened up and enabled the Batswana chiefdoms to rebuild. The Bakwena, Bangwaketse, Bangwato and Batawana cooperated to control the lucrative ivory trade and used the proceeds to import horses and guns, which in turn enabled them to establish control over what is now Botswana. This process was largely complete by 1880, and the Batswana subjugated thus the Bushmen, Kalanga, Bakgalagadi and other current minorities.

Following the Great Trek, Afrikaners from the Cape Colony established themselves on the borders of Botswana in the Transvaal. In 1852, a coalition of Tswana chiefdoms led by Sechele I defeated Afrikaner incursions at the Battle of Dimawe and, after about eight years of intermittent tensions and hostilities, eventually came to a peace agreement in Potchefstroom in 1860. From that point on, the modern-day border between South Africa and Botswana was agreed on, and the Afrikaners and Batswana traded and worked together comparatively peacefully.

In 1884, Batawana, a northern-based Tswana clan&#x27;s cavalry under the command of Kgosi Moremi, fought and defeated the Ndebele&#x27;s invasion of northern Botswana at the Battle of Khutiyabasadi. This is the start of the collapse of the Ndebele Kingdom in Zimbabwe and it helped the Tswana speaking authority.

Due to newly peaceful conditions, trade thrived between 1860 and 1880. Christian missionaries were able to take advantage of this. The Lutherans and the London Missionary Society both became established in the country by 1856. By 1880, every major village had a resident missionary, and their influence slowly grew. Khama III (reigned 1875–1923) was the first of the Tswana chiefs to make Christianity a state religion, and a great deal of Tswana customary law changed as a result. Christianity became the de facto official religion in all the chiefdoms by World War I.

===Colonialism===

During the Scramble for Africa, both the German Empire and Britain coveted the territory of Botswana. During the Berlin Conference, Britain decided to annex Botswana to safeguard the Road to the North and thus connect the Cape Colony to its territories further north. It unilaterally annexed Tswana territories in January 1885 and then sent the Warren Expedition north to consolidate control over the area and convince the chiefs to accept British overrule. Despite their misgivings, they eventually acquiesced to this &quot;fait accompli&quot;.

In 1890, areas north of 22 degrees were added to the new Bechuanaland Protectorate. During the 1890s, the new territory was divided into eight different reserves, with fairly small amounts of land being left as freehold for white settlers. During the early 1890s, the British government decided to hand over the Bechuanaland Protectorate to the British South Africa Company. This plan, which was well on its way to fruition despite the entreaties of Tswana leaders who toured England in protest, was eventually foiled by the failure of the Jameson Raid in January 1896.
When the Union of South Africa was formed from the main British colonies in the region in 1910, the High Commission Territories—the Bechuanaland Protectorate, Basutoland (now Lesotho) and Swaziland (now Eswatini)—were not included, but provision was made for their later incorporation. However, the UK began to consult with their inhabitants as to their wishes. Although successive South African governments sought to have the territories transferred to their jurisdiction, the UK kept delaying; consequently, it never occurred. The election of the Nationalist government in 1948, which instituted apartheid, and South Africa&#x27;s withdrawal from the Commonwealth in 1961, ended any prospect of the UK or these territories agreeing to incorporation into South Africa.

An expansion of British central authority and the evolution of native government resulted in the 1920 establishment of two advisory councils to represent both Africans and Europeans. The African Council consisted of the eight heads of the Tswana tribes and some elected members. Proclamations in 1934 regulated tribal rule and powers. A European-African advisory council was formed in 1951, and the 1961 constitution established a consultative legislative council.

===Independence===
In June 1964, the United Kingdom accepted proposals for a democratic self-government in Botswana. An independence conference was held in London in February 1966. The seat of government was moved in 1965 from Mahikeng in South Africa, to the newly established Gaborone, located near Botswana&#x27;s border with South Africa. Based on the 1965 constitution, the country held its first general elections under universal suffrage and gained independence on 30 September 1966. Seretse Khama, a leader in the independence movement, was elected as the first president, and subsequently re-elected twice.

Khama died in office in 1980. The presidency passed to the sitting vice-president, Quett Masire, who was elected in his own right in 1984 and re-elected in 1989 and 1994. Masire retired from office in 1998. He was succeeded by Festus Mogae, who was elected in 1999 and re-elected in 2004. The presidency passed in 2008 to Ian Khama (son of the first president), who had been serving as Mogae&#x27;s vice-president since resigning his position as Commander of the Botswana Defence Force in 1998 to take up this civilian role. On 1 April 2018, Mokgweetsi Eric Keabetswe Masisi was sworn in as the fifth president of Botswana, succeeding Ian Khama. A long-running dispute over the northern border with Namibia&#x27;s Caprivi Strip was the subject of a ruling by the International Court of Justice in December 1999. It ruled that Kasikili Island belongs to Botswana.

The Botswana Democratic Party consistently held power until the 2024 Botswana general election, which was won by the Umbrella for Democratic Change. On 1 November 2024, Duma Boko, the leader of the UDC, was sworn in as president of Botswana, becaming the first president not to represent the BDP.

==Geography==
At , Botswana is the world&#x27;s 48th-largest country. It also has a mean altitude of roughly above sea level. Botswana is predominantly flat, tending towards gently rolling tableland. Botswana is dominated by the Kalahari Desert, which covers up to 70% of its land surface. The Limpopo River Basin, the major landform of all of southern Africa, lies partly in Botswana, with the basins of its tributaries, the Notwane, Bonwapitse, Mahalapye, Lotsane, Motloutse and the Shashe, located in the eastern part of the country. The Notwane provides water to the capital through the Gaborone Dam. The Chobe River meets with the Zambezi River at a place called Kazungula.

===Biodiversity and conservation===
Botswana has diverse areas of wildlife habitat. In addition to the delta and desert areas, there are grasslands and savannas. Northern Botswana has one of the few remaining large populations of the endangered African wild dog. Chobe National Park in the Chobe District has the world&#x27;s largest concentration of African elephants. The park covers about and supports about 350 species of birds. In Botswana forest cover is around 27% of the total land area, equivalent to 15,254,700 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 18,803,700 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 15,254,700 hectares, of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 11% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 24% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership and 76% private ownership.

The Chobe National Park and Moremi Game Reserve (in the Okavango Delta) are major tourist destinations. Other reserves include the Central Kalahari Game Reserve located in the Kalahari Desert in Ghanzi District; Makgadikgadi Pans National Park and Nxai Pan National Park are in the Central District in the Makgadikgadi Pan.

Botswana faces two major environmental problems, drought and desertification, which are heavily linked. Three-quarters of the country&#x27;s human and animal populations depend on groundwater due to drought. Groundwater use through deep borehole drilling has somewhat eased the effects of drought. Surface water is scarce in Botswana, and less than 5% of the agriculture in the country is sustainable by rainfall. In the remaining 95% of the country, raising livestock is the primary source of rural income. Approximately 71% of the country&#x27;s land is used for communal grazing, which has been a major cause of the desertification and the accelerating soil erosion in the country.

Since raising livestock has been profitable for the people of Botswana, they continue to exploit the land with dramatically increasing numbers of animals. From 1966 to 1991, the livestock population grew from 1.7million to 5.5million. Similarly, the human population has increased from 574,000 in 1971 to 1.5million in 1995, a 161% increase in 24years. Environmentalists report that the Okavango Delta is drying up due to increased livestock grazing. The Okavango Delta is one of the major semi-forested wetlands in Botswana and one of the largest inland deltas in the world; the ecosystem is crucial to the survival of many animals.

The Department of Forestry and Range Resources has already begun to implement a project to reintroduce indigenous vegetation into communities in Kgalagadi South, Kweneng North and Boteti. Reintroduction of indigenous vegetation will help reduce the degradation of the land. The United States Government has also entered into an agreement with Botswana, giving them US$7 million to reduce Botswana&#x27;s debt by US$8.3 million. The US stipulated that Botswana will focus on more extensive conservation of the land. The country had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 9.13/10, ranking it 8th globally out of 172 countries.

The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) claims that poverty is a major problem behind the overexploitation of resources, including land, in Botswana. The UNDP joined in with a project started in the southern community of Struizendam in Botswana. The project&#x27;s purpose is to draw from &quot;indigenous knowledge and traditional land management systems&quot;. The leaders of this movement are supposed to be the people in the community to draw indigenous people in, which in turn increases their opportunities to earn an income, thus decreasing poverty. The UNDP also stated that the government has to effectively implement policies to allow people to manage their own local resources and the programme is giving the government information to help with policy development.

== Government and politics ==

Botswana is a parliamentary republic governed by the Constitution of Botswana. It is the longest uninterrupted democracy in Africa. Its seat of government is in Gaborone. Botswana&#x27;s governing institutions were established after it became an independent nation in 1966. Botswana&#x27;s governmental structure is based on both the United Kingdom&#x27;s Westminster system and the Tswana people&#x27;s tribal governments. Botswana has a centralised government in which national law supersedes local law. Local laws are developed by local councils and district councils. They are heavily influenced by tribal governments, which are led by the tribe&#x27;s chief.

The Parliament of Botswana consists of the President and the National Assembly, which serves as the nation&#x27;s formal and sole legislature, while the &quot;Ntlo ya Dikgosi&quot; serves an advisory body made up of tribal chiefs and other appointed members. Botswana&#x27;s executive branch is led by the President of Botswana, who serves as both the head of state and head of government. The members of parliament choose the president, and the president then appoints the vice-president and cabinet members. The president has significant power in Botswana, and the legislature has little power to check the president once appointed. The judiciary includes the High Court of Botswana, the Court of Appeal and Magistrates&#x27; Courts. Cases are often settled by customary courts with tribal chiefs presiding.

Elections in Botswana are held every five years and overseen by the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC). Botswana operates a multi-party system in which many political parties compete in elections. It was a dominant-party state in which the Botswana Democratic Party had ruled with a majority government from independence in 1966 to 2024. The nation&#x27;s elections are recognized as free and fair, but the ruling party has institutional advantages that other parties do not. Factionalism is common within Botswana&#x27;s political parties, and several groups have formed new parties by splitting from established ones. Since 2019, the Umbrella for Democratic Change has operated as a coalition of opposition parties. The most recent election was held in 2024, with the Botswana Democratic Party losing its majority for the first time in history, ending its 58 year rule over the country. The election saw Duma Boko being elected as president.

In Botswana&#x27;s early years, its politics were managed by President Seretse Khama and vice-president (later president) Quett Masire. Since the Kgabo Commission in 1991, factionalism and political rivalries have dominated Botswana politics. The Barata-Phathi faction was led by Peter Mmusi, Daniel Kwelagobe and Ponatshego Kedikilwe, while the A Team faction was led by Mompati Merafhe and Jacob Nkate. When Festus Mogae and Ian Khama became president and vice-president, respectively, they aligned with the A Team. Khama effectively expelled the A Team from the party in 2010 after he became president. A new rivalry formed in 2018 when Khama&#x27;s chosen successor, Mokgweetsi Masisi, became president. He opposed Khama, and the two formed a political rivalry that continues to loom over Batswana politics in the 2020s.

Botswana was ranked as a &quot;flawed democracy&quot; and 33rd out of 167 states in the 2023 Democracy Index (The Economist), which was the second-highest rating in Africa, and the highest ranking in continental Africa (only the offshore island nation of Mauritius bested its ranking). However, according to the 2024 V-Dem Democracy Indices, Botswana has been experiencing an episode of democratic backsliding over the past 10 years, recording its lowest ever score on the indices. The indices classify Botswana as an electoral democracy in a &#x27;grey zone&#x27; between electoral democracy and electoral autocracy. Furthermore, they show that Botswana lost its status as a &quot;liberal democracy&quot; in 2021, with its liberal, participatory and deliberative components decreasing &quot;at a statistically significant level&quot;, with the latter component being noted as becoming &quot;significantly worse&quot;.

The 2023 Transparency International Corruption Index ranks Botswana is the third-least corrupt country in Africa, just below Cape Verde and the Seychelles. Botswana is also a member of the Commonwealth of Nations.

===Foreign relations and military===
At the time of independence, Botswana had no armed forces. It was only after the Rhodesian and South African armies attacked the Zimbabwe People&#x27;s Revolutionary Army and Umkhonto we Sizwe bases respectively that the Botswana Defence Force (BDF) was formed in 1977. The president is commander-in-chief of the armed forces and appoints a defence council. In 2019, Botswana signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

Following political changes in South Africa and the region, the BDF&#x27;s missions have increasingly focused on preventing poaching, preparing for disasters, and supporting foreign peacekeeping. The United States has been the largest single foreign contributor to the development of the BDF, and a large segment of its officer corps have received U.S. training. The Botswana government gave the United States permission to explore the possibility of establishing an Africa Command (AFRICOM) base in the country.

Botswana is the 50th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

===Human rights===
The Botswana Centre for Human Rights, Ditshwanelo, was established in 1993. Until June 2019, homosexual acts were illegal in Botswana. A Botswana High Court decision of 11 June of that year struck down provisions in the Criminal Code that punished &quot;carnal knowledge of any person against the order of nature&quot; and &quot;acts of gross indecency&quot;, making Botswana one of 22 African countries that have either decriminalised or legalised homosexual acts. Capital punishment is a legal penalty for murder in Botswana, and executions are carried out by hanging.

==== San and other indigenous tribes ====
Many of the indigenous San people have been forcibly relocated from their land to reservations. To make them relocate, they were denied access to water on their land and faced arrest if they hunted, which was their primary source of food. Their lands lie in the middle of the world&#x27;s richest diamond field. Officially, the government denies that there is any link to mining, claiming the relocation is to preserve the wildlife and ecosystem, even though the San people have lived sustainably on the land for millennia. On the reservations, they struggle to find employment, and alcoholism is rampant.

On 24 August 2018, the UN Special Rapporteur on Minorities, Fernand de Varennes, issued a statement calling on Botswana &quot;to step up efforts to recognise and protect the rights of minorities in relation to public services, land and resource use, and the use of minority languages in education and other critical areas.&quot;

== Administrative divisions ==

Botswana is divided into 10 administrative districts, 2 city districts, 4 towns, 11 sub-districts and, in total, 16 administrative divisions. They are:

* Central
* Chobe
* Francistown
* Gaborone
* Ghanzi
* Jwaneng
* Kgalagadi
* Kgatleng
* Kweneng
* Lobatse
* North East
* North West
* South East
* Southern
* Selibe Phikwe
* Sowa Town 

These are administered by 16 local authorities (district councils, city councils or town councils).

In 1977, Botswana&#x27;s administrative divisions were Ngamiland, Chobe, Francistown, Ngwato, Tuli, Ghanzi, Kgalagadi, Ngwaketse, Kweneng, Gaborone and Lobatse. In 2006, Chobe was removed from being an administrative division, and Ngamiland&#x27;s name was changed to North West district. Chobe was readded on 31 March 2014. That same day, the administrative divisions Francistown, Gaborone, Jwaneng, Lobatse, Selibe Phikwe, and Sowa Town were also added.

==Economy==
Since independence, Botswana has had one of the fastest growth rates in per capita income in the world. Formerly one of the world&#x27;s poorest countries—with a GDP per capita of about US$70 per year in the late 1960s—Botswana has transformed itself into an upper middle-income country. GDP per capita grew from $439 in 1950 to $15,842 in 2018. Although Botswana was resource-abundant, a good institutional framework allowed the country to reinvest resource-income to generate stable future income. By one estimate, it has the fourth-highest gross national income at purchasing power parity in Africa, giving it a relatively high standard of living in Africa, around that of Mexico. As of 2022, the unemployment rate stood at 25.4%, while youth unemployment reached 45.41% in 2023. The latest available data from 2015/2016 estimate that 17.2% of Botswana&#x27;s population is multidimensionally poor, with an additional 19.7% at risk.

The Ministry of Trade and Industry of Botswana is responsible for promoting business development throughout the country. According to the International Monetary Fund, economic growth averaged over 9% per year from 1966 to 1999. Botswana has a high level of economic freedom compared to other African countries. The government has maintained a sound fiscal policy, despite consecutive budget deficits in 2002 and 2003, and a negligible level of foreign debt. It earned the highest sovereign credit rating in Africa and has stockpiled foreign exchange reserves (over $7 billion in 2005/2006) amounting to almost two and a half years of current imports.

The constitution provides for an independent judiciary, and the government respects this in practice. The legal system is sufficient to conduct secure commercial dealings, although a growing backlog of cases prevents timely trials. Botswana is ranked second only to South Africa among sub-Saharan African countries in the 2014 International Property Rights Index.

=== Gemstones and precious metals ===

In Botswana, the Department of Mines and Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy Security maintains data regarding mining throughout the country. Debswana, the largest diamond mining company operating in Botswana, is a joint venture, 50% owned by the government.

The mineral industry provides about 40% of all government revenues. Botswana has not begun mining uranium; however, the Letlhakane Uranium Project in Africa is one of the largest undeveloped uranium projects. The government announced in early 2009 that they would try to diversify their economy and avoid overreliance on diamonds.

===Tourism===
The Botswana Tourism Organisation is the country&#x27;s official tourism group. Other destinations in Botswana include the Gaborone Yacht Club and the Kalahari Fishing Club. The country has natural attractions such as the Gaborone Dam and Mokolodi Nature Reserve. There are golf courses that the Botswana Golf Union (BGU) maintains. In 2014, the Okavango Delta of Botswana, the largest inland delta in the world, was inscribed as the 1,000th World Heritage Site.

===Infrastructure===
Botswana has of railway lines, of roads, and 92 airports, of which 12 have paved runways. Of these roads, are paved, while the other are unpaved. The national airline is Air Botswana, which flies domestically and to other countries in Africa. Botswana Railways is the national railway company, operating primarily in the Southern African regional railway system. Botswana Railways offers rail-based transport facilities for moving a range of commodities for the mining sector and primary materials industries, as well as passenger train services and dry ports.

In terms of power infrastructure in Botswana, the country produces coal for electricity and imports oil. Recently, the country has taken a large interest in renewable energy sources and has designed a comprehensive strategy to attract investors in the wind, solar and biomass renewable energy industries. Botswana&#x27;s power stations include Morupule B Power Station (600 MW), Morupule A Power Station (132 MW), Orapa Power Station (90 MW), Phakalane Power Station (1.3 MW) and Mmamabula Power Station (300 MW), which is expected to be online in the near future. A 200-MW solar power plant is in the planning and design stage at the Ministry of Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy Security.

==Demographics==

As of 2024, the Tswana are the majority ethnic group in Botswana, making up approximately 79% of the population, followed by Kalanga at 11% and the San (Basarwa) at 3%. The remaining 7% consists of White Batswana/European Batswana, Indians, and a number of other smaller Southern African ethnic groups.

Native groups include the Bayei, Bambukushu, Basubia, Baherero and Bakgalagadi. The Indian minority is made up of both recent migrants and descendants of Indian migrants who arrived from Mozambique, Kenya, Tanzania, Mauritius and South Africa.
Since 2000, because of deteriorating economic conditions in Zimbabwe, the number of Zimbabweans in Botswana has risen into the tens of thousands. Fewer than 10,000 San people are still living their traditional hunter-gatherer way of life. Since the mid-1990s, the central government of Botswana has been trying to move the San out of their historic lands, likely because they live on a diamond-rich region.

In 2010, James Anaya, as the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people for the United Nations, described loss of land as a major contributor to many of the problems facing Botswana&#x27;s indigenous people, citing the San&#x27;s eviction from the Central Kalahari Game Reserve (CKGR) as a special example. Among Anaya&#x27;s recommendations in a report to the United Nations Human Rights Council was that development programmes should promote, in consultation with indigenous communities such as the San and Bakgalagadi people, activities in harmony with the culture of those communities such as traditional hunting and gathering activities.
===Languages===

The official language of Botswana is English, while Setswana is widely spoken across the country. In Setswana, prefixes are more important than they are in many other languages, because Setswana is a Bantu language and has noun classes denoted by these prefixes. They include &quot;Bo&quot;, which refers to the country, &quot;Ba&quot;, which refers to the people, &quot;Mo&quot;, which is one person, and &quot;Se&quot; which is the language. For example, the main ethnic group of Botswana is the Tswana people, hence the name Botswana for its country. The people as a whole are Batswana, one person is a Motswana, and the language they speak is Setswana.

Other languages spoken in Botswana include Kalanga (Sekalanga), Sarwa (Sesarwa), Ndebele, Kgalagadi, Tswapong, !Xóõ, Yeyi, and, in some parts, Afrikaans.

===Religion===
An estimated 77% of the country&#x27;s citizens identify as Christians. Anglicans, Methodists, and the United Congregational Church of Southern Africa make up the majority of Christian denominations. The country also has congregations of:

* Lutherans
* Baptists
* Roman Catholics
* The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
* The Dutch Reformed Church
* Mennonites
* Seventh-day Adventists
* Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses 
* Serbian Orthodox 

According to the 2001 census, the nation has around 5,000 Muslims (mainly from South Asia), 3,000 Hindus, and 700 of the Baháʼí Faith. Approximately 20% of citizens identify with no religion.

===Health===
Botswana&#x27;s healthcare system has been steadily improving and expanding. Specifically, infant mortality and maternal mortality rates are steadily declining. Eighty-five percent of the population live within a five-kilometre (3.1 mi) radius of a health facility. Seventy-three percent of pregnant women access antenatal care services at least four times. Almost 100 percent of births in Botswana take place in hospitals.

The Ministry of Health in Botswana is responsible for overseeing the quality and distribution of healthcare throughout the country. Life expectancy at birth was 55 in 2009 according to the World Bank, having previously fallen from a peak of 64.1 in 1990 to a low of 49 in 2002. Since Botswana&#x27;s 2011 census, current life expectancy is estimated at 54.06 years.

The Cancer Association of Botswana is a voluntary non-governmental organisation that is a member of the Union for International Cancer Control. The Association supplements existing services through provision of cancer prevention and health awareness programs, facilitating access to health services for cancer patients and offering support and counselling to those affected. Botswana&#x27;s 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI) score is 20.7.

====HIV/AIDS epidemic====

Like elsewhere in Sub-Saharan Africa, the economic impact of AIDS is considerable. Economic development spending was cut by 10% in 2002–2003 as a result of recurring budget deficits and rising expenditures on healthcare services. Botswana has been hit very hard by the AIDS pandemic; in 2006, it was estimated that life expectancy at birth had dropped from 65 to 35 years. The life expectancy is 66.4 years as of 2024.

In 2003, the government began a comprehensive programme involving free or cheap generic antiretroviral drugs as well as an information campaign designed to stop the spread of the virus; in 2013, over 40% of adults in Botswana had access to antiretroviral therapy. In the 15–19 age group, prevalence was estimated at 6% for females and 3.5% for males in 2013, and for the 20–24 age group, 15% for females and 5% for males. Botswana is one of 21 priority countries identified by the UN AIDS group in 2011 in the Global Plan to eliminate new HIV infections among children and to keep their mothers alive. From 2009 to 2013, the country saw a decrease of over 50% in new HIV infections in children. Less than 10% of pregnant HIV-infected women were not receiving antiretroviral medications in 2013, with a large, corresponding decrease (over 50%) in the number of new HIV infections in children under five. Among the UN Global Plan countries, people living with HIV in Botswana have the highest percentage receiving antiretroviral treatment: about 75% for adults (age 15+) and about 98% for children.

The country has been adversely affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In 2002, Botswana became the first country to offer anti-retroviral drugs (ARVs) to help combat the epidemic. Despite the launch of programmes to make treatment available and to educate the populace about the epidemic, the number of people with AIDS rose from 290,000 in 2005 to 320,000 in 2013. However, in recent years, the country has made strides in combating HIV/AIDS, with efforts being made to provide proper treatment and lower the rate of mother-to-child transmission.

With a nationwide Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission programme, Botswana has reduced HIV transmission from infected mothers to their children from about 40% in 2003 to 4% in 2010. Under the leadership of Festus Mogae, the government of Botswana solicited outside help in curing people with HIV/AIDS and received early support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Merck Foundation, which together formed the African Comprehensive HIV/AIDS Partnership (ACHAP). Other early partners include the Botswana–Harvard AIDS Institute of the Harvard School of Public Health and the Botswana–UPenn Partnership of the University of Pennsylvania. According to the 2011 UNAIDS Report, universal access to treatment—defined as 80% coverage or greater—has been achieved in Botswana.

==Culture==
Botswana&#x27;s music is mostly vocal and performed, sometimes without drums depending on the occasion; it also makes heavy use of string instruments. Botswana folk music has instruments such as setinkane (a sort of miniature piano), segankure/segaba (a Motswana version of the Chinese instrument erhu), moropa (&quot;meropa&quot; for plural) and phala (a whistle used mostly during celebrations). The hands are sometimes used as musical instruments too, by either clapping them together or against (goat skin turned inside out wrapped around the calf area, only used by men) to create music and rhythm. The national anthem is &quot;Fatshe leno la rona&quot;, which was written and composed by Kgalemang Tumediso Motsete; it was adopted upon independence in 1966.

In the northern part of Botswana, women in the villages of Etsha and Gumare are noted for their skill at crafting baskets from mokola palm and local dyes. The baskets are generally woven into three types: large, lidded baskets used for storage; large, open baskets for carrying objects on the head or for winnowing threshed grain; and smaller plates for winnowing pounded grain. These baskets steadily use colour.

The oldest paintings from both Botswana and South Africa depict hunting, animal and human figures, and were made by the Khoisan (Kung San/Bushmen) over 20,000 years ago within the Kalahari Desert.

=== Cuisine ===
The national dish is seswaa, pounded meat made from goat meat or beef, or Segwapa dried, cured meat ranging from beef to game meats, either fillets of meat cut into strips following the grain of the muscle, or flat pieces sliced across the grain. Botswana&#x27;s cuisine shares some characteristics with other cuisine of southern Africa.

Examples of Botswana food are: bogobe, pap (maize porridge), boerewors, samp, Magwinya and mopane worms. Bogobe is made by putting sorghum, maize or millet flour into boiling water, stirring it into a soft paste, and cooking it slowly. A dish called &quot;ting&quot; is made when milk and sugar is added to fermented sorghum or maize. Ting without the milk and sugar is sometimes eaten with meat or vegetables for lunch or dinner. Another way of making bogobe is to add sour milk and a cooking melon (lerotse). The Kalanga tribe calls this dish &quot;tophi&quot;. Madila is a traditional fermented milk product similar to yogurt or sour cream.

=== Sports ===
Football is the most popular sport in Botswana. Qualifying for the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations is the national team&#x27;s highest achievement to date. Other popular sports are softball, cricket, tennis, rugby, badminton, handball, golf and track and field. Botswana is an associate member of the International Cricket Council. Botswana became a member of the International Badminton Federation and Africa Badminton Federation in 1991. The Botswana Golf Union has an amateur golf league in which golfers compete in tournaments and championships. Runner Nijel Amos won Botswana its first Olympic medal in 2012, taking silver in the 800 metres.

In 2011, Amantle Montsho became world champion in the 400 metres and won Botswana&#x27;s first athletics medal at the world level. High jumper Kabelo Kgosiemang is a three-time African champion. Isaac Makwala is a sprinter who specialises in the 400 metres who was the gold medalist at the Commonwealth Games in 2018. Baboloki Thebe was a silver medalist in the 200 metres at the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics and reached the semi-finals at the 2014 World Junior Championships in Athletics. Ross Branch Ross, a motor-biker, holds the number one place in the South African Cross Country Championship and has competed at the Dakar Rally. Letsile Tebogo set the world junior record in the 100 metres with a time of 9.94 at the 2022 World Athletics Championships, and, as of 2024, holds the 100 metre and 200 metre world&#x27;s third-best time of 30.69 seconds. On 7 August 2021, Botswana won the bronze medal in the Men&#x27;s 4 × 400 metres relay at the Olympics in Tokyo. Botswana was the first African nation to host the Netball World Youth Cup. On 8 August 2024, Letsile Tebogo won Botswana&#x27;s first-ever Olympic gold medal at the 2024 Paris Olympics after finishing in first place in the men&#x27;s 200m final, finishing with a time of 19.46 seconds.

The card game bridge has a strong following; it was first played in Botswana around 40 years ago, and it grew in popularity during the 1980s. Many British expatriate school teachers informally taught the game in Botswana&#x27;s secondary schools. The Botswana Bridge Federation (BBF) was founded in 1988. Bridge has remained popular and the BBF has over 800 members. In 2007, the BBF invited the English Bridge Union to host a week-long teaching programme in May 2008.

==Education==


Botswana has made educational progress since independence in 1966 when there were only 22 graduates in the country and only a very small percentage of the population attended secondary school. Botswana increased its adult literacy rate from 69% in 1991 to 83% in 2008. Among sub-Saharan African countries, Botswana has one of the highest literacy rates. As of 2024, 88.5% of the population aged 15 and over could read and write and were respectively literate.

The Botswana Ministry of Education is working to establish libraries in primary schools in partnership with the African Library Project. The Government of Botswana hopes that investing a large part of national income in education will make the country less dependent on diamonds for its economic survival, and less dependent on expatriates for its skilled workers. NPVET (National Policy on Vocational Education and Training) introduced policies in favour of vocational education. Botswana invests 21% of its government spending in education.

In January 2006, Botswana announced the reintroduction of school fees after two decades of free state education, though the government still provides full scholarships with living expenses to any Botswana citizen in university, either at the University of Botswana or, if the student wishes to pursue an education in any field not offered locally, they are provided with a full scholarship to study abroad.

===Science and technology===
In 2015, Botswana planned to use science and technology to diversify its economy and thereby reduce its dependence on diamond mining. Botswana published its updated &quot;National Policy on Research, Science and Technology&quot; in 2011, within a UNESCO project sponsored by the Spanish Agency for International Cooperation and Development (AECID). This policy was formulated in strategic documents that include Botswana&#x27;s &quot;Tenth National Development Plan&quot; for 2016 and &quot;Vision 2016&quot;. The &quot;National Policy on Research, Science, Technology and Innovation&quot; (2011) sets the target of raising gross domestic expenditure on research and development (R&amp;D) from 0.26% of GDP in 2012 to over 2% of GDP by 2016. This target can only be reached within the specified time frame by raising public spending on R&amp;D. Botswana counts one of the highest researcher densities in sub-Saharan Africa: 344 per million inhabitants (in head counts), compared to an average of 91 per million inhabitants for the subcontinent in 2013. Botswana was ranked 87th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

In 2009, Botswana-based company Deaftronics launched a solar-powered hearing aid after six years of prototype development. Since then, Deaftronics has sold over 10,000 of the hearing aids. Priced at $200 per unit, each hearing aid includes four rechargeable batteries (lasting up to three years) and a solar charger for them. The product is inexpensive compared to many similar devices, which can start at around $600. In 2011, Botswana&#x27;s Department of Agricultural Research (DAR) unveiled Musi cattle, designed to optimise beef production. As a hybrid of the Tswana, Bonsmara, Brahman, Tuli and Simmental breeds, it is hoped that the composite will lead to increased beef production. In 2016, the Botswana Institute of Technology Research and Innovation (BITRI) developed a rapid testing kit for foot-and-mouth disease in collaboration with the Botswana Vaccine Institute and Canadian Food Inspection Agency. The kit developed in Botswana allows for on-site diagnosis.

The Square Kilometre Array (SKA) (MeerKAT) consists of thousands of dishes and antennas spread over large distances linked together to form one giant telescope. Additional dishes will be located in eight other African countries, Botswana among them. Botswana was selected to participate because of its ideal location in the southern hemisphere and environment, which could enable easier data collection from the universe. The Botswana government has built the SKA precursor telescope at Kgale View, which is the African Very Long Base Line Interferometry Network (AVN). It sent students on astronomy scholarships.
Botswana launched its own three-year programme to build and launch a Micro Satellite (CubeSat) Botswana Satellite Technology (Sat-1 Project) in Gaborone on 18 December 2020. Botswana International University of Science and Technology (BIUST) will lead satellite development, with technical support from the University of Oulu in Finland and Loon, a giant leap forward in the realisation of Botswana&#x27;s ambition to become a technologically driven economy. The satellite, which will be used for earth observation, will generate data for farm planning and real-time virtual tourism. It can also help predict and forecast harvest time. In 2016, for the IT sector, Almaz opened a first-of-its-kind computer assembly company. Ditec, a Botswana company, also customises, designs and manufactures mobile phones. Ditec specialises in customising Microsoft-powered devices.

On 19 November 2021, scientists at the Botswana Harvard HIV Reference Laboratory (BHHRL) first discovered the COVID-19 Omicron variant, subsequently designated B.1.1.529, and then named &quot;Omicron,&quot; becoming the first country in the world to discover the variant. Since early 2021, they have genome-sequenced some 2,300 positive SARS-CoV-2 virus samples. According to Dr. Gaseitsiwe, Botswana&#x27;s genome sequence submissions to GISAID are among the highest in the African region on a per capita basis, on a par with its well-resourced neighbour South Africa. Botswana Harvard AIDS Institute Partnership (BHP) was built in 2003, two years after the umbrella organisation opened the BHHRL, its purpose-built HIV research lab which was one of the first on the continent.

==See also==

* Outline of Botswana
* List of Botswana-related topics

== Notes ==
== References ==

=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 

=== General sources ===
== Further reading ==

* Charles, Thalefang (2016). &quot;Botswana&#x27;s Top50 Ultimate Experiences&quot;. Mmegi Publishing House. .
* 
* Colclough, Christopher and Stephen McCarthy. &quot;The Political Economy of Botswana: A Study of Growth and Income Distribution&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1980)
* 
* Edge, Wayne A. and Mogopodi H. Lekorwe eds. &quot;Botswana: Politics and Society&quot; (Pretoria: J.L. van Schaik, 1998)
* 

* LaRocco, Annette A. &quot;Nature of Politics: State Building and the Conservation Estate in Postcolonial Botswana&quot; (Ohio University Press, 2024) Online review of this book.

* Tlou, Thomas, and Alec C. Campbell. &quot;History of Botswana&quot; (Macmillan Botswana, 1984)
==External links==

* Botswana. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Botswana from UCB Libraries GovPubs
* Botswana from the BBC News
* 
* Key Development Forecasts for Botswana from International Futures
* Government Directory for Botswana</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="0" end="8" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="25" end="45" title="Botswana" label="Republic of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="52" end="70" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="74" end="89" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="184" end="199" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="219" end="231" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="260" end="267" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="291" end="297" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="315" end="323" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="426" end="432" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="457" end="480" title="List of countries and dependencies by population density" label="most sparsely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="547" end="560" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana people"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="665" end="687" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu-speaking peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251" start="692" end="721" title="Bantu expansion" label="migrated into southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="774" end="776" title="AD" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="795" end="802" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="856" end="868" title="Bechuanaland" label="Bechuanaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146918" start="885" end="909" title="decolonisation of Africa" label="decolonisation of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216856" start="946" end="967" title="Commonwealth republic" label="Commonwealth republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="1039" end="1061" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11933059" start="1115" end="1124" title="Elections in Botswana" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="1139" end="1164" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="Botswana Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="1295" end="1323" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="1337" end="1363" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099100" start="1394" end="1400" title="Mining industry of Botswana" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q14477439" start="1405" end="1412" title="Tourism in Botswana" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="1445" end="1468" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1573" end="1605" title="Per capita income" label="gross national income per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="1691" end="1709" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="1733" end="1756" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="1772" end="1790" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344350" start="1915" end="1945" title="Southern African Customs Union" label="Southern African Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="1951" end="1989" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1995" end="2018" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2027" end="2041" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="2106" end="2112" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966125" start="2146" end="2170" title="Ethnic groups in Botswana" label="ethnic group in Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="2244" end="2251" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="2393" end="2401" title="Setswana" label="Setswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="2670" end="2681" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="2847" end="2860" title="Early modern human" label="modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="3079" end="3082" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="3109" end="3113" title="Khoi" label="Khoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q427013" start="3141" end="3156" title="Click consonant" label="click languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785084" start="3172" end="3182" title="Khoe-Kwadi" label="Khoe-Kwadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6450587" start="3184" end="3193" title="Kx&amp;#x27;a" label="Kx&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q631046" start="3198" end="3201" title="Tuu languages" label="Tuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q205256" start="3457" end="3469" title="tsetse flies" label="tsetse flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="3490" end="3495" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193813" start="3653" end="3660" title="Kalanga people" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q30675283" start="3863" end="3873" title="Domboshaba" label="Domboshaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088743" start="4609" end="4620" title="Bakgalagadi" label="Bakgalagadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="4659" end="4667" title="Kalahari" label="Kalahari"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="4739" end="4752" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="4760" end="4772" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="4882" end="4897" title="Rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829431" start="4904" end="4922" title="Toutswemogala Hill" label="Toutswemogala Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q804468" start="5798" end="5805" title="Bakwena" label="Bakwena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855641" start="6079" end="6090" title="Bangwaketse" label="Bangwaketse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628797" start="6129" end="6137" title="Bangwato" label="Bangwato"/>
<link wikidata="Q650872" start="6262" end="6276" title="Okavango Delta" label="Okavango Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q865081" start="6802" end="6809" title="Mfecane" label="Mfecane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779570" start="6964" end="6972" title="Kololo people" label="Bakololo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211360" start="7088" end="7098" title="Northern Ndebele people" label="AmaNdebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="7407" end="7418" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="7461" end="7469" title="Tswana people" label="Batswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q804468" start="7496" end="7503" title="Bakwena" label="Bakwena"/>
<link wikidata="Q338949" start="7867" end="7877" title="Great Trek" label="Great Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="7879" end="7889" title="Afrikaners" label="Afrikaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="7968" end="7977" title="South African Republic" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="8003" end="8009" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475748" start="8027" end="8036" title="Sechele I" label="Sechele I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870875" start="8074" end="8090" title="Battle of Dimawe" label="Battle of Dimawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q605167" start="8202" end="8215" title="Potchefstroom" label="Potchefstroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="8576" end="8599" title="Tswana people" label="Battle of Khutiyabasadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="8797" end="8809" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="8851" end="8860" title="Lutherans" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="8869" end="8894" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078487" start="9032" end="9041" title="Khama III" label="Khama III"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9273" end="9284" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="9317" end="9336" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="9347" end="9360" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582" start="9419" end="9436" title="Berlin Conference" label="Berlin Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q15378647" start="9651" end="9668" title="Warren Expedition" label="Warren Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067567" start="9831" end="9844" title="fait accompli" label="fait accompli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="10083" end="10090" title="settler" label="settler"/>
<link wikidata="Q918320" start="10198" end="10226" title="British South Africa Company" label="British South Africa Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q916340" start="10393" end="10405" title="Jameson Raid" label="Jameson Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="10432" end="10453" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340665" start="10582" end="10592" title="Basutoland" label="Basutoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="10598" end="10605" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="10611" end="10620" title="Swaziland" label="Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="10626" end="10634" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="10972" end="10983" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="11021" end="11030" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="11076" end="11088" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="11816" end="11822" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q211055" start="11887" end="11895" title="Mahikeng" label="Mahikeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919" start="11938" end="11946" title="Gaborone" label="Gaborone"/>
<link wikidata="Q219962" start="12151" end="12164" title="Seretse Khama" label="Seretse Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q310574" start="12360" end="12372" title="Quett Masire" label="Quett Masire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193238" start="12504" end="12516" title="Festus Mogae" label="Festus Mogae"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="12599" end="12608" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q740258" start="12740" end="12762" title="Botswana Defence Force" label="Botswana Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618891" start="12819" end="12851" title="Mokgweetsi Masisi" label="Mokgweetsi Eric Keabetswe Masisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="12976" end="12983" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="12991" end="13004" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="13040" end="13070" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q849782" start="13103" end="13118" title="Kasikili Island" label="Kasikili Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449433" start="13205" end="13235" title="2024 Botswana general election" label="2024 Botswana general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347306" start="13258" end="13288" title="Umbrella for Democratic Change" label="Umbrella for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618881" start="13310" end="13319" title="Duma Boko" label="Duma Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="13628" end="13637" title="plateau" label="tableland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="13668" end="13683" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="13733" end="13746" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140059" start="13865" end="13872" title="Notwane River" label="Notwane"/>
<link wikidata="Q21858459" start="13874" end="13884" title="Bonwapitse River" label="Bonwapitse"/>
<link wikidata="Q170724" start="13886" end="13895" title="Mahalapye" label="Mahalapye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167466" start="13897" end="13904" title="Lotsane River" label="Lotsane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782407" start="13906" end="13915" title="Motloutse" label="Motloutse"/>
<link wikidata="Q859372" start="13924" end="13930" title="Shashe" label="Shashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515478" start="14030" end="14042" title="Gaborone Dam" label="Gaborone Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q182942" start="14048" end="14059" title="Chobe River" label="Chobe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="14075" end="14088" title="Zambezi River" label="Zambezi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305536" start="14107" end="14116" title="Kazungula" label="Kazungula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="14256" end="14265" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="14271" end="14278" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q173651" start="14364" end="14380" title="African wild dog" label="African wild dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q859389" start="14382" end="14401" title="Chobe National Park" label="Chobe National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q165536" start="14409" end="14423" title="Chobe District" label="Chobe District"/>
<link wikidata="Q36557" start="14470" end="14486" title="African bush elephant" label="African elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="14564" end="14576" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="14844" end="14858" title="primary forest" label="primary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="15084" end="15100" title="public ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="15109" end="15126" title="private ownership" label="private ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q353112" start="15157" end="15176" title="Moremi Game Reserve" label="Moremi Game Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q194732" start="15260" end="15289" title="Central Kalahari Game Reserve" label="Central Kalahari Game Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q57571" start="15324" end="15339" title="Ghanzi District" label="Ghanzi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q533041" start="15341" end="15372" title="Makgadikgadi Pans National Park" label="Makgadikgadi Pans National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q859377" start="15377" end="15399" title="Nxai Pan National Park" label="Nxai Pan National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q57525" start="15411" end="15427" title="Central District (Botswana)" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q533041" start="15435" end="15451" title="Makgadikgadi Pan" label="Makgadikgadi Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="15479" end="15490" title="Natural environment" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="15503" end="15510" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="15515" end="15530" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="15662" end="15673" title="Groundwater" label="Groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="17053" end="17077" title="United States Government" label="United States Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q641498" start="17264" end="17276" title="Conservation biology" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="17313" end="17345" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="17420" end="17456" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="17514" end="17530" title="overexploitation" label="overexploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="18246" end="18268" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592128" start="18285" end="18309" title="Constitution of Botswana" label="Constitution of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919" start="18393" end="18401" title="Gaborone" label="Gaborone"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="18588" end="18606" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="18671" end="18693" title="centralised government" label="centralised government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918998" start="18901" end="18923" title="Parliament of Botswana" label="Parliament of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969555" start="18958" end="18975" title="National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q859599" start="19056" end="19071" title="Ntlo ya Dikgosi" label="Ntlo ya Dikgosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q866725" start="19203" end="19224" title="President of Botswana" label="President of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="19249" end="19262" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="19267" end="19285" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q859757" start="19371" end="19385" title="Vice-President of Botswana" label="vice-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048312" start="19390" end="19397" title="Cabinet of Botswana" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="19496" end="19501" title="Separation of powers" label="check"/>
<link wikidata="Q27655714" start="19559" end="19581" title="High Court of Botswana" label="High Court of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11933059" start="19708" end="19729" title="Elections in Botswana" label="Elections in Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q126372469" start="19776" end="19808" title="Independent Electoral Commission (Botswana)" label="Independent Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="19836" end="19854" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502916" start="19864" end="19886" title="List of political parties in Botswana" label="many political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="19918" end="19932" title="dominant-party" label="dominant-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="19952" end="19977" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="Botswana Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146844" start="20096" end="20109" title="free and fair" label="free and fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="20188" end="20200" title="Political faction" label="Factionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347306" start="20348" end="20378" title="Umbrella for Democratic Change" label="Umbrella for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449433" start="20464" end="20471" title="2024 Botswana general election" label="in 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618881" start="20618" end="20627" title="Duma Boko" label="Duma Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q219962" start="20728" end="20741" title="Seretse Khama" label="Seretse Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q310574" start="20779" end="20791" title="Quett Masire" label="Quett Masire"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447301" start="20803" end="20819" title="Kgabo Commission" label="Kgabo Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20904" end="20917" title="Botswana Democratic Party#History" label="Barata-Phathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298758" start="20937" end="20948" title="Peter Mmusi" label="Peter Mmusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217839" start="20950" end="20966" title="Daniel Kwelagobe" label="Daniel Kwelagobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139832" start="20971" end="20991" title="Ponatshego Kedikilwe" label="Ponatshego Kedikilwe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21003" end="21009" title="Botswana Democratic Party#History" label="A Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436517" start="21029" end="21044" title="Mompati Merafhe" label="Mompati Merafhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193238" start="21067" end="21079" title="Festus Mogae" label="Festus Mogae"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="21084" end="21093" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="21576" end="21607" title="Democracy Index (The Economist)" label="Democracy Index (The Economist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="21738" end="21747" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="21800" end="21823" title="V-Dem Democracy Indices" label="V-Dem Democracy Indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q30676252" start="21870" end="21892" title="democratic backsliding" label="democratic backsliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q113997929" start="22080" end="22099" title="electoral autocracy" label="electoral autocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="22412" end="22438" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="22439" end="22455" title="Corruption Index" label="Corruption Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="22528" end="22538" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="22547" end="22557" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="22592" end="22615" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="22736" end="22744" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815399" start="22750" end="22770" title="South African Army" label="South African armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426171" start="22784" end="22825" title="Zimbabwe People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army" label="Zimbabwe People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136236" start="22830" end="22847" title="Umkhonto we Sizwe" label="Umkhonto we Sizwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q740258" start="22876" end="22898" title="Botswana Defence Force" label="Botswana Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="22942" end="22960" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="23045" end="23089" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="23216" end="23224" title="poaching" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="23226" end="23249" title="Emergency management" label="preparing for disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="23274" end="23286" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q740258" start="23380" end="23383" title="Botswana Defence Force" label="BDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q664743" start="23575" end="23582" title="AFRICOM" label="AFRICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="23685" end="23703" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q97290922" start="23729" end="23761" title="Botswana Centre for Human Rights" label="Botswana Centre for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163426" start="23818" end="23833" title="LGBT rights in Botswana" label="homosexual acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q903453" start="24146" end="24160" title="decriminalised" label="decriminalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q940525" start="24164" end="24173" title="legalised" label="legalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035727" start="24191" end="24209" title="Capital punishment in Botswana" label="Capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="24362" end="24372" title="San people" label="San people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="24636" end="24643" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="24922" end="24932" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q64351370" start="24969" end="25004" title="UN Special Rapporteur on Minorities" label="UN Special Rapporteur on Minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q61566" start="25211" end="25228" title="minority language" label="minority language"/>
<link wikidata="Q149621" start="25351" end="25359" title="district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="26759" end="26780" title="gross national income" label="gross national income"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="26784" end="26807" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952348" start="27093" end="27116" title="Multidimensional Poverty Index" label="multidimensionally poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q123982683" start="27157" end="27199" title="Ministry of Trade and Industry (Botswana)" label="Ministry of Trade and Industry of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017569" start="27229" end="27249" title="business development" label="business development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="27291" end="27318" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810245" start="27396" end="27426" title="List of sovereign states by economic freedom" label="high level of economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q187021" start="27502" end="27515" title="fiscal policy" label="fiscal policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317814" start="27537" end="27552" title="budget deficits" label="budget deficits"/>
<link wikidata="Q461319" start="27597" end="27609" title="foreign debt" label="foreign debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q372765" start="27643" end="27656" title="credit rating" label="credit rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q539206" start="28362" end="28370" title="Debswana" label="Debswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q87769621" start="28384" end="28398" title="list of diamond mines" label="diamond mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515478" start="29048" end="29060" title="Gaborone Dam" label="Gaborone Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379069" start="29065" end="29088" title="Mokolodi Nature Reserve" label="Mokolodi Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="29100" end="29111" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q650872" start="29172" end="29186" title="Okavango Delta" label="Okavango Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="29268" end="29287" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q406896" start="29481" end="29493" title="Air Botswana" label="Air Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q848511" start="29554" end="29571" title="Botswana Railways" label="Botswana Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q915912" start="30217" end="30241" title="Morupule Thermal Power Station" label="Morupule B Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q915912" start="30252" end="30276" title="Morupule Thermal Power Station" label="Morupule A Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745791" start="30287" end="30306" title="Orapa Power Station" label="Orapa Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775544" start="30316" end="30339" title="Phakalane Power Station" label="Phakalane Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885794" start="30353" end="30376" title="Mmamabula" label="Mmamabula Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003207" start="30447" end="30464" title="solar power plant" label="solar power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="30612" end="30618" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193813" start="30721" end="30728" title="Kalanga people" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="30740" end="30757" title="San people" label="the San (Basarwa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151362" start="30794" end="30808" title="White people in Botswana" label="White Batswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024070" start="30828" end="30835" title="Indians in Botswana" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205797" start="30926" end="30931" title="Bayei" label="Bayei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631357" start="30945" end="30952" title="Basubia" label="Basubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166535" start="30967" end="30978" title="Kgalagadi people" label="Bakgalagadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="31087" end="31097" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="31099" end="31104" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="31106" end="31114" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="31116" end="31125" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="31130" end="31142" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="31204" end="31212" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072102" start="31228" end="31251" title="Zimbabweans in Botswana" label="Zimbabweans in Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="31308" end="31318" title="San people" label="San people"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="31354" end="31369" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128693" start="31561" end="31572" title="James Anaya" label="James Anaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="31687" end="31701" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q194732" start="31855" end="31884" title="Central Kalahari Game Reserve" label="Central Kalahari Game Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q205650" start="31968" end="32003" title="United Nations Human Rights Council" label="United Nations Human Rights Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="32319" end="32327" title="Setswana" label="Setswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="32378" end="32384" title="prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="32467" end="32481" title="Bantu language" label="Bantu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="32968" end="32975" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="32989" end="32994" title="Tshwa language" label="Sarwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="33006" end="33013" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q13229" start="33036" end="33040" title="!Xóõ" label="!Xóõ"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="33068" end="33077" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="33155" end="33165" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="33167" end="33176" title="Anglicans" label="Anglicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="33178" end="33188" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887649" start="33198" end="33245" title="United Congregational Church of Southern Africa" label="United Congregational Church of Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="33337" end="33346" title="Lutherans" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="33349" end="33357" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="33360" end="33375" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="33378" end="33425" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="33432" end="33453" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Dutch Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="33456" end="33466" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="33469" end="33491" title="Seventh-day Adventists" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="33494" end="33518" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="33522" end="33538" title="Serbian Orthodox" label="Serbian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="33599" end="33606" title="Islam" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="33620" end="33630" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="33639" end="33645" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="33662" end="33674" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="33720" end="33731" title="Irreligion" label="no religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="34269" end="34279" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="34304" end="34319" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031399" start="34543" end="34573" title="Cancer Association of Botswana" label="Cancer Association of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="34589" end="34618" title="non-governmental organisation" label="non-governmental organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333509" start="35046" end="35069" title="economic impact of AIDS" label="economic impact of AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="35273" end="35286" title="AIDS pandemic" label="AIDS pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q583050" start="35512" end="35526" title="antiretroviral" label="antiretroviral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629825" start="36569" end="36586" title="HIV/AIDS in Botswana" label="HIV/AIDS epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q583050" start="36640" end="36661" title="anti-retroviral drugs" label="anti-retroviral drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="36833" end="36837" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q193238" start="37279" end="37291" title="Festus Mogae" label="Festus Mogae"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="37410" end="37443" title="Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation" label="Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948876" start="37581" end="37612" title="Botswana–Harvard AIDS Institute" label="Botswana–Harvard AIDS Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676556" start="37620" end="37651" title="Harvard School of Public Health" label="Harvard School of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="37694" end="37720" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q726306" start="38165" end="38169" title="erhu" label="erhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q221708" start="38501" end="38520" title="Fatshe leno la rona" label="Fatshe leno la rona"/>
<link wikidata="Q170668" start="38702" end="38708" title="Gumare" label="Gumare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704920" start="38760" end="38771" title="Hyphaene petersiana" label="mokola palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="38782" end="38785" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="39228" end="39243" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q859981" start="39283" end="39289" title="seswaa" label="seswaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q863394" start="39336" end="39343" title="Biltong" label="Segwapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="39632" end="39638" title="bogobe" label="bogobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="39640" end="39643" title="Ugali" label="pap"/>
<link wikidata="Q890278" start="39662" end="39671" title="boerewors" label="boerewors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644493" start="39673" end="39677" title="samp" label="samp"/>
<link wikidata="Q282620" start="39679" end="39687" title="Vetkoek" label="Magwinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q311788" start="39692" end="39704" title="mopane worms" label="mopane worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="40223" end="40229" title="yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q840171" start="40233" end="40243" title="sour cream" label="sour cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="40261" end="40269" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q218208" start="40328" end="40354" title="2012 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2012 Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q119322" start="40362" end="40375" title="Botswana national football team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="40437" end="40445" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="40447" end="40454" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="40456" end="40462" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="40464" end="40469" title="Rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="40471" end="40480" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="40482" end="40490" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="40492" end="40496" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="40501" end="40516" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="40557" end="40586" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q126638" start="40620" end="40654" title="International Badminton Federation" label="International Badminton Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q383980" start="40659" end="40686" title="Africa Badminton Federation" label="Africa Badminton Federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40700" end="40719" title="Sport in Botswana#Golf" label="Botswana Golf Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660" start="40813" end="40823" title="Nijel Amos" label="Nijel Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q636830" start="40847" end="40860" title="Olympic medal" label="Olympic medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q847956" start="40877" end="40883" title="Silver medal" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049551" start="40891" end="40901" title="Athletics at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 800 metres" label="800 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q32478" start="40913" end="40928" title="Amantle Montsho" label="Amantle Montsho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635947" start="40936" end="40950" title="2011 World Championships in Athletics – Women&amp;#x27;s 400 metres" label="world champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719640" start="41047" end="41064" title="Kabelo Kgosiemang" label="Kabelo Kgosiemang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417217" start="41081" end="41097" title="African Championships in Athletics" label="African champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112691" start="41099" end="41112" title="Isaac Makwala" label="Isaac Makwala"/>
<link wikidata="Q24261060" start="41222" end="41236" title="Baboloki Thebe" label="Baboloki Thebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832000" start="41537" end="41551" title="Letsile Tebogo" label="Letsile Tebogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q592883" start="41560" end="41579" title="List of world under-20 records in athletics" label="world junior record"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="41587" end="41597" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q19803277" start="41625" end="41659" title="2022 World Athletics Championships" label="2022 World Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423998" start="41825" end="41861" title="4 × 400 metres relay at the Olympics" label="4 × 400 metres relay at the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="41865" end="41870" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639537" start="41922" end="41945" title="2017 Netball World Youth Cup" label="Netball World Youth Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832000" start="41965" end="41979" title="Letsile Tebogo" label="Letsile Tebogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="42037" end="42056" title="2024 Paris Olympics" label="2024 Paris Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q116495926" start="42095" end="42116" title="Athletics at the 2024 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 200 metres" label="men&amp;#x27;s 200m final"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="42173" end="42179" title="Contract bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378199" start="42555" end="42575" title="English Bridge Union" label="English Bridge Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892497" start="43110" end="43140" title="Botswana Ministry of Education" label="Botswana Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689845" start="43218" end="43241" title="African Library Project" label="African Library Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q105095016" start="43247" end="43269" title="Government of Botswana" label="Government of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q493141" start="43892" end="43914" title="University of Botswana" label="University of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="44741" end="44765" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="45172" end="45195" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="45451" end="45473" title="rechargeable batteries" label="rechargeable batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556094" start="45508" end="45521" title="solar charger" label="solar charger"/>
<link wikidata="Q859941" start="45771" end="45777" title="Tswana cattle" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910363" start="45779" end="45787" title="Bonsmara" label="Bonsmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q897314" start="45789" end="45796" title="American Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459457" start="45798" end="45802" title="Tuli cattle" label="Tuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426346" start="45807" end="45816" title="Simmental cattle" label="Simmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q152401" start="46008" end="46030" title="foot-and-mouth disease" label="foot-and-mouth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826578" start="46088" end="46119" title="Canadian Food Inspection Agency" label="Canadian Food Inspection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q258499" start="46186" end="46208" title="Square Kilometre Array" label="Square Kilometre Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807657" start="46216" end="46223" title="MeerKAT" label="MeerKAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142930" start="46882" end="46889" title="CubeSat" label="CubeSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856101" start="46970" end="47029" title="Botswana International University of Science and Technology" label="Botswana International University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357517" start="47103" end="47121" title="University of Oulu" label="University of Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13463146" start="47137" end="47141" title="Loon LLC" label="Loon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915546" start="47363" end="47375" title="virtual tour" label="virtual tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="47449" end="47458" title="IT sector" label="IT sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="47589" end="47601" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="47637" end="47646" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="47775" end="47783" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112207" start="48461" end="48480" title="Outline of Botswana" label="Outline of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564486" start="48483" end="48514" title="List of Botswana-related topics" label="List of Botswana-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="49366" end="49384" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="49392" end="49419" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="49437" end="49450" title="UCB Libraries" label="UCB Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="49479" end="49487" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="49537" end="49558" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3466" wikidata="Q921" url="?curid=3466" title="Brunei">
<text>Brunei, officially Brunei Darussalam, is a country in Southeast Asia, situated on the northern coast of the island of Borneo. Apart from its coastline on the South China Sea, it is completely surrounded by the Malaysian state of Sarawak, with its territory bifurcated by the Sarawak district of Limbang. Brunei is the only sovereign state entirely on Borneo; the remainder of the island is divided between its multi-landmass neighbours of Malaysia and Indonesia. , the country had a population of 455,858, of whom approximately 180,000 resided in the capital and largest city of Bandar Seri Begawan. Its official language is Malay and Islam is the state religion of the country, although other religions are nominally tolerated. The government of Brunei is an absolute monarchy ruled by the Sultan, and it implements a fusion of English common law and jurisprudence inspired by Islam, including sharia.

At the Bruneian Empire&#x27;s peak during the reign of Sultan Bolkiah (1485–1528), the state is claimed to have had control over the most of Borneo, including modern-day Sarawak and Sabah, as well as the Sulu archipelago and the islands off the northwestern tip of Borneo. There are also claims to its historical control over Seludong, in which Southeast Asian scholars believe the name of the location in question is actually in reference to Mount Selurong, in Indonesia, or Serudong River in eastern Sabah. The maritime state of Brunei was visited by the surviving crew of the Magellan Expedition in 1521, and in 1578 it fought against Spain in the Castilian War.

During the 19th century, the Bruneian Empire began to decline. The Sultanate ceded Sarawak (Kuching) to James Brooke and installed him as the White Rajah, and it ceded Sabah to the British North Borneo Chartered Company. In 1888, Brunei became a British protectorate and was assigned a British resident as colonial manager in 1906. After the Japanese occupation during World War II, a new constitution was written in 1959. In 1962, a small armed rebellion against the monarchy which was indirectly related to the Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation was ended with British assistance and led to the ban of the pro-independent Brunei People&#x27;s Party. The revolt had also influenced the Sultan&#x27;s decision not to join the Malaysian Federation while it was being formed. Britain&#x27;s protectorate over Brunei would eventually end on 1 January 1984, becoming a fully sovereign state.

Brunei has been led by Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah since 1967, and the country&#x27;s unicameral legislature, the Legislative Council, is simply consultative and are all appointed by the Sultan. The country&#x27;s wealth derives from its extensive petroleum and natural gas fields. Economic growth during the 1990s and 2000s has transformed Brunei into an industrialised country, with its GDP increasing 56% between 1999 and 2008. Political stability is maintained by the House of Bolkiah by providing a welfare state for its citizens, with free or significant subsidies in regards to housing, healthcare and education. It ranks &quot;very high&quot; on the Human Development Index (HDI)—the second-highest among Southeast Asian states after Singapore, which it maintains close relations with including a Currency Interchangeability Agreement. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Brunei is ranked ninth in the world by gross domestic product per capita at purchasing power parity. Brunei is a member of the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the East Asia Summit, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Commonwealth of Nations, and ASEAN.

== Etymology ==
According to local historiography, Brunei was founded by Awang Alak Betatar, later to be Sultan Muhammad Shah, reigning around AD 1400. He moved from Garang in the Temburong District to the Brunei River estuary, discovering Brunei. According to legend, upon landing he exclaimed, &quot;Baru nah&quot; (loosely translated as &quot;that&#x27;s it!&quot; or &quot;there&quot;), from which the name &quot;Brunei&quot; was derived. He was the first Muslim ruler of Brunei. Before the rise of the Bruneian Empire under the Muslim Bolkiah dynasty, Brunei is believed to have been under Buddhist rulers.

It was renamed &quot;Barunai&quot; in the 14th century, possibly influenced by the Sanskrit word &quot;&#x27;&quot; (), meaning &quot;seafarers&quot;. The word &quot;Borneo&quot; is of the same origin. In the country&#x27;s full name, &#x27;, &#x27; () means &quot;abode of peace&quot;, while &#x27; means &quot;country&quot; in Malay. A shortened version of the Malay official name, &quot;Brunei Darussalam&quot;, has also entered common usage, particularly in official contexts, and is present in the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names geographical database, as well as the official ASEAN and Commonwealth listings.

The earliest recorded documentation by the West about Brunei is by an Italian known as Ludovico di Varthema. On his documentation back to 1550;

== History ==
=== Early history ===
Areas comprising what is now Brunei participated in the Maritime Jade Road, as ascertained by archeological research. The trading network existed for 3,000 years, between 2000 BC to 1000 AD. The settlement known as Vijayapura was a vassal-state to the Buddhist Srivijaya empire and was thought to be located in Borneo&#x27;s Northwest which flourished in the 7th Century. Vijayapura itself upon earlier in its history, was a rump state of the fallen multi-ethnic: Austronesian, Austroasiatic and Indian, Funan Civilization; previously located in what is now Cambodia. This alternative Srivijaya known as Vijayapura referring to Brunei, was known to Arabic sources as &quot;Sribuza&quot;. 

One of the earliest Chinese records of an independent kingdom in Borneo is the 977 AD letter to the Chinese emperor from the ruler of Boni, which some scholars believe to refer to Borneo. The Bruneians regained their independence from Srivijaya due to the onset of a Javanese-Sumatran war. In 1225, the Chinese official Zhao Rukuo reported that Boni had 100 warships to protect its trade, and that there was great wealth in the kingdom. Marco Polo suggested in his memoirs that the Great Khan or the ruler of the Mongol Empire, attempted and failed many times in invading &quot;Great Java&quot; which was the European name for Bruneian controlled Borneo. 

According to Wang Zhenping, in the 1300s, the &quot;Yuan Dade nanhai zhi&quot; or &quot;Yuan dynasty Dade period southern sea records&quot; reported that Brunei conquered or administered Sarawak and Sabah as well as the Philippine kingdoms of Butuan, Sulu, Ma-i (Mindoro), Malilu 麻裏蘆 (Manila), Shahuchong 沙胡重 (Siocon or Zamboanga), Yachen 啞陳 Oton, and 文杜陵 Wenduling (Mindanao), which would regain their independence at a later date.

In the 14th century, the Javanese manuscript &quot;Nagarakretagama&quot;, written by Prapanca in 1365, mentioned &quot;Barune&quot; as the constituent state of Hindu Majapahit, which had to make an annual tribute of 40 katis of camphor. In 1369, Sulu which was also formerly part of Majapahit, had successfully rebelled and then attacked Boni, and had invaded the Northeast Coast of Borneo and afterwards had looted the capital of its treasure and gold including sacking two sacred pearls. A fleet from Majapahit succeeded in driving away the Sulus, but Boni was left weaker after the attack. A Chinese report from 1371 described Boni as poor and totally controlled by Majapahit. When the Chinese admiral Zheng He visited the Brunei in the early 15th century, he founded a major trading port which included Chinese people who were actively trading with China.

During the 15th century, Boni had seceded from Majapahit and then converted to Islam. Thus transforming into the independent Sultanate of Brunei. Brunei became a Hashemite state when she allowed the Arab Emir of Mecca, Sharif Ali, to become her third sultan. 

As customary for close affiliation and alliances in Southeast Asia, the royal family of Luzon intermarried with the ruling houses of the Sultanate of Brunei. Intermarriage was a common strategy for Southeast Asian states to extend their influence. However, Islamic Brunei&#x27;s power was not uncontested in Borneo since it had a Hindu rival in a state founded by Indians called Kutai in the south which they overpowered but didn&#x27;t destroy.

Nevertheless, by the 16th century, Islam was firmly rooted in Brunei, and the country had built one of its biggest mosques. In 1578, Alonso Beltrán, a Spanish traveller, described it as being five stories tall and built on the water.

=== War with Spain and decline ===
 Brunei briefly rose to prominence in Southeast Asia when the Portuguese occupied Malacca and thereby forced the wealthy and powerful but displaced Muslim refugees there to relocate to nearby Sultanates such as Brunei. The Bruneian Sultan then intervened in a territorial conflict between Hindu Tondo and Muslim Manila in the Philippines by appointing the Bruneian descended Rajah Ache of Manila as admiral of the Bruneian navy in a rivalry against Tondo and as the enforcer of Bruneian interests in the Philippines. He subsequently encountered the Magellan expedition wherein Antonio Pigafetta noted that under orders from his grandfather the Sultan of Brunei, Ache had previously sacked the Buddhist city of Loue in Southwest Borneo for being faithful to the old religion and rebelling against the authority of Sultanate. However, European influence gradually brought an end to Brunei&#x27;s regional power, as Brunei entered a period of decline compounded by internal strife over royal succession. In the face of these invasions by European Christian powers, the Ottoman Caliphate aided the beleaguered Southeast Asian Sultanates by making Aceh a protectorate and sending expeditions to reinforce, train and equip the local mujahideen. Turks were routinely migrating to Brunei as evidenced by the complaints of Manila Oidor Melchor Davalos who in his 1585 report, say that Turks were coming to Sumatra, Borneo and Ternate every year, including defeated veterans from the Battle of Lepanto.

Spain declared war in 1578, planning to attack and capture Kota Batu, Brunei&#x27;s capital at the time. This was based in part on the assistance of two Bruneian noblemen, Pengiran Seri Lela and Pengiran Seri Ratna. The former had travelled to Manila, then the centre of the Spanish colony. Manila itself was captured from Brunei, Christianised and made a territory of the Viceroyalty of New Spain which was centered in Mexico City. Pengiran Seri Lela came to offer Brunei as a tributary to Spain for help to recover the throne usurped by his brother, Saiful Rijal. The Spanish agreed that if they succeeded in conquering Brunei, Pengiran Seri Lela would be appointed as the sultan, while Pengiran Seri Ratna would be the new Bendahara.
In March 1578, a fresh Spanish fleet had arrived from Mexico and settled at the Philippines. They were led by De Sande, acting as Capitán-General. He organized an expedition from Manila for Brunei, consisting of 400 Spaniards and Mexicans, 1,500 Filipino natives, and 300 Borneans. The campaign was one of many, which also included action in Mindanao and Sulu. The racial make-up of the Christian side was diverse since it were usually made up of Mestizos, Mulattoes and Amerindians (Aztecs, Mayans and Incans) who were gathered and sent from Mexico and were led by Spanish officers who had worked together with native Filipinos in military campaigns across the Southeast Asia. The Muslim side was also equally racially diverse. In addition to the native Malay warriors, the Ottomans had repeatedly sent military expeditions to nearby Aceh. The expeditions were composed mainly of Turks, Egyptians, Swahilis, Somalis, Sindhis, Gujaratis and Malabars. These expeditionary forces had also spread to other nearby Sultanates such as Brunei and had taught new fighting tactics and techniques on how to forge cannons.

Eventually, the Spanish captured the capital on 16 April 1578, with the help of Pengiran Seri Lela and Pengiran Seri Ratna. The Sultan Saiful Rijal and Paduka Seri Begawan Sultan Abdul Kahar were forced to flee to Meragang then to Jerudong. In Jerudong, they made plans to chase the conquering army away from Brunei. Suffering high fatalities due to a cholera or dysentery outbreak, the Spanish decided to abandon Brunei and returned to Manila on 26 June 1578, after 72 days.

Pengiran Seri Lela died in August or September 1578, probably from the same illness suffered by his Spanish allies. There was suspicion that the legitimist sultan could have been poisoned by the ruling sultan. Seri Lela&#x27;s daughter, a Bruneian princess, &quot;Putri&quot;, had left with the Spanish, she abandoned her claim to the crown and then she married a Christian Tagalog, named Agustín de Legazpi de Tondo. Agustin de Legaspi along with his family and associates were soon implicated in the Conspiracy of the Maharlikas, an attempt by Filipinos to link up with the Brunei Sultanate and Japanese Shogunate to expel the Spaniards from the Philippines. However, upon the Spanish suppression of the conspiracy, the Bruneian descended aristocracy of precolonial Manila were exiled to Guerrero, Mexico which consequently later became a center of the Mexican war of independence against Spain.

The local Brunei accounts of the Castilian War differ greatly from the generally accepted view of events. What was called the Castilian War was seen as a heroic episode, with the Spaniards being driven out by Bendahara Sakam, purportedly a brother of the ruling sultan, and a thousand native warriors. Most historians consider this to be a folk-hero account, which probably developed decades or centuries after.

Brunei eventually descended into anarchy. The country suffered a civil war from 1660 to 1673.

=== British intervention ===


The British have intervened in the affairs of Brunei on several occasions. Britain attacked Brunei in July 1846 due to internal conflicts over who was the rightful Sultan.

In the 1880s, the decline of the Bruneian Empire continued. The sultan granted land (now Sarawak) to James Brooke, who had helped him quell a rebellion, and allowed him to establish the Raj of Sarawak. Over time, Brooke and his nephews (who succeeded him) leased or annexed more land. Brunei lost much of its territory to him and his dynasty, known as the White Rajahs.

Sultan Hashim Jalilul Alam Aqamaddin appealed to the British to stop further encroachment by the Brookes. The &quot;Treaty of Protection&quot; was negotiated by Sir Hugh Low and signed into effect on 17 September 1888. The treaty said that the sultan &quot;could not cede or lease any territory to foreign powers without British consent&quot;; it provided Britain effective control over Brunei&#x27;s external affairs, making it a British protected state (which continued until 1984). But, when the Raj of Sarawak annexed Brunei&#x27;s Pandaruan District in 1890, the British did not take any action to stop it. They did not regard either Brunei or the Raj of Sarawak as &#x27;foreign&#x27; (per the Treaty of Protection). This final annexation by Sarawak left Brunei with its current small land mass and separation into two parts.

The British Foreign Office sent Consul Malcolm Stewart Hannibal McArthur to assess Brunei and make recommendations on future British foreign policy in the region. McArthur produced his Report On Brunei in 1904 where he recommended the implementation of the Malayan British Residency system and the continued protection of Brunei. British residents were introduced in Brunei under the Supplementary Protectorate Agreement in 1906. The residents were to advise the sultan on all matters of administration. Over time, the resident assumed more executive control than the sultan. The residential system ended in 1959.

=== Discovery of oil ===
Petroleum was discovered in 1929 after several fruitless attempts. Two men, F. F. Marriot and T. G. Cochrane, smelled oil near the Seria river in late 1926. They informed a geophysicist, who conducted a survey there. In 1927, gas seepages were reported in the area. Seria Well Number One (S-1) was drilled on 12 July 1928. Oil was struck at on 5 April 1929. Seria Well Number 2 was drilled on 19 August 1929, and, , continues to produce oil. Oil production was increased considerably in the 1930s with the development of more oil fields. In 1940, oil production was at more than six million barrels. The British Malayan Petroleum Company (now Brunei Shell Petroleum Company) was formed on 22 July 1922. The first offshore well was drilled in 1957. Oil and natural gas have been the basis of Brunei&#x27;s development and wealth since the late 20th century.

=== Japanese occupation ===

The Japanese invaded Brunei on 16 December 1941, eight days after their attack on Pearl Harbor on the United States Navy. They landed 10,000 troops of the Kawaguchi Detachment from Cam Ranh Bay at Kuala Belait. After six days&#x27; fighting, they occupied the entire country. The only Allied troops in the area were the 2nd Battalion of the 15th Punjab Regiment based at Kuching, Sarawak.

Once the Japanese occupied Brunei, they made an agreement with Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin over governing the country. Inche Ibrahim (known later as Pehin Datu Perdana Menteri Dato Laila Utama Awang Haji Ibrahim), a former Secretary to the British Resident, Ernest Edgar Pengilly, was appointed chief administrative officer under the Japanese Governor. The Japanese had proposed that Pengilly retain his position under their administration, but he declined. Both he and other British nationals still in Brunei were interned by the Japanese at Batu Lintang camp in Sarawak. While the British officials were under Japanese guard, Ibrahim made a point of personally shaking each one by the hand and wishing him well.

The Sultan retained his throne and was given a pension and honours by the Japanese. During the later part of the occupation, he resided at Tantuya, Limbang and had little to do with the Japanese. Most of the Malay government officers were retained by the Japanese. Brunei&#x27;s administration was reorganised into five prefectures, which included British North Borneo. The Prefectures included Baram, Labuan, Lawas, and Limbang. Ibrahim hid numerous significant government documents from the Japanese during the occupation. Pengiran Yusuf (later YAM Pengiran Setia Negara Pengiran Haji Mohd Yusuf), along with other Bruneians, was sent to Japan for training. Although in the area the day of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, Yusuf survived.

The British had anticipated a Japanese attack, but lacked the resources to defend the area because of their engagement in the war in Europe. The troops from the Punjab Regiment filled in the Seria oilfield oilwells with concrete in September 1941 to deny the Japanese their use. The remaining equipment and installations were destroyed when the Japanese invaded Malaya. By the end of the war, 16 wells at Miri and Seria had been restarted, with production reaching about half the pre-war level. Coal production at Muara was also recommenced, but with little success.
During the occupation, the Japanese had their language taught in schools, and Government officers were required to learn Japanese. The local currency was replaced by what was to become known as &quot;duit pisang&quot; (banana money). From 1943 hyper-inflation destroyed the currency&#x27;s value and, at the end of the war, this currency was worthless. Allied attacks on shipping eventually caused trade to cease. Food and medicine fell into short supply, and the population suffered from famine and disease.

The airport runway was constructed by the Japanese during the occupation, and in 1943 Japanese naval units were based in Brunei Bay and Labuan. The naval base was destroyed by Allied bombing, but the airport runway survived. The facility was developed as a public airport. In 1944 the Allies began a bombing campaign against the occupying Japanese, which destroyed much of the town and Kuala Belait, but missed Kampong Ayer.
On 10 June 1945, the Australian 9th Division landed at Muara under Operation Oboe Six to recapture Borneo from the Japanese. They were supported by American air and naval units. Brunei town was bombed extensively and recaptured after three days of heavy fighting. Many buildings were destroyed, including the Mosque. The Japanese forces in Brunei, Borneo, and Sarawak, under Lieutenant-General Masao Baba, formally surrendered at Labuan on 10 September 1945. The British Military Administration took over from the Japanese and remained until July 1946.

=== Post-World War II ===
After World War II, a new government was formed in Brunei under the British Military Administration (BMA). It consisted mainly of Australian officers and servicemen. The administration of Brunei was passed to the Civil Administration on 6 July 1945. The Brunei State Council was also revived that year. The BMA was tasked to revive the Bruneian economy, which was extensively damaged by the Japanese during their occupation. They also had to put out the fires on the wells of Seria, which had been set by the Japanese prior to their defeat.

Before 1941, the Governor of the Straits Settlements, based in Singapore, was responsible for the duties of British High Commissioner for Brunei, Sarawak, and North Borneo (now Sabah). The first British High Commissioner for Brunei was the Governor of Sarawak, Sir Charles Ardon Clarke. The Barisan Pemuda (&quot;Youth Front&quot;; abbreviated as BARIP) was the first political party to be formed in Brunei, on 12 April 1946. The party intended to &quot;preserve the sovereignty of the Sultan and the country, and to defend the rights of the Malays&quot;. BARIP also contributed to the composition of the country&#x27;s national anthem. The party was dissolved in 1948 due to inactivity.

In 1959, a new constitution was written declaring Brunei a self-governing state, while its foreign affairs, security, and defence remained the responsibility of the United Kingdom. A small rebellion erupted against the monarchy in 1962, which was suppressed with help of the UK. Known as the Brunei Revolt, the rebellion contributed to the Sultan&#x27;s decision to opt out of joining the emerging state now called Malaysia under the umbrella of North Borneo Federation. 

Brunei gained its independence from the United Kingdom on 1 January 1984. The official National Day, which celebrates the country&#x27;s independence, is held by tradition on 23 February.

=== Writing of the Constitution ===

In July 1953, Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III formed a seven-member committee named &quot;Tujuh Serangkai&quot;, to determine the citizens&#x27; views regarding a written constitution for Brunei. In May 1954, the Sultan, Resident and High Commissioner met to discuss the findings of the committee. They agreed to authorise the drafting of a constitution. In March 1959, Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III led a delegation to London to discuss the proposed Constitution. The British delegation was led by Sir Alan Lennox-Boyd, Secretary of State for the Colonies. The British Government later accepted the draft constitution.

On 29 September 1959, the Constitution Agreement was signed in Brunei Town. The agreement was signed by Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III and Sir Robert Scott, the Commissioner-General for Southeast Asia.
It included the following provisions:
* The Sultan was made the Supreme Head of State.
* Brunei was responsible for its internal administration.
* The British Government was responsible for foreign and defence affairs only.
* The post of Resident was abolished and replaced by a British High Commissioner.

Five councils were established:
* The Executive Council
* The Legislative Council of Brunei
* The Privy Council
* The Council of Succession
* The State Religious Council

=== National development plans ===
A series of National Development Plans was initiated by the 28th Sultan of Brunei, Omar Ali Saifuddien III.

The first was introduced in 1953. A total sum of B$100 million was approved by the Brunei State Council for the plan. E.R. Bevington, from the Colonial Office in Fiji, was appointed to implement it. A US$14 million Gas Plant was built under the plan. In 1954, survey and exploration work were undertaken by the Brunei Shell Petroleum on both offshore and onshore fields. By 1956, production reached 114,700 bpd.
The plan also aided the development of public education. By 1958, expenditure on education totalled at $4 million. Communications were improved, as new roads were built and reconstruction at Berakas Airport was completed in 1954.

The second National Development Plan was launched in 1962. A major oil and gas field was discovered in 1963. Developments in the oil and gas sector have continued, and oil production has steadily increased since then. The plan also promoted the production of meat and eggs for consumption by citizens. The fishing industry increased its output by 25% throughout the course of the plan. The deepwater port at Muara was also constructed during this period. Power requirements were met, and studies were made to provide electricity to rural areas. Efforts were made to eradicate malaria, an endemic disease in the region, with the help of the World Health Organization. Malaria cases were reduced from 300 cases in 1953 to only 66 cases in 1959. The death rate was reduced from 20 per thousand in 1947 to 11.3 per thousand in 1953. Infectious disease has been prevented by public sanitation and improvement of drainage, and the provision of piped pure water to the population.

=== Independence ===
On 14 November 1971, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah left for London to discuss matters regarding the amendments to the 1959 constitution. A new agreement was signed on 23 November 1971 with the British representative being Anthony Royle.

Under this agreement, the following terms were agreed upon:
* Brunei was granted full internal self-government
* The UK would still be responsible for external affairs and defence.
* Brunei and the UK agreed to share the responsibility for security and defence.

This agreement also caused Gurkha units to be deployed in Brunei, where they remain up to this day.
On 7 January 1979, another treaty was signed between Brunei and the United Kingdom. It was signed with Lord Goronwy-Roberts being the representative of the UK. This agreement granted Brunei to take over international responsibilities as an independent nation. Britain agreed to assist Brunei in diplomatic matters. In May 1983, it was announced by the UK that the date of independence of Brunei would be 1 January 1984.

On 31 December 1983, a mass gathering was held on main mosques on all four of the districts of the country and at midnight, on 1 January 1984, the Proclamation of Independence was read by Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah. The sultan subsequently assumed the title &quot;His Majesty&quot;, rather than the previous &quot;His Royal Highness&quot;. Brunei was admitted to the United Nations on 22 September 1984, becoming the organisation&#x27;s 159th member.

=== 21st century ===
In October 2013, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah announced his intention to impose Penal Code from Sharia on the country&#x27;s Muslims, which make up roughly two thirds of the country&#x27;s population. This would be implemented in three phases, culminating in 2016, and making Brunei the first and only country in East Asia to introduce Sharia into its penal code, excluding the subnational Indonesian special territory of Aceh. The move attracted international criticism, the United Nations expressing &quot;deep concern&quot;.

== Geography ==
Brunei is a southeast Asian country consisting of two unconnected parts with a total area of on the island of Borneo. It has of coastline next to the South China Sea, and it shares a border with Malaysia. It has of territorial waters, and a exclusive economic zone.

About 97% of the population lives in the larger western part (Belait, Tutong, and Brunei-Muara), while only about 10,000 people live in the mountainous eastern part (Temburong District). The total population of Brunei is approximately 408,000 , of which around 150,000 live in the capital Bandar Seri Begawan. Other major towns are the port town of Muara, the oil-producing town of Seria and its neighbouring town, Kuala Belait. In Belait District, the Panaga area is home to large numbers of Europeans expatriates, due to Royal Dutch Shell and British Army housing, and several recreational facilities are located there.

Most of Brunei is within the Borneo lowland rain forests ecoregion, which covers most of the island. Areas of mountain rain forests are located inland. In Brunei forest cover is around 72% of the total land area, equivalent to 380,000 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 413,000 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 374,740 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 5,260 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 69% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 5% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.

The climate of Brunei is tropical equatorial that is a tropical rainforest climate more subject to the Intertropical Convergence Zone than the trade winds and with no or rare cyclones. Brunei is exposed to the risks stemming from climate change along with other ASEAN member states.

== Politics and government ==
Brunei&#x27;s political system is governed by the constitution and the national tradition of the Malay Islamic Monarchy (&quot;Melayu Islam Beraja&quot;; MIB). The three components of MIB cover Malay culture, Islamic religion, and the political framework under the monarchy. It has a legal system based on English common law, although Islamic law (&quot;sharia&quot;) supersedes this in some cases. Brunei has a parliament but there are no elections; the last election was held in 1962.

Under Brunei&#x27;s 1959 constitution, the Sultan, currently Hassanal Bolkiah, is the head of state with full executive authority. Following the Brunei Revolt of 1962, this authority has included emergency powers, which are renewed every two years, meaning that Brunei has technically been under martial law since then. Hassanal Bolkiah also serves as the state&#x27;s prime minister, finance minister and defence minister.

=== Foreign relations ===

Until 1979, Brunei&#x27;s foreign relations were managed by the UK government. After that, they were handled by the Brunei Diplomatic Service. After independence in 1984, this Service was upgraded to ministerial level and is now known as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Officially, Brunei&#x27;s foreign policy is as follows:
* Mutual respect of others&#x27; territorial sovereignty, integrity and independence;
* The maintenance of friendly relations among nations;
* Non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries; and
* The maintenance and the promotion of peace, security and stability in the region.

With its traditional ties with the United Kingdom, Brunei became the 49th member of the Commonwealth immediately on the day of its independence on 1 January 1984. As one of its first initiatives toward improved regional relations, Brunei joined ASEAN on 7 January 1984, becoming the sixth member. To achieve recognition of its sovereignty and independence, it joined the United Nations as a full member on 21 September of that same year.

As an Islamic country, Brunei became a full member of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation) in January 1984 at the Fourth Islamic Summit held in Morocco.

After its accession to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC) in 1989, Brunei hosted the APEC Economic Leaders&#x27; Meeting in November 2000 and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) in July 2002. Brunei became a founding member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) on 1 January 1995, and is a major player in BIMP-EAGA, which was formed during the Inaugural Ministers&#x27; Meeting in Davao, Philippines, on 24 March 1994.

Brunei shares a close relationship with Singapore and the Philippines. In April 2009, Brunei and the Philippines signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that seeks to strengthen the bilateral cooperation of the two countries in the fields of agriculture and farm-related trade and investments.

Brunei is one of many nations to lay claim to some of the disputed Spratly Islands. The status of Limbang as part of Sarawak has been disputed by Brunei since the area was first annexed in 1890. The issue was reportedly settled in 2009, with Brunei agreeing to accept the border in exchange for Malaysia giving up claims to oil fields in Bruneian waters. The Brunei government denies this and says that their claim on Limbang was never dropped.

Brunei was the chair for ASEAN in 2013. It also hosted the ASEAN summit on that same year.

=== Military ===

Brunei maintains three infantry battalions stationed around the country. The Brunei navy has several &quot;Ijtihad&quot;-class patrol boats purchased from a German manufacturer. The United Kingdom also maintains a base in Seria, the centre of the oil industry in Brunei. A Gurkha battalion of 1,500 personnel is stationed there. United Kingdom military personnel are stationed there under a defence agreement signed between the two countries.

A Bell 212 operated by the air force crashed in Kuala Belait on 20 July 2012 with the loss of 12 of the 14 crew on board. The cause of the accident has yet to be ascertained. The crash is the worst aviation incident in the history of Brunei.

The Army is currently acquiring new equipment, including UAVs and S-70i Black Hawks.

Brunei&#x27;s Legislative Council proposed an increase of the defence budget for the 2016–17 fiscal year of about five per cent to 564 million Brunei dollars ($408 million). This amounts to about ten per cent of the state&#x27;s total national yearly expenditure and represents around 2.5 per cent of GDP.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Brunei is divided into four districts (), namely Brunei-Muara, Belait, Tutong and Temburong. Brunei-Muara District is the smallest yet the most populous and home to the country&#x27;s capital, Bandar Seri Begawan. Belait is the birthplace and centre of the country&#x27;s oil and gas industry. Temburong is an exclave and is separated from the rest of the country by the Brunei Bay and Malaysian state of Sarawak. Tutong is home to Tasek Merimbun, the country&#x27;s largest natural lake.

Each district is divided into several mukims. Altogether, there are 39 mukims in Brunei. Each mukim encompasses several villages ( or ).

Bandar Seri Begawan and towns in the country (except Muara and Bangar) are administered as Municipal Board areas (). Each municipal area may constitute villages or mukims, partially or as a whole. Bandar Seri Begawan and a few of the towns also function as the capitals of the districts where they are located.

A district and its constituent mukims and villages are administered by a District Office (). Meanwhile, municipal areas are governed by Municipal Departments (). Both District Offices and Municipal Departments are government departments under the Ministry of Home Affairs.

== Legal system ==
Brunei has numerous courts in its judicial branch. The highest court, though subject in civil cases to the appellate jurisdiction of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, is the Supreme Court, which consists of the Court of Appeal and High Court. Both of these have a chief justice and two judges.

=== Women and children ===
A 2010 U.S. Department of State report stated that discrimination against women is a problem in Brunei. The law prohibits sexual harassment and stipulates that whoever assaults or uses criminal force, intending thereby to outrage or knowing it is likely to outrage the modesty of a person, shall be punished with imprisonment for as much as five years and caning. The law stipulates imprisonment of up to 30 years, and caning with not fewer than 12 strokes for rape. The law does not criminalise spousal rape; it explicitly states that sexual intercourse by a man with his wife, as long as she is not under 13 years of age, is not rape. Protections against sexual assault by a spouse are provided under the amended Islamic Family Law Order 2010 and Married Women Act Order 2010. The penalty for breaching a protection order is a fine not exceeding BN$2,000 or imprisonment not exceeding six months. By law, sexual intercourse with a female under 14 years of age constitutes rape and is punishable by imprisonment for not less than eight years and not more than 30 years and not less than 12 strokes of the cane. The intent of the law is to protect girls from exploitation through prostitution and &quot;other immoral purposes&quot;, including pornography.

Bruneian citizenship is derived through parents&#x27; nationality rather than &quot;jus soli&quot;. Parents with stateless status are required to apply for a special pass for a child born in the country. Failure to register a child may make it difficult to enroll the child in school.

=== LGBT rights ===

Male and female homosexuality is illegal in Brunei. Sexual relations between men are punishable by death or whipping; sex between women is punishable by caning or imprisonment.

In May 2019, the Brunei government extended its existing moratorium on the death penalty to the Sharia criminal code as well that made homosexual acts punishable with death by stoning.

In 2019, Brunei announced that it would no longer be implementing the second phase of its controversial sharia penal code. The code, which was first introduced in 2014, included a range of punishments for crimes such as theft, drug offences, and same-sex relationships, including amputation and death by stoning.

The decision to halt the implementation of the second phase of the code came after significant international backlash and pressure from countries and human rights organizations, who criticized the harsh punishments as inhumane and a violation of human rights.

The government of Brunei stated that the decision was made in order to maintain peace and stability in the country, and to avoid any negative impact on the economy and reputation of the country. The Sultan of Brunei, Hassanal Bolkiah, also issued a statement saying that the country would continue to &quot;strengthen and improve&quot; its legal system in line with international norms and best practices.

It is worth mentioning that the first phase of the sharia penal code, which includes fines and imprisonment for offenses such as failure to attend Friday prayers and consuming alcohol, remains in place.

=== Religious rights ===
In The Laws of Brunei, the right of non-Muslims to practice their faith is guaranteed by the 1959 Constitution. However, celebrations and prayers must be confined to places of worship and private residences. Upon adopting Sharia Penal Code, the Ministry of Religious Affairs banned Christmas decorations in public places, but did not forbid celebration of Christmas in places of worship and private premises.
On 25 December 2015, 4,000 out of 18,000 estimated local Catholics attended the mass of Christmas Day and Christmas Eve. In 2015, the then-head of the Catholic Church in Brunei told &quot;The Brunei Times&quot;, &quot;To be quite honest there has been no change for us this year; no new restrictions have been laid down, although we fully respect and adhere to the existing regulations that our celebrations and worship be [confined] to the compounds of the church and private residences&quot;.

Brunei&#x27;s revised penal code came into force in phases, commencing on 22 April 2014 with offences punishable by fines or imprisonment. The complete code, due for final implementation later, stipulated the death penalty for numerous offenses (both violent and non-violent), such as insult or defamation of Muhammad, insulting any verses of the Quran and Hadith, blasphemy, declaring oneself a prophet or non-Muslim, robbery, rape, adultery, sodomy, extramarital sexual relations for Muslims, and murder. Stoning to death was the specified &quot;method of execution for crimes of a sexual nature&quot;. Rupert Colville, spokesperson for the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) declared that, &quot;Application of the death penalty for such a broad range of offences contravenes international law.&quot;

=== Animal rights ===
Brunei is the first country in Asia to have banned shark finning nationwide.

Brunei has retained most of its forests, compared to its neighbours that share Borneo island. There is a public campaign calling to protect pangolins which are considered a threatened treasure in Brunei.

== Economy ==
Brunei has the second-highest Human Development Index among the Southeast Asian nations, after Singapore. Crude oil and natural gas production account for about 90% of its GDP. About of oil are produced every day, making Brunei the fourth-largest producer of oil in Southeast Asia. It also produces approximately of liquified natural gas per day, making Brunei the ninth-largest gas exporter in the world. &quot;Forbes&quot; also ranks Brunei as the fifth-richest nation out of 182, based on its petroleum and natural gas fields. Brunei was ranked 88th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

Substantial income from overseas investment supplements income from domestic production. Most of these investments are made by the Brunei Investment Agency, an arm of the Ministry of Finance. The government provides for all medical services, and subsidises rice and housing.

The national air carrier, Royal Brunei Airlines, is trying to develop Brunei as a hub for international travel between Europe and Australia/New Zealand. Central to this strategy is the position that the airline maintains at London Heathrow Airport. It holds a daily slot at the highly capacity-controlled airport, which it serves from Bandar Seri Begawan via Dubai. The airline also has services to major Asian destinations including Hong Kong, Bangkok, Singapore and Manila.

Brunei depends heavily on imports such as agricultural products (e.g. rice, food products, livestock, etc.), vehicles and electrical products from other countries. Brunei imports 60% of its food; of that amount, around 75% come from other ASEAN countries.

Brunei&#x27;s leaders are concerned that increasing integration in the world economy will undermine internal social cohesion and have therefore pursued an isolationist policy. However, it has become a more prominent player by serving as chairman for the 2000 Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum. Brunei&#x27;s leaders plan to upgrade the labour force, reduce unemployment, which was at 6.9% in 2014; strengthen the banking and tourism sectors, and, in general, broaden the economic base. A long-term development plan aims to diversify growth.

The government of Brunei has also promoted food self-sufficiency, especially in rice. Brunei renamed its Brunei Darussalam Rice 1 as Laila Rice during the launch of the &quot;Padi Planting Towards Achieving Self-Sufficiency of Rice Production in Brunei Darussalam&quot; ceremony at the Wasan padi fields in April 2009. In August 2009, the Royal Family reaped the first few Laila padi stalks, after years of attempts to boost local rice production, a goal first articulated about half a century ago. In July 2009 Brunei launched its national halal branding scheme, Brunei Halal, with a goal to export to foreign markets.

In 2020, Brunei&#x27;s electricity production was largely based on fossil fuels; renewable energy accounted for less than 1% of produced electricity in the country.

== Infrastructure ==

As of 2019, the country&#x27;s road network constituted a total length of , out of which were paved. The highway from Muara Town to Kuala Belait is a dual carriageway.

Brunei is accessible by air, sea, and land transport. Brunei International Airport is the main entry point to the country. Royal Brunei Airlines is the national carrier. There is another airfield, the Anduki Airfield, located in Seria. The ferry terminal at Muara services regular connections to Labuan (Malaysia). Speedboats provide passenger and goods transportation to the Temburong district. The main highway running across Brunei is the Tutong-Muara Highway. The country&#x27;s road network is well developed. Brunei has one main sea port located at Muara.

The airport in Brunei is currently being extensively upgraded. Changi Airport International is the consultant working on this modernisation, which planned cost is currently $150 million. This project is slated to add of new floorspace and includes a new terminal and arrival hall. With the completion of this project, the annual passenger capacity of the airport is expected to double from 1.5 to 3 million.

With one private car for every 2.09 persons, Brunei has one of the highest car ownership rates in the world. This has been attributed to the absence of a comprehensive transport system, low import tax, and low unleaded petrol price of B$0.53 per litre.

A new roadway connecting the Muara and Temburong districts of opened to traffic on March 17, 2020. Fourteen kilometres (9 mi) of this roadway would be crossing the Brunei Bay. The bridge cost is $1.6 billion.

=== Banking ===
Bank of China received permission to open a branch in Brunei in April 2016. Citibank, which entered in 1972, closed its operations in Brunei in 2014. HSBC, which had entered in 1947, closed its operation in Brunei in November 2017. Maybank of Malaysia, RHB Bank of Malaysia, Standard Chartered Bank of United Kingdom, United Overseas Bank of Singapore and Bank of China are currently operating in Brunei.

== Demographics ==

Ethnicities indigenous to Brunei include the Belait, Brunei Bisaya (not to be confused with the Bisaya/Visaya of the nearby Philippines), indigenous Bruneian Malay, Dusun, Kedayan, Lun Bawang, Murut and Tutong.

The population of Brunei in was , of which 76% live in urban areas. The rate of urbanisation is estimated at 2.13% per year from 2010 to 2015. The average life expectancy is 77.7 years. In 2014, 65.7% of the population were Malay, 10.3% are Chinese, 3.4% are indigenous, with 20.6% smaller groups making up the rest. There is a relatively large expatriate community.
Most expats come from non-Muslim countries such as Australia, United Kingdom, South Korea, Japan, The Philippines, Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam and India.

=== Religion ===

Islam is the official religion of Brunei, specifically that of the Sunni denomination and the Shafi&#x27;i school of Islamic jurisprudence. More than 82% of the population, including the majority of Bruneian Malays and Kedayans identify as Muslim. Other faiths practised are Christianity (6.7%) and Buddhism (6.3%, mainly by the Chinese). Freethinkers, mostly Chinese, form about 2% of the population. Although most of them practise some form of religion with elements of Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism, they prefer to present themselves as having practised no religion officially, hence labelled as atheists in official censuses. Followers of indigenous religions are about 2% of the population.

=== Languages ===

The official language of Brunei is Standard Malay, for which both the Latin alphabet (Rumi) and the Arabic alphabet (Jawi) are used. Initially, Malay was written in the Jawi script before it switched to the Latin alphabet around 1941.

The principal spoken language is &quot;Melayu Brunei&quot; (Brunei Malay). Brunei Malay is rather divergent from standard Malay and the rest of the Malay dialects, being about 84% cognate with standard Malay, and is mostly mutually intelligible with it.

English is widely used as a business and official language and it is spoken by a majority of the population in Brunei. English is used in business as a working language and as the language of instruction from primary to tertiary education.

Chinese languages are also widely spoken, and the Chinese minority in Brunei speaks a number of varieties of Chinese.

Arabic is the religious language of Muslims and is taught in schools, particularly religious schools, and also in institutes of higher learning. As of 2004, there are six Arabic schools and one religious teachers&#x27; college in Brunei. A majority of Brunei&#x27;s Muslim population has had some form of formal or informal education in the reading, writing and pronunciation of the Arabic language as part of their religious education.

Other languages and dialects spoken include Kedayan Malay dialect, Tutong Malay dialect, Murut, and Dusun.

== Culture ==
The culture of Brunei is predominantly Malay (reflecting its ethnicity), with heavy influences from Islam, but is seen as much more conservative than Indonesia and Malaysia. Influences to Bruneian culture come from the Malay cultures of the Malay Archipelago. Four periods of cultural influence have occurred: animist, Hindu, Islamic, and Western. Islam had a very strong influence, and was adopted as Brunei&#x27;s ideology and philosophy.

As a Sharia country, the sale and public consumption of alcohol is banned. Non-Muslims are allowed to bring in a limited amount of alcohol from their point of embarkation overseas for their own private consumption.

=== Media ===

Media in Brunei are said to be pro-government; press criticism of the government and monarchy is rare. The country ranks &quot;Not Free&quot; in media by Freedom House. Nonetheless, the press is not overtly hostile toward alternative viewpoints and is not restricted to publishing only articles regarding the government. The government allowed a printing and publishing company, Brunei Press PLC, to form in 1953. The company continues to print the English daily &quot;Borneo Bulletin&quot;. This paper began as a weekly community paper and became a daily in 1990 Apart from The &quot;Borneo Bulletin&quot;, there is also the &quot;Media Permata&quot; and Pelita Brunei, the local Malay newspapers which are circulated daily. &quot;The Brunei Times&quot; is another English independent newspaper published in Brunei since 2006.

The Brunei government, through state broadcaster Radio Television Brunei (RTB), owns and operates three television channels with the introduction of digital TV using DVB-T (RTB Perdana, RTB Aneka and RTB Sukmaindera) and five radio stations (National FM, Pilihan FM, Nur Islam FM, Harmony FM and Pelangi FM). A private company has made cable television available (Astro-Kristal) as well as one private radio station, Kristal FM.
It also has an online campus radio station, &quot;UBD FM&quot;, that streams from its first university, Universiti Brunei Darussalam.

===Sport===
The most popular sport in Brunei is association football. The Brunei national football team joined FIFA in 1969, but has not had much success. Brunei&#x27;s top football league is the Brunei Super League, which is managed by the Football Association of Brunei Darussalam (FABD). The nation has its own martial arts called &quot;Silat Suffian Bela Diri&quot;.

Brunei debuted at the Olympics in 1996 and has competed at all subsequent Summer Olympics except the 2008 edition. The country has competed in badminton, shooting, swimming, and track-and-field, but has yet to win any medals. The Brunei Darussalam National Olympic Council is the National Olympic Committee for Brunei.

Brunei has had slightly more success at the Asian Games, winning four bronze medals. The first major international sporting event to be hosted in Brunei was the 1999 Southeast Asian Games. According to the all-time Southeast Asian Games medal table, Bruneian athletes have won a total of 14 gold, 55 silver and 163 bronze medals at the games. 

== See also ==

* List of Brunei-related topics
* Outline of Brunei

== Notes ==
== References ==
Sources
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
Government
* Prime Minister&#x27;s Office of Brunei Darussalam website
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members 

General information
* Brunei. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Brunei profile from the BBC News
* Brunei at &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;
* Key Development Forecasts for Brunei from International Futures

Travel
* Brunei Tourism website (archived 9 May 2007)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="0" end="6" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="19" end="36" title="Brunei" label="Brunei Darussalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="43" end="50" title="country" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="54" end="68" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="118" end="124" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="158" end="173" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="229" end="236" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955993" start="295" end="302" title="Limbang District" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="439" end="447" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="452" end="461" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="551" end="558" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9279" start="579" end="598" title="Bandar Seri Begawan" label="Bandar Seri Begawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="625" end="630" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="635" end="640" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="648" end="662" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q835409" start="688" end="727" title="Religion in Brunei" label="other religions are nominally tolerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q105638570" start="733" end="753" title="government of Brunei" label="government of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="760" end="777" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="791" end="797" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="829" end="847" title="English common law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="878" end="883" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="895" end="901" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="911" end="926" title="Bruneian Empire" label="Bruneian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31800" start="966" end="973" title="Bolkiah" label="Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="1045" end="1051" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="1086" end="1091" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061195" start="1108" end="1124" title="Sulu archipelago" label="Sulu archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q60524519" start="1483" end="1502" title="Timeline of Magellan&amp;#x27;s circumnavigation" label="Magellan Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q31880" start="1555" end="1568" title="Castilian War" label="Castilian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="1663" end="1670" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="1675" end="1687" title="James Brooke" label="James Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189867" start="1713" end="1724" title="White Rajahs" label="White Rajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585255" start="1760" end="1790" title="North Borneo Chartered Company" label="North Borneo Chartered Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="1817" end="1837" title="British protectorate" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q572927" start="1857" end="1873" title="Resident (title)" label="British resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1940" end="1952" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299246" start="2011" end="2026" title="Brunei revolt" label="armed rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="2084" end="2116" title="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation" label="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721260" start="2193" end="2219" title="Brunei People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Brunei People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="2295" end="2315" title="Malaysian Federation" label="Malaysian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741681" start="2335" end="2341" title="Malaysia Agreement" label="formed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="2440" end="2455" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327" start="2488" end="2504" title="Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Hassanal Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="2540" end="2562" title="unicameral legislature" label="unicameral legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396996" start="2568" end="2587" title="Legislative Council of Brunei" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2885" end="2904" title="Politics of Brunei#Regime stability" label="Political stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812682" start="2926" end="2942" title="House of Bolkiah" label="House of Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="2958" end="2971" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="3112" end="3135" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="3167" end="3182" title="Southeast Asian" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="3196" end="3205" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q206319" start="3259" end="3296" title="Brunei dollar" label="Currency Interchangeability Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="3315" end="3342" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="3360" end="3449" title="list of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="ranked ninth in the world by gross domestic product per capita at purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3477" end="3491" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="3497" end="3521" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="3527" end="3543" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="3549" end="3584" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3590" end="3610" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3616" end="3639" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="3645" end="3650" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658398" start="3758" end="3778" title="Muhammad Shah of Brunei" label="Sultan Muhammad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q263285" start="3833" end="3842" title="Temburong" label="Temburong"/>
<link wikidata="Q407792" start="3859" end="3871" title="Brunei River" label="Brunei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="4160" end="4175" title="Bruneian Empire" label="Bruneian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4349" end="4357" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="4432" end="4438" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="4595" end="4600" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q838685" start="4769" end="4822" title="United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names" label="United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q375804" start="4991" end="5011" title="Ludovico di Varthema" label="Ludovico di Varthema"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="5346" end="5355" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="5589" end="5607" title="kingdom of Funan" label="Funan Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q698817" start="6095" end="6105" title="Zhao Rukuo" label="Zhao Rukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="6619" end="6626" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="6631" end="6636" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401303" start="6675" end="6681" title="Rajahnate of Butuan" label="Butuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q422065" start="6683" end="6687" title="Sultanate of Sulu" label="Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401176" start="6689" end="6693" title="Ma-i" label="Ma-i"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401247" start="6717" end="6723" title="Maynila (historical polity)" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q110413502" start="6726" end="6736" title="Sanmalan" label="Shahuchong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629" start="6752" end="6761" title="Zamboanga City" label="Zamboanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q275199" start="6774" end="6778" title="Oton" label="Oton"/>
<link wikidata="Q248572" start="6799" end="6807" title="Sultanate of Maguindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="6891" end="6895" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q49335" start="6917" end="6932" title="Nagarakretagama" label="Nagarakretagama"/>
<link wikidata="Q49338" start="6951" end="6959" title="Mpu Prapanca" label="Prapanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="7032" end="7041" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="7071" end="7078" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q892596" start="7085" end="7090" title="catty" label="katis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="7094" end="7101" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="7571" end="7579" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774915" start="7889" end="7898" title="Hashemite" label="Hashemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q29089" start="7946" end="7956" title="Sharif Ali" label="Sharif Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="8125" end="8144" title="Bruneian Empire" label="Sultanate of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794655" start="8367" end="8372" title="Kutai" label="Kutai"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="8787" end="8794" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642472" start="8994" end="9005" title="Kingdom of Tondo" label="Hindu Tondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401247" start="9010" end="9023" title="Kingdom of Maynila" label="Muslim Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833470" start="9080" end="9090" title="Rajah Matanda" label="Rajah Ache"/>
<link wikidata="Q310922" start="9282" end="9299" title="Antonio Pigafetta" label="Antonio Pigafetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="9538" end="9556" title="Colonialism" label="European influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="9599" end="9613" title="regional power" label="regional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="9771" end="9788" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669333" start="9848" end="9852" title="Ottoman expedition to Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="9855" end="9867" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="9932" end="9942" title="mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q165425" start="10179" end="10196" title="Battle of Lepanto" label="Battle of Lepanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q31880" start="10205" end="10217" title="Castille War" label="declared war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365632" start="10258" end="10267" title="Kota Batu, Brunei-Muara" label="Kota Batu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10361" end="10369" title="Pengiran#Brunei" label="noblemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="10443" end="10449" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="10572" end="10596" title="Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="Viceroyalty of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="10677" end="10686" title="tributary state" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887021" start="10925" end="10934" title="Bendahara" label="Bendahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284479" start="11046" end="11054" title="Francisco de Sande" label="De Sande"/>
<link wikidata="Q56923" start="11066" end="11081" title="Capitán-General" label="Capitán-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="11182" end="11190" title="Filipino people" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="11278" end="11286" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061195" start="11291" end="11295" title="Sulu Archipelago" label="Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="11383" end="11391" title="Mestizos" label="Mestizos"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="11393" end="11402" title="Mulattoes" label="Mulattoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="11420" end="11426" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="11428" end="11434" title="Mayans" label="Mayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="11439" end="11445" title="Incans" label="Incans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669333" start="11771" end="11775" title="Ottoman expedition to Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="11817" end="11822" title="Turkic people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="11824" end="11833" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q721854" start="11835" end="11843" title="Swahili people" label="Swahilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="11845" end="11852" title="Somalis" label="Somalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258074" start="11854" end="11861" title="Sindhis" label="Sindhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282294" start="11863" end="11872" title="Gujaratis" label="Gujaratis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740768" start="11877" end="11885" title="Malabars" label="Malabars"/>
<link wikidata="Q126385" start="12280" end="12288" title="Jerudong" label="Jerudong"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="12401" end="12408" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="12412" end="12421" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262011" start="12900" end="12907" title="Tagalog people" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050497" start="12944" end="12962" title="Agustin de Legaspi" label="Agustin de Legaspi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163454" start="13028" end="13056" title="Conspiracy of the Maharlikas" label="Conspiracy of the Maharlikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60158" start="13316" end="13332" title="Guerrero, Mexico" label="Guerrero, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080980" start="13381" end="13422" title="Isidoro Montes de Oca" label="Mexican war of independence against Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q123253612" start="13634" end="13649" title="Bendahara Sakam" label="Bendahara Sakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="13765" end="13774" title="folk-hero" label="folk-hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263276" start="13903" end="13912" title="Brunei Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="14170" end="14185" title="Bruneian Empire" label="Bruneian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="14238" end="14250" title="James Brooke" label="James Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658411" start="14323" end="14337" title="Raj of Sarawak" label="Raj of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189867" start="14493" end="14505" title="White Rajahs" label="White Rajahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40101" start="14515" end="14544" title="Hashim Jalilul Alam Aqamaddin" label="Hashim Jalilul Alam Aqamaddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100084" start="14669" end="14681" title="Sir Hugh Low" label="Sir Hugh Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14864" end="14871" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="14939" end="14962" title="British protected state" label="British protected state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600922" start="15044" end="15062" title="Limbang Division" label="Pandaruan District"/>
<link wikidata="Q27786470" start="15380" end="15413" title="Malcolm Stewart Hannibal McArthur" label="Malcolm Stewart Hannibal McArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q132674651" start="15526" end="15550" title="Report On Brunei" label="Report On Brunei in 1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400154" start="15598" end="15630" title="Federated Malay States" label="Malayan British Residency system"/>
<link wikidata="Q572927" start="15671" end="15687" title="British resident" label="British resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159472" start="16112" end="16117" title="Seria" label="Seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="16154" end="16166" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131008721" start="16624" end="16646" title="Brunei Shell Petroleum" label="Brunei Shell Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="16940" end="16962" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379498" start="17023" end="17043" title="Kawaguchi Detachment" label="Kawaguchi Detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072051" start="17049" end="17061" title="Cam Ranh Bay" label="Cam Ranh Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q588045" start="17065" end="17077" title="Kuala Belait" label="Kuala Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551027" start="17209" end="17229" title="15th Punjab Regiment" label="15th Punjab Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="17239" end="17246" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q40111" start="17321" end="17342" title="Ahmad Tajuddin" label="Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072283" start="17547" end="17575" title="chief administrative officer" label="chief administrative officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147549" start="17795" end="17812" title="Batu Lintang camp" label="Batu Lintang camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="18115" end="18122" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="18323" end="18335" title="North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424881" start="18362" end="18367" title="Miri Division" label="Baram"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="18369" end="18375" title="Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503576" start="18377" end="18382" title="Lawas" label="Lawas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="18388" end="18395" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q20466819" start="18549" end="18564" title="Haji Mohd Yusuf" label="Haji Mohd Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="18663" end="18690" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159472" start="18900" end="18905" title="Seria" label="Seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="19054" end="19077" title="Japanese invasion of Malaya" label="Japanese invaded Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q986803" start="19114" end="19118" title="Miri, Malaysia" label="Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982479" start="19223" end="19228" title="Muara, Brunei" label="Muara"/>
<link wikidata="Q650834" start="19470" end="19508" title="Banana money" label="&amp;quot;duit pisang&amp;quot; (banana money)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148514" start="19790" end="19797" title="Brunei International Airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182027" start="19907" end="19917" title="Brunei Bay" label="Brunei Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990199" start="20197" end="20209" title="Kampong Ayer" label="Kampong Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021969" start="20232" end="20255" title="Australian 9th Division" label="Australian 9th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934591" start="20278" end="20296" title="Battle of North Borneo" label="Operation Oboe Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20797" end="20809" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953961" start="20859" end="20890" title="British Military Administration (Borneo)" label="British Military Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658411" start="21479" end="21486" title="Kingdom of Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="21492" end="21504" title="North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="21510" end="21515" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q123695" start="21528" end="21553" title="British High Commissioner" label="British High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q126946576" start="21624" end="21638" title="Barisan Pemuda" label="Barisan Pemuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="21875" end="21881" title="Ethnic Malays" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="22211" end="22220" title="rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299246" start="22314" end="22327" title="Brunei Revolt" label="Brunei Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10801529" start="22468" end="22491" title="North Borneo Federation" label="North Borneo Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40512" start="22742" end="22765" title="Omar Ali Saifuddien III" label="Omar Ali Saifuddien III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707145" start="23224" end="23240" title="Alan Lennox-Boyd" label="Alan Lennox-Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9279" start="23405" end="23416" title="Bandar Seri Begawan" label="Brunei Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396996" start="23909" end="23942" title="Legislative Council of Brunei" label="The Legislative Council of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q40512" start="24140" end="24163" title="Omar Ali Saifuddien III" label="Omar Ali Saifuddien III"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="24328" end="24332" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q178506" start="24573" end="24576" title="barrels per day" label="bpd"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814244" start="24769" end="24784" title="Old Airport, Brunei" label="Berakas Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593487" start="25199" end="25213" title="List of Panamax ports" label="deepwater port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982479" start="25217" end="25222" title="Muara, Brunei" label="Muara"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="25385" end="25392" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="25449" end="25474" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327" start="25833" end="25849" title="Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Hassanal Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773385" start="26021" end="26034" title="Anthony Royle, Baron Fanshawe of Richmond" label="Anthony Royle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925738" start="26327" end="26339" title="British Military Garrison Brunei" label="Gurkha units"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="26468" end="26482" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q669458" start="27082" end="27093" title="Majesty" label="His Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252328" start="27132" end="27150" title="His Royal Highness" label="His Royal Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q160016" start="27169" end="27199" title="Member states of the United Nations" label="admitted to the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19705" start="27366" end="27376" title="Penal Code" label="Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="27382" end="27388" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823" start="27708" end="27712" title="Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="27981" end="27996" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089012" start="28014" end="28034" title="Brunei–Malaysia border" label="border with Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="28072" end="28095" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40395" start="28160" end="28166" title="Belait District" label="Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q40398" start="28168" end="28174" title="Tutong District" label="Tutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q153009" start="28180" end="28192" title="Brunei and Muara" label="Brunei-Muara"/>
<link wikidata="Q263285" start="28264" end="28282" title="Temburong District" label="Temburong District"/>
<link wikidata="Q9279" start="28387" end="28406" title="Bandar Seri Begawan" label="Bandar Seri Begawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982479" start="28447" end="28452" title="Muara, Brunei" label="Muara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159472" start="28480" end="28485" title="Seria" label="Seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q588045" start="28513" end="28525" title="Kuala Belait" label="Kuala Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129799" start="28551" end="28557" title="Panaga" label="Panaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="28621" end="28638" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Royal Dutch Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913503" start="28750" end="28777" title="Borneo lowland rain forests" label="Borneo lowland rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913201" start="28831" end="28852" title="Borneo montane rain forests" label="mountain rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="28883" end="28895" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="29207" end="29221" title="primary forest" label="primary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="29447" end="29463" title="State ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288189" start="29470" end="29487" title="climate of Brunei" label="climate of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="29491" end="29499" title="tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="29521" end="29548" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="29569" end="29599" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="29609" end="29619" title="trade wind" label="trade wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="29641" end="29648" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="29728" end="29733" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q204742" start="29907" end="29926" title="Melayu Islam Beraja" label="Melayu Islam Beraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="30086" end="30104" title="English common law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="30134" end="30140" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396996" start="30186" end="30202" title="Legislative Council of Brunei" label="has a parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299246" start="30261" end="30265" title="Brunei Revolt" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327" start="30329" end="30345" title="Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Hassanal Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="30354" end="30367" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299246" start="30413" end="30426" title="Brunei Revolt" label="Brunei Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="30464" end="30480" title="State of emergency" label="emergency powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="30564" end="30575" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711797" start="30653" end="30669" title="finance minister" label="finance minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="30674" end="30690" title="defence minister" label="defence minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="31429" end="31441" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="31586" end="31591" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="31712" end="31726" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="31886" end="31921" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="31976" end="31983" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="32013" end="32046" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="32228" end="32252" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835688" start="32303" end="32312" title="BIMP-EAGA" label="BIMP-EAGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="32379" end="32384" title="Davao City" label="Davao"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="32386" end="32397" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="32458" end="32467" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="32540" end="32567" title="Memorandum of Understanding" label="Memorandum of Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q215664" start="32783" end="32798" title="Spratly Islands" label="Spratly Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="32814" end="32821" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="33187" end="33192" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130695" start="33349" end="33360" title="Royal Brunei Navy" label="Brunei navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159472" start="33494" end="33499" title="Seria" label="Seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q207962" start="33545" end="33551" title="Gurkha" label="Gurkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q698242" start="33718" end="33726" title="Bell 212" label="Bell 212"/>
<link wikidata="Q588045" start="33764" end="33776" title="Kuala Belait" label="Kuala Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="34016" end="34019" title="UAV" label="UAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150702" start="34025" end="34042" title="Sikorsky S-70" label="S-70i Black Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q50427" start="34414" end="34423" title="districts of Brunei" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q153009" start="34435" end="34447" title="Brunei-Muara District" label="Brunei-Muara"/>
<link wikidata="Q40395" start="34449" end="34455" title="Belait District" label="Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q40398" start="34457" end="34463" title="Tutong District" label="Tutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q263285" start="34468" end="34477" title="Temburong District" label="Temburong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="34696" end="34703" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182027" start="34757" end="34767" title="Brunei Bay" label="Brunei Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="34772" end="34780" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50464" start="34782" end="34787" title="states of Malaysia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="34791" end="34798" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687127" start="34818" end="34832" title="Tasek Merimbun" label="Tasek Merimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q60047" start="34914" end="34920" title="mukims of Brunei" label="mukims"/>
<link wikidata="Q48731335" start="34996" end="35004" title="villages of Brunei" label="villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982479" start="35067" end="35072" title="Pekan Muara" label="Muara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125479" start="35077" end="35083" title="Bangar, Brunei" label="Bangar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041553" start="35105" end="35126" title="municipalities of Brunei" label="Municipal Board areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q50824964" start="35573" end="35597" title="Ministry of Home Affairs (Brunei)" label="Ministry of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="35756" end="35795" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192695" start="36308" end="36314" title="caning" label="caning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198705" start="36448" end="36460" title="Marital rape" label="spousal rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181726" start="37209" end="37229" title="Bruneian nationality law" label="Bruneian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q604971" start="37293" end="37301" title="jus soli" label="jus soli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="37532" end="37545" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q116934" start="37549" end="37566" title="LGBT rights in Brunei" label="illegal in Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q47012985" start="39184" end="39201" title="Constitution of Brunei" label="1959 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="39373" end="39382" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133956" start="39639" end="39643" title="Cornelius Sim" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720424" start="39688" end="39704" title="The Brunei Times" label="The Brunei Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="40205" end="40218" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="40305" end="40313" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="40361" end="40370" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="40639" end="40690" title="Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights" label="Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q116823" start="40899" end="40912" title="shark finning" label="shark finning"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="41005" end="41011" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191516" start="41066" end="41074" title="pangolin" label="pangolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="41175" end="41198" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="41209" end="41224" title="Southeast Asian" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="41240" end="41249" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="41251" end="41260" title="petroleum" label="Crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="41461" end="41482" title="liquified natural gas" label="liquified natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="41557" end="41563" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="41705" end="41728" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="42028" end="42039" title="flag carrier" label="air carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050783" start="42041" end="42062" title="Royal Brunei Airlines" label="Royal Brunei Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="42239" end="42262" title="London Heathrow Airport" label="London Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q13030962" start="42568" end="42581" title="convenience food" label="food products"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="42614" end="42633" title="consumer electronics" label="electrical products"/>
<link wikidata="Q553270" start="42858" end="42873" title="social cohesion" label="social cohesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="43008" end="43041" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="43098" end="43104" title="labour (economics)" label="labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="43384" end="43388" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="43845" end="43850" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="44207" end="44212" title="paved road" label="paved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982479" start="44231" end="44241" title="Muara Town" label="Muara Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q588045" start="44245" end="44257" title="Kuala Belait" label="Kuala Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="44263" end="44279" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148514" start="44336" end="44364" title="Brunei International Airport" label="Brunei International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050783" start="44405" end="44426" title="Royal Brunei Airlines" label="Royal Brunei Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270751" start="44483" end="44498" title="Anduki Airfield" label="Anduki Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159472" start="44511" end="44516" title="Seria" label="Seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="44578" end="44584" title="Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629159" start="45522" end="45556" title="Temburong Bridge" label="connecting the Muara and Temburong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182027" start="45672" end="45682" title="Brunei Bay" label="Brunei Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q790068" start="45734" end="45747" title="Bank of China" label="Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="45810" end="45818" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q190464" start="45884" end="45888" title="HSBC" label="HSBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364018" start="45966" end="45985" title="Maybank" label="Maybank of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207443" start="45987" end="46007" title="RHB Bank" label="RHB Bank of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q548278" start="46009" end="46050" title="Standard Chartered" label="Standard Chartered Bank of United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064074" start="46052" end="46085" title="United Overseas Bank" label="United Overseas Bank of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894202" start="46205" end="46211" title="Belait people" label="Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q866036" start="46213" end="46226" title="Bisaya (Borneo)" label="Brunei Bisaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978967" start="46309" end="46323" title="Bruneian Malay people" label="Bruneian Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267760" start="46325" end="46330" title="Dusun people" label="Dusun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262236" start="46332" end="46339" title="Kedayan" label="Kedayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60510" start="46341" end="46351" title="Lun Bawang" label="Lun Bawang"/>
<link wikidata="Q476393" start="46353" end="46358" title="Murut people" label="Murut"/>
<link wikidata="Q107618498" start="46363" end="46369" title="Tutong people" label="Tutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978967" start="46596" end="46601" title="Bruneian Malay people" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903558" start="46613" end="46620" title="Ethnic Chinese in Brunei" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="46717" end="46727" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="46765" end="46771" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084118" start="46912" end="46917" title="Islam in Brunei" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="46979" end="46984" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="47006" end="47018" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;i" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978967" start="47111" end="47126" title="Bruneian Malay people" label="Bruneian Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262236" start="47131" end="47138" title="Kedayan" label="Kedayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="47152" end="47158" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078445" start="47187" end="47199" title="Christianity in Brunei" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204360" start="47211" end="47219" title="Buddhism in Brunei" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="47251" end="47263" title="Freethought" label="Freethinkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="47394" end="47406" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="47412" end="47418" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="47516" end="47524" title="atheism" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536483" start="47646" end="47664" title="languages of Brunei" label="language of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q15065" start="47668" end="47682" title="Standard Malay" label="Standard Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="47703" end="47717" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673515" start="47719" end="47723" title="Rumi script" label="Rumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="47733" end="47748" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83942" start="47750" end="47754" title="Jawi alphabet" label="Jawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83942" start="47802" end="47813" title="Jawi script" label="Jawi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182878" start="47929" end="47941" title="Brunei Malay" label="Brunei Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="48124" end="48131" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q629071" start="48276" end="48292" title="working language" label="working language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903558" start="48415" end="48431" title="Ethnic Chinese in Brunei" label="Chinese minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="48461" end="48481" title="varieties of Chinese" label="varieties of Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="48484" end="48490" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182878" start="48966" end="48979" title="Kedayan Malay" label="Kedayan Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507990" start="48989" end="49009" title="Tutong language" label="Tutong Malay dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217491" start="49011" end="49016" title="Murutic languages" label="Murut"/>
<link wikidata="Q85970302" start="49022" end="49027" title="Dusun language" label="Dusun"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="49083" end="49088" title="Malay people" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="49144" end="49149" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="49194" end="49203" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="49208" end="49216" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="49285" end="49302" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="49363" end="49368" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="49491" end="49497" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="49871" end="49884" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946070" start="50186" end="50201" title="Borneo Bulletin" label="Borneo Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155035" start="50238" end="50253" title="community paper" label="community paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805520" start="50349" end="50362" title="Media Permata" label="Media Permata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720424" start="50449" end="50465" title="The Brunei Times" label="The Brunei Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126325" start="50595" end="50618" title="Radio Television Brunei" label="Radio Television Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863814" start="51025" end="51031" title="UBD FM" label="UBD FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q569243" start="51079" end="51107" title="Universiti Brunei Darussalam" label="Universiti Brunei Darussalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="51158" end="51178" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q239555" start="51184" end="51213" title="Brunei national football team" label="Brunei national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="51221" end="51225" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978928" start="51306" end="51325" title="Brunei Super League" label="Brunei Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q622172" start="51351" end="51392" title="Football Association of Brunei Darussalam" label="Football Association of Brunei Darussalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q741811" start="51497" end="51512" title="Brunei at the Olympics" label="at the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="51556" end="51571" title="Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q859321" start="51712" end="51754" title="Brunei Darussalam National Olympic Council" label="Brunei Darussalam National Olympic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q183288" start="51762" end="51788" title="National Olympic Committee" label="National Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847712" start="51839" end="51857" title="Brunei at the Asian Games" label="at the Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192491" start="51963" end="51989" title="1999 Southeast Asian Games" label="1999 Southeast Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q877484" start="52008" end="52050" title="all-time Southeast Asian Games medal table" label="all-time Southeast Asian Games medal table"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240961" start="52165" end="52194" title="List of Brunei-related topics" label="List of Brunei-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112211" start="52197" end="52214" title="Outline of Brunei" label="Outline of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="52441" end="52459" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="52467" end="52494" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="52522" end="52530" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="52549" end="52572" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="52623" end="52644" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3469" wikidata="Q25305" url="?curid=3469" title="British Virgin Islands">
<text>The British Virgin Islands (BVI), officially the Virgin Islands, are a British Overseas Territory in the Caribbean, to the east of Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands and north-west of Anguilla. The islands are geographically part of the Virgin Islands archipelago and are located in the Leeward Islands of the Lesser Antilles and part of the West Indies.

The British Virgin Islands consist of the main islands of Tortola, Virgin Gorda, Anegada and Jost Van Dyke, along with more than 50 other smaller islands and cays. About 16 of the islands are inhabited. The capital, Road Town, is on Tortola, the largest island, which is about long and wide. The islands had a population of 28,054 at the 2010 Census, of whom 23,491 lived on Tortola; current estimates put the population at 35,802 (July 2018).

The economy of the territory is overwhelmingly dominated by tourism and financial services. In terms of financial services, the territory is known as a leading hub for tax evasion and concealment of assets.

British Virgin Islanders are British Overseas Territories citizens and, since 2002, also British citizens.

==Etymology==
The islands were named &quot;Santa Úrsula y las Once Mil Vírgenes&quot; by Christopher Columbus in 1493 after the legend of Saint Ursula and the 11,000 virgins. The name was later shortened to &quot;the Virgin Islands&quot;.

The official name of the territory is still simply the &quot;Virgin Islands&quot;, but the prefix &quot;British&quot; is often used. This is commonly believed to distinguish it from the neighbouring American territory which changed its name from the &quot;Danish West Indies&quot; to &quot;Virgin Islands of the United States&quot; in 1917. However, local historians have disputed this, pointing to a variety of publications and public records dating from between 21 February 1857 and 12 September 1919 where the territory is referred to as the &quot;British&quot; Virgin Islands. British Virgin Islands government publications continue to begin with the name &quot;The territory of the Virgin Islands&quot;, and the territory&#x27;s passports simply refer to the &quot;Virgin Islands&quot;, and all laws begin with the words &quot;Virgin Islands&quot;. Moreover, the territory&#x27;s Constitutional Commission has expressed the view that &quot;every effort should be made&quot; to encourage the use of the name &quot;Virgin Islands&quot;. But various public and quasi-public bodies continue to use the name &quot;British Virgin Islands&quot; or &quot;BVI&quot;, including BVI Finance, BVI Electricity Corporation, BVI Tourist Board, BVI Athletic Association, BVI Bar Association and others.

In 1968 the British Government issued a memorandum requiring that the postage stamps in the territory should say &quot;British Virgin Islands&quot; (whereas previously they had simply stated &quot;Virgin Islands&quot;), a practice which is still followed today. This was likely to prevent confusion following on from the adoption of US currency in the territory in 1959, and the references to US currency on the stamps of the territory.

==History==
It is generally thought that the Virgin Islands were first settled by the Arawak from South America around 100 BC to AD 200, though there is some evidence of Amerindian presence on the islands as far back as 1500 BC. The Arawaks inhabited the islands until the 15th century when they were displaced by the Kalinago (Island Caribs), a tribe from the Lesser Antilles islands.

The first European sighting of the Virgin Islands was by the Spanish expedition of Christopher Columbus in 1493 on his second voyage to the Americas, who gave the islands their modern name.

The Spanish Empire claimed the islands by discovery in the early 16th century, but never settled them, and subsequent years saw the English, Dutch, French, Spanish, and Danish all jostling for control of the region, which became a notorious haunt for pirates. There is no record of any native Amerindian population in the British Virgin Islands during this period; it is thought that they either fled to safer islands or were killed.

The Dutch established a permanent settlement on the island of Tortola by 1648, frequently clashing with the Spanish who were based on nearby Puerto Rico. In 1672, the English captured Tortola from the Dutch, and the English annexation of Anegada and Virgin Gorda followed in 1680. Meanwhile, over the period 1672–1733, the Danish gained control of the nearby islands of Saint Thomas, Saint John and Saint Croix (i.e. the modern US Virgin Islands).
The British islands were considered principally a strategic possession. The British introduced sugar cane which was to become the main crop and source of foreign trade, and large numbers of slaves were forcibly brought from Africa to work on the sugar cane plantations. The islands prospered economically until the middle of the nineteenth century, when a combination of the abolition of slavery in the British Empire in 1834, a series of disastrous hurricanes, and the growth in the sugar beet crop in Europe and the United States significantly reduced sugar cane production and led to a period of economic decline.

In 1917, the United States purchased the Danish Virgin Islands for US$25 million, renaming them the United States Virgin Islands. Economic linkages with the US islands prompted the British Virgin Islands to adopt the US dollar as its currency in 1959.

The British Virgin Islands were administered variously as part of the British Leeward Islands or with St. Kitts and Nevis, with an administrator representing the British Government on the islands. The islands gained separate colony status in 1960 and became autonomous in 1967 under the new post of Chief Minister. Since the 1960s, the islands have diversified away from their traditionally agriculture-based economy towards tourism and financial services, becoming one of the wealthiest areas in the Caribbean. The constitution of the islands was amended in 1977, 2004 and 2007, giving them greater local autonomy.

In 2017 Hurricane Irma struck the islands, causing four deaths and immense damage.

==Geography==

The British Virgin Islands comprise around 60 tropical Caribbean islands, ranging in size from the largest, Tortola, being long and wide, to tiny uninhabited islets, altogether about in extent. They are located in the Virgin Islands archipelago, a few miles east of the US Virgin Islands, and about from the Puerto Rican mainland. About east south-east lies Anguilla. The North Atlantic Ocean lies to the east of the islands, and the Caribbean Sea lies to the west. Most of the islands are volcanic in origin and have a hilly, rugged terrain. The highest point is Mount Sage on Tortola at 521m. Anegada is geologically distinct from the rest of the group, being a flat island composed of limestone and coral. The British Virgin Islands contain the Leeward Islands moist forests and Leeward Islands xeric scrub terrestrial ecoregions. In the British Virgin Islands forest cover is around 24% of the total land area, equivalent to 3,620 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 3,710 hectares (ha) in 1990.

==Climate==

The British Virgin Islands have a tropical rainforest climate, moderated by trade winds. Temperatures vary little throughout the year. In the capital, Road Town, typical daily maxima are around in the summer and in the winter. Typical daily minima are around in the summer and in the winter. Rainfall averages about per year, higher in the hills and lower on the coast. Rainfall can be quite variable, but the wettest months on average are September to November and the driest months on average are February and March.
===Hurricanes===
Hurricanes occasionally hit the islands, with the Atlantic hurricane season running from June to November.

====Hurricane Irma====
On 6 September 2017, Hurricane Irma struck the islands, causing extensive damage, especially on Tortola, and killing four people. The Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency declared a state of emergency. Visiting Tortola on 13 September 2017, UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson said that he was reminded of photos of Hiroshima after it had been hit by the atom bomb.

By 8 September, the UK government sent troops with medical supplies and other aid. More troops were expected to arrive a day or two later, but
, carrying more extensive assistance, was not expected to reach the islands for another two weeks.

Entrepreneur Richard Branson, a resident of Necker Island, called on the UK government to develop a massive disaster recovery plan to include &quot;both through short-term aid and long-term infrastructure spending&quot;. Premier Orlando Smith also called for a comprehensive aid package to rebuild the territory. On 10 September UK Prime Minister Theresa May pledged £32 million to the Caribbean for a hurricane relief fund and promised that the UK government would match donations from the public to the British Red Cross appeal. Specifics were not provided to the news media as to the amount that would be allocated to the Virgin Islands. Boris Johnson&#x27;s visit to Tortola on 13 September 2017 during his Caribbean tour was intended to confirm the UK&#x27;s commitment to helping restore British islands but he provided no additional comments on the aid package. He did confirm that HMS &quot;Ocean&quot; had departed for the BVI carrying items like timber, buckets, bottled water, food, baby milk, bedding and clothing, as well as ten pickup trucks, building materials and hardware.

The UK offered to underwrite rebuilding loans up to US$400m as long as there was accountability as to how the monies were spent. Successive NDP and VIP governments declined, despite there having been created a Recovery &amp; Development Authority led by highly-skilled infrastructure personnel, many of whom were ex-military with decades of infrastructure rebuilding expertise from war zones and natural disaster sites. Many wealthy residents also proposed a large rebuilding plan, starting with key infrastructure, such as the high school. Nearly five years later, there was no sign of any such rebuilding of the high school or certain other key infrastructure.

==Politics==
The territory operates as a parliamentary democracy. Ultimate executive authority in the British Virgin Islands is vested in the King, and is exercised on his behalf by the Governor of the British Virgin Islands. The governor is appointed by the King on the advice of the British Government. Defence and most foreign affairs remain the responsibility of the United Kingdom.

The most recent constitution was adopted in 2007 (the Virgin Islands Constitution Order, 2007) and came into force when the Legislative Council was dissolved for the 2007 general election. The head of government under the constitution is the Premier (before the new constitution the office was referred to as Chief Minister), who is elected in a general election along with the other members of the ruling government as well as the members of the opposition. Elections are held roughly every four years. A cabinet is nominated by the Premier and appointed and chaired by the Governor. The Legislature consists of the King (represented by the Governor) and a unicameral House of Assembly made up of 13 elected members plus the Speaker and the Attorney General.
The current Governor is Daniel Pruce (since 29 January 2024). The current Premier is Natalio Wheatley (since 5 May 2022), who is leader of the Virgin Islands Party.

On 8 June 2022, subordinate UK legislation was made allowing for direct rule for the islands. However, the British Government decided on that date not to implement direct rule.

===Subdivisions===

The British Virgin Islands is a unitary territory. The territory is divided into nine electoral districts, and each voter is registered in one of those districts. Eight of the nine districts are partly or wholly on Tortola, and encompass nearby neighbouring islands. Only the ninth district (Virgin Gorda and Anegada) does not include any part of Tortola. At elections, in addition to voting their local representative, voters also cast votes for four candidates who are elected upon an at-large territory-wide basis.

===Law and criminal justice===
Crime in the British Virgin Islands is comparatively low by Caribbean standards. While statistics and hard data are relatively rare, and are not regularly published by governmental sources in the British Virgin Islands, the then-Premier did announce that in 2013 there was a 14% decline in recorded crime compared to 2012. Homicides are rare, with just one incident recorded in 2013.

The Virgin Islands Prison Service operates a single facility, His Majesty&#x27;s Prison in East End, Tortola.

The British and US Virgin Islands sit at the axis of a major drugs transshipment point between Latin America and the continental United States. The American Drug Enforcement Administration regards the adjacent US territories of Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands as a &quot;High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area&quot;.

===Military===

As a British Overseas territory, defence of the islands is the responsibility of the United Kingdom.

==Economy==

The twin pillars of the economy are financial services (60%) and tourism (roughly 40–45% of GDP).

Economically however, financial services associated with the territory&#x27;s status as an offshore financial centre are by far the more important. 51.8% of the Government&#x27;s revenue comes directly from licence fees for offshore companies, and considerable further sums are raised directly or indirectly from payroll taxes relating to salaries paid within the trust industry sector (which tend to be higher on average than those paid in the tourism sector). According to Transparency International, the British Virgin Islands is one of the top incorporation hubs for anonymous companies used to conceal assets and stolen funds.

The official currency of the British Virgin Islands has been the United States dollar (US$) since 1959, the currency also used by the United States Virgin Islands.

The British Virgin Islands enjoys one of the more prosperous economies of the Caribbean region, with a per capita average income of around $47,000 (2022 est.)

Although it is common to hear criticism in the British Virgin Islands&#x27; press about income inequality, no serious attempt has been made by economists to calculate a Gini coefficient or similar measure of income equality for the territory. A report from 2000 suggested that, despite the popular perception, income inequality was actually lower in the British Virgin Islands than in any other OECS state, although in global terms income equality is higher in the Caribbean than in many other regions.

===Tourism===
Tourism accounts for approximately 45% of national income. The islands are a popular destination for US citizens. Tourists frequent the numerous white sand beaches, visit The Baths on Virgin Gorda, snorkel the coral reefs near Anegada, or experience the well-known bars of Jost Van Dyke. The BVI are known as one of the world&#x27;s greatest sailing destinations, and charter sailboats are a very popular way to visit less accessible islands. Established in 1972, the BVI hosts the BVI Spring Regatta and Sailing Festival. A substantial number of the tourists who visit the BVI are cruise ship passengers, and although they produce far lower revenue per head than charter boat tourists and hotel based tourists, they are nonetheless important to the substantial – and politically important – taxi driving community.

===Financial services===
Financial services account for over half of the income of the territory. The majority of this revenue is generated by the licensing of offshore companies and related services. The British Virgin Islands is a significant global player in the offshore financial services industry. Since 2001, financial services in the British Virgin Islands have been regulated by the independent Financial Services Commission.

The BVI is relied upon for its sophisticated Commercial Court division of the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court, as well as the more recent BVI Arbitration Centre. Caribbean KCs and British KCs preside over the majority of important cases and the laws of the Virgin Islands are based on English laws, meaning the jurisdiction provides clarity and consistency should parties require commercial disputes to be resolved. Owing to the international nature of BVI companies&#x27; operations and asset holdings, the BVI Commercial Court routinely hears highly sophisticated matters at the cutting edge of cross-border litigation and enforcement, where billions of dollars are at issue.

Citco, also known as the Citco Group of Companies and the Curaçao International Trust Co., is a privately owned global hedge fund administrator headquartered in the British Virgin Islands, founded in 1948. It is the world&#x27;s largest hedge fund administrator, managing over $1 trillion in assets under administration.

In May 2022, the banking sector of the British Virgin Islands comprised only seven commercial banks and one restricted bank, 12 authorised custodians, two licensed money services businesses and one licensed financing service provider.

The British Virgin Islands is frequently referred to as a &quot;tax haven&quot; by campaigners and NGOs, including Oxfam. Successive governments in the British Virgin Islands have implemented tax exchange agreements and verified beneficial ownership information of companies following the 2013 G8 summit putting their governance and regulatory regimes far ahead of many &quot;onshore&quot; jurisdictions.

On 10 September 2013, British Prime Minister David Cameron said &quot;I do not think it is fair any longer to refer to any of the Overseas Territories or Crown Dependencies as tax havens. They have taken action to make sure that they have fair and open tax systems. It is very important that our focus should now shift to those territories and countries that really are tax havens.&quot; Yet journalist and author for The Economist, Nicholas Shaxson, writes in his 2016 &quot;Treasure Islands, tax havens and the men who stole the world&quot;: &quot;...Britain sits, spider-like, at the centre of a vast international web of tax havens, which hoover up trillions of dollars&#x27; worth of business and capital from around the globe and funnel it up to the City of London. The British Crown Dependencies and Overseas Territories – ...the British Virgin Islands... are some of the biggest players in the offshore world.&quot;(pp. vii-viii) Shaxson points out that despite BVI having fewer than 25000 inhabitants, hosts over 800,000 companies.

In the April 2016 Panama Papers leak, while all of the wrongdoing by Mossack Fonseca personnel occurred in Panama and the US, the British Virgin Islands was by far the most commonly-used jurisdiction by clients of Mossack Fonseca.

In 2022, the verified nature of beneficial ownership registers of the British Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies were a crucial tool in giving effect to sanctions against Russia and Belarus, enabling the efficient identification and seizure of yachts, real estate and businesses.

====Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act====
On 30 June 2014, The British Virgin Islands was deemed to have an Inter- Governmental Agreement (IGA) with the United States of America with respect to the &quot;Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act&quot; of the United States of America.

The Model 1 Agreement (14 Pages) recognizes that: &quot;The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland provided a copy of the Letter of Entrustment which was sent to the Government of the British Virgin Islands, to the Government of the United States of America &quot;via diplomatic note of 28 May 2014&quot;.&quot;

The Letter of Entrustment dated 14 July 2010 was originally provided to the Government of the British Virgin Islands and authorised the Government of the BVI &quot;to negotiate and conclude Agreements relating to taxation that provide for exchange of information on tax matters to the OECD standard&quot; (Paragraph 2 of the FATCA Agreement). Via an &quot;Entrustment Letter&quot; dated 24 March 2014, The Government of the United Kingdom, authorised the Government of the BVI to sign an agreement on information exchange to facilitate the Implementation of the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act. On 27 March 2017, the US Treasury site disclosed that the Model 1 agreement and related agreement were &quot;In Force&quot; on 13 July 2015.

====Sanctions and Anti-Money Laundering Act====
Under the UK Sanctions and Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2018, beneficial ownership of companies in British overseas territories such as the British Virgin Islands must be publicly registered for disclosure by 31 December 2020. The Government of the British Virgin Islands has not yet formally challenged this law, yet has criticised it, noting that it violates the Constitutional sovereignty granted to the islands, and would in practice be relatively ineffective in anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing, while raising serious privacy and human rights issues. Further, this would put the British Virgin Islands in a position where it would be at a severe disadvantage because other International Finance Centres do not have this in place, and in the case of the US and the UK, there is very little near-term prospect of the same.

In late 2022, both of the US and EU appeared to have endorsed the British Overseas Territories&#x27; beneficial ownership register regimes. In a judgment dated 22 November 2022, the European Court of Justice (ECJ) has at last decided that open public access to the beneficial owner registers of EU member state companies is no longer valid, as it is in contravention of articles 7 and 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the Charter). The US appears to have come to a similar conclusion regarding balancing confidentiality and legitimate privacy with the Anti-Money Laundering advantages of having verified beneficial ownerships registers. The resultant goal appears to be to bring the US in line with the current Cayman and BVI regimes. The UK&#x27;s Crown Dependencies have already stated that they will not implement public registers without beforehand having received fresh legal advice on the matter and it is thought that the Overseas Territories would logically take a similar position. The UK is yet to come out in support of the BOTs and CDs and their current gold standard regulatory positions.

===Agriculture and industry===
Agriculture and industry account for only a small proportion of the islands&#x27; GDP. Agricultural produce includes fruit, vegetables, sugar cane, livestock and poultry, and industries include rum distillation, construction and boat building. Commercial fishing is also practised in the islands&#x27; waters.

===Workforce===
The British Virgin Islands is heavily dependent on migrant workers, and over 50% of all workers on the islands are of a foreign descent. Only 37% of the entire population were born in the territory. The national labour-force is estimated at 12,770, of whom approximately 59.4% work in the service sector but less than 0.6% are estimated to work in agriculture (the balance working in industry). The British Virgin Islands has met challenges in recruiting sufficient numbers in recent years, having been affected by hurricanes Irma and Maria, and having continued to lag behind other jurisdictions in providing a reliable permanent residence regime. This has had a knock-on effect in limiting schooling and amenities when compared to IFCs like Cayman, UAE, Singapore, and Hong Kong.

====CARICOM status and the CARICOM Single Market Economy====
As of 2 July 1991, the British Virgin Islands holds Associate Member status in CARICOM, the Caribbean Single Market and Economy (CSME).

In recognition of the CARICOM (Free Movement) Skilled Persons Act which came into effect in July 1997 in some of the CARICOM countries such as Jamaica and which has been adopted in other CARICOM countries, such as Trinidad and Tobago, it is possible that CARICOM nationals who hold the &quot;A Certificate of Recognition of Caribbean Community Skilled Person&quot; may be allowed to work in the BVI under normal working conditions.

==Transport==
There are of roads. The main airport, Terrance B. Lettsome International Airport, also known as Beef Island Airport, is located on Beef Island, which lies off the eastern tip of Tortola and is accessible by the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge. Cape Air, and Air Sunshine are among the airlines offering scheduled service. Virgin Gorda and Anegada have their own smaller airports. Private air charter services operated by Island Birds Air Charter fly directly to all three islands from any major airport in the Caribbean. Helicopters are used to get to islands with no runway facilities; Antilles Helicopter Services is the only helicopter service based in the country.

The main harbour is in Road Town. There are also ferries that operate within the British Virgin Islands and to the neighbouring United States Virgin Islands. Cars in the British Virgin Islands drive on the left just as they do in the United Kingdom and the United States Virgin Islands. However, most cars are left hand drive, because they are from the United States. The roads are often quite steep, narrow and winding, and ruts, mudslides and rockfall can be a problem when it rains.

==Demographics==

As of the 2010 Census, the population of the territory was 28,054. Estimates put the population at 35,800 (July 2018) yet in 2022, it is thought to be much less than 30,000 post-Irma and with people having left during COVID lockdowns due to unemployment in the tourism industry. The majority of the population (76.9%) are , descended from slaves brought to the islands by the British. Other large ethnic groups include Latinos (5.6%), those of European ancestry (5.4%), Mixed ancestry (5.4%) and Indian (2.1%).

The 2010 Census reports:
*76.9% African
*5.6% Hispanic
*5.4% European/Caucasian
*5.4% Mixed
*2.1% East Indian
*4.6% Others*
The 2010 Census reports the main places of origin of residents as follows:
*39.1% local born (though many locals go to St. Thomas or the United States for maternity services)
*7.2% Guyana
*7.0% St. Vincent and the Grenadines
*6.0% Jamaica
*5.5% United States
*5.4% Dominican Republic
*5.3% United States Virgin Islands

The islands are heavily dependent upon migrant labour. In 2004, migrant workers accounted for 50% of the total population. 32% of workers employed in the British Virgin Islands work for the government. In the late 2000s the first Overseas Filipino Worker came to the British Virgin Islands, by 2020 total British Filipino population was about 800.

Unusually, the territory has one of the highest drowning mortality rates in the world, being higher than other high-risk countries such as China and India. 20% of deaths in the British Virgin Islands during 2012 were recorded as drownings, all of them being tourists. Despite this, the territory&#x27;s most popular beach still has no lifeguard presence.

===Religion===

Over 90% of the population who indicated a religious affiliation at the 2010 Census were Christian with the largest individual Christian denominations being Methodist (17.6%), Anglican (9.5%), Church of God (10.4%), Seventh-Day Adventists (9.0%) and Roman Catholic (8.9%). The largest non-Christian faiths in 2010 were Hinduism (1.9%) and Islam (0.9%). However Hindus and Muslims constitute each approximately 1.2% of the population according to Word Religion Database 2005.

The Constitution of the British Virgin Islands commences with a professed national belief in God. 
==Education==

The British Virgin Islands operates several government schools as well as private schools. There is also a community college, H. Lavity Stoutt Community College, that is located on the eastern end of Tortola. This college was named after Lavity Stoutt, the first Chief Minister of the British Virgin Islands. There remains segregation in the school system; while BVIslander and Belonger children make up a significant proportion of pupils in private schools, Non-Belongers are prohibited from attending government schools. It is extremely common for students from the British Virgin Islands to travel overseas for secondary and tertiary education, either to the University of the West Indies, or to colleges and universities in either the United Kingdom, United States or Canada. Coaching in certain sports, such as athletics, squash and football is of a high level.

The literacy rate in the British Virgin Islands is high at 98%.

There is a University of the West Indies Open campus in the territory and a Marine Science educational facility.

==Culture==
===Language===

The primary language is English, although there is a local dialect. Spanish is spoken by Puerto Rican, Dominican and other Hispanic immigrants.

===Music===
The traditional music of the British Virgin Islands is called &quot;fungi&quot; after the local cornmeal dish with the same name, often made with okra. The special sound of fungi is due to a unique local fusion between African and European music. The fungi bands, also called &quot;scratch bands&quot;, use instruments ranging from calabash, washboard, bongos and ukulele, to more traditional western instruments like keyboard, banjo, guitar, bass, triangle and saxophone. Apart from being a form of festive dance music, fungi often contains humorous social commentaries, as well as BVI oral history.

===Sport===

Because of its location and climate, the British Virgin Islands has long been a haven for sailing enthusiasts. Sailing is regarded as one of the foremost sports in all of the BVI. Calm waters and steady breezes provide some of the best sailing conditions in the Caribbean.

Many sailing events are held in the waters of this country, the largest of which is a week-long series of races called the Spring Regatta, the premier sailing event of the Caribbean, with several races hosted each day. Boats include everything from full-size mono-hull yachts to dinghies. Captains and their crews come from all around the world to attend these races. The Spring Regatta is part race, part party, part festival. The Spring Regatta is normally held during the first week of April.

Since 2009, the BVI have made a name for themselves as a host of international basketball events. The BVI hosted three of the last four events of the Caribbean Basketball Championship (&quot;FIBA CBC Championship&quot;).

==See also==

*List of British Virgin Islanders
*Outline of the British Virgin Islands

== References ==
==External links==

; Directories
*British Virgin Islands from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;

; NGO sources


; Official websites and overviews
*Government of the British Virgin Islands official website
*British Virgin Islands – London Office
*Old Government House Museum, British Virgin Islands
*British Virgin Islands Tourist Board
*Home
*National Parks Trust of the British Virgin Islands—Official site
*British Virgin Islands Financial Services Commission—Official site
*The British Virgin Islands Ports Authority—Official site
*British Virgin Islands. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.

; Wikimedia content</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25305" start="4" end="26" title="British Virgin Islands" label="British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305" start="28" end="31" title="British Virgin Islands" label="BVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305" start="49" end="63" title="British Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="71" end="97" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="105" end="114" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="131" end="142" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="151" end="168" title="United States Virgin Islands" label="US Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228" start="187" end="195" title="Anguilla" label="Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="240" end="266" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="290" end="305" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="313" end="328" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="345" end="356" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q827604" start="417" end="424" title="Tortola" label="Tortola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139293" start="426" end="438" title="Virgin Gorda" label="Virgin Gorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q519873" start="440" end="447" title="Anegada" label="Anegada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330151" start="452" end="465" title="Jost Van Dyke" label="Jost Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q503481" start="517" end="520" title="cay" label="cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q179431" start="575" end="584" title="Road Town" label="Road Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970593" start="1041" end="1077" title="British Overseas Territories citizen" label="British Overseas Territories citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="1101" end="1117" title="British nationality law" label="British citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="1209" end="1229" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q369691" start="1258" end="1270" title="Saint Ursula" label="Saint Ursula"/>
<link wikidata="Q829655" start="1616" end="1634" title="Danish West Indies" label="Danish West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="1650" end="1685" title="Virgin Islands of the United States" label="Virgin Islands of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971233" start="2073" end="2103" title="British Virgin Islands passport" label="the territory&amp;#x27;s passports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971199" start="2620" end="2639" title="BVI Bar Association" label="BVI Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="3177" end="3183" title="Arawak" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="3261" end="3271" title="Amerindian" label="Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="3409" end="3417" title="Kalinago" label="Kalinago"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="3452" end="3467" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="3561" end="3581" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="3673" end="3687" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197661" start="3920" end="3927" title="Piracy in the British Virgin Islands" label="pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541260" start="4128" end="4148" title="Dutch Virgin Islands" label="permanent settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q827604" start="4166" end="4173" title="Tortola" label="Tortola"/>
<link wikidata="Q519873" start="4342" end="4349" title="Anegada" label="Anegada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139293" start="4354" end="4366" title="Virgin Gorda" label="Virgin Gorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q463937" start="4474" end="4486" title="Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="Saint Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q849441" start="4488" end="4498" title="Saint John, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q642481" start="4503" end="4514" title="Saint Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="Saint Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="4647" end="4657" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539279" start="4742" end="4748" title="Slavery in the British Virgin Islands" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="4927" end="4947" title="abolition of slavery" label="abolition of slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="5036" end="5046" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q829655" start="5211" end="5232" title="Danish Virgin Islands" label="Danish Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="5270" end="5298" title="United States Virgin Islands" label="United States Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796551" start="5493" end="5516" title="British Leeward Islands" label="British Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="5525" end="5544" title="St. Kitts and Nevis" label="St. Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q38685186" start="6048" end="6062" title="Hurricane Irma" label="Hurricane Irma"/>
<link wikidata="Q54951624" start="6063" end="6081" title="Effects of Hurricane Irma in the British Virgin Islands" label="struck the islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="6297" end="6302" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="6357" end="6383" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="6409" end="6426" title="US Virgin Islands" label="US Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="6447" end="6459" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228" start="6497" end="6505" title="Anguilla" label="Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="6511" end="6531" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="6573" end="6586" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q54976435" start="6703" end="6713" title="Mount Sage" label="Mount Sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q104631326" start="6887" end="6916" title="Leeward Islands moist forests" label="Leeward Islands moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q104634151" start="6921" end="6948" title="Leeward Islands xeric scrub" label="Leeward Islands xeric scrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="7003" end="7015" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="7194" end="7221" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="7236" end="7247" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q179431" start="7311" end="7320" title="Road Town" label="Road Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q756721" start="7746" end="7771" title="Atlantic hurricane season" label="Atlantic hurricane season"/>
<link wikidata="Q38685186" start="7848" end="7862" title="Hurricane Irma" label="Hurricane Irma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039374" start="7961" end="8007" title="Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency" label="Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="8099" end="8112" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="8459" end="8474" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q747129" start="8490" end="8503" title="Necker Island (British Virgin Islands)" label="Necker Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q715046" start="8675" end="8688" title="Orlando Smith" label="Orlando Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="8793" end="8804" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="10242" end="10265" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="10339" end="10347" title="Charles III" label="the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q691615" start="10387" end="10425" title="Governor of the British Virgin Islands" label="Governor of the British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="10486" end="10504" title="British Government" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164247" start="10593" end="10617" title="Constitution of the British Virgin Islands" label="most recent constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914704" start="10713" end="10732" title="Legislative Council of the British Virgin Islands" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971229" start="10755" end="10776" title="British Virgin Islands general election, 2007" label="2007 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q119804" start="10831" end="10838" title="Premier of the British Virgin Islands" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q119804" start="10898" end="10912" title="Chief Minister of the British Virgin Islands" label="Chief Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354887" start="11048" end="11057" title="Elections in the British Virgin Islands" label="Elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825166" start="11095" end="11102" title="Cabinet of the British Virgin Islands" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="11247" end="11257" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914704" start="11258" end="11275" title="House of Assembly of the British Virgin Islands" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812609" start="11315" end="11322" title="List of Speakers of the House of Assembly of the British Virgin Islands" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822025" start="11331" end="11347" title="Attorney General of the British Virgin Islands" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q57628881" start="11373" end="11385" title="Daniel Pruce" label="Daniel Pruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q109887658" start="11434" end="11450" title="Natalio Wheatley" label="Natalio Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933937" start="11492" end="11512" title="Virgin Islands Party" label="Virgin Islands Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="11622" end="11640" title="British Government" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="12916" end="12947" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="13402" end="13427" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="14009" end="14029" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="14078" end="14106" title="United States Virgin Islands" label="United States Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q683667" start="14357" end="14374" title="List of countries by income equality" label="income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="14438" end="14454" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q392770" start="14664" end="14674" title="Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States" label="OECS state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715805" start="14958" end="14983" title="The Baths" label="The Baths on Virgin Gorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471422" start="14985" end="14992" title="Snorkeling" label="snorkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="14997" end="15007" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="15369" end="15380" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518331" start="15764" end="15782" title="offshore company" label="offshore companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="15870" end="15906" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial services industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971202" start="16008" end="16037" title="British Virgin Islands Financial Services Commission" label="Financial Services Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752543" start="16719" end="16724" title="Citco" label="Citco"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="16838" end="16848" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="16849" end="16862" title="Business administration" label="administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="17341" end="17350" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q65250" start="17566" end="17580" title="39th G8 summit" label="2013 G8 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="17728" end="17741" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702848" start="18743" end="18756" title="Panama Papers" label="Panama Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035311" start="18939" end="18954" title="Mossack Fonseca" label="Mossack Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q111022187" start="19119" end="19155" title="International sanctions during the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="sanctions against Russia and Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250504" start="23921" end="23976" title="CARICOM Single Market and Economy" label="CARICOM, the Caribbean Single Market and Economy (CSME)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703252" start="24464" end="24506" title="Terrance B. Lettsome International Airport" label="Terrance B. Lettsome International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270350" start="24637" end="24662" title="Queen Elizabeth II Bridge, British Virgin Islands" label="Queen Elizabeth II Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034273" start="24664" end="24672" title="Cape Air" label="Cape Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033625" start="24678" end="24690" title="Air Sunshine" label="Air Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933920" start="24742" end="24754" title="Virgin Gorda Airport" label="Virgin Gorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901593" start="24759" end="24766" title="Auguste George Airport" label="Anegada"/>
<link wikidata="Q179431" start="25113" end="25122" title="Road Town" label="Road Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="25283" end="25300" title="Right- and left-hand traffic" label="drive on the left"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="25400" end="25415" title="left hand drive" label="left hand drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="26014" end="26021" title="Hispanic" label="Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="26039" end="26047" title="White people" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="26065" end="26070" title="Multiracial" label="Mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050339" start="26139" end="26146" title="Afro-Caribbean" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="26153" end="26161" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="26168" end="26186" title="White people" label="European/Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="26193" end="26198" title="Multiracial" label="Mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025447" start="26205" end="26216" title="Indo-Caribbean" label="East Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628193" start="26781" end="26805" title="Overseas Filipino Worker" label="Overseas Filipino Worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448666" start="26856" end="26872" title="Filipinos in the United Kingdom" label="British Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="27429" end="27438" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="27448" end="27456" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q700743" start="27465" end="27478" title="Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee)" label="Church of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27522" end="27536" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="27633" end="27639" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="27644" end="27650" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164247" start="27752" end="27794" title="Constitution of the British Virgin Islands" label="Constitution of the British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="27841" end="27844" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222431" start="27988" end="28022" title="H. Lavity Stoutt Community College" label="H. Lavity Stoutt Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q518666" start="28100" end="28113" title="Lavity Stoutt" label="Lavity Stoutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884520" start="28240" end="28248" title="Belonger" label="Belonger"/>
<link wikidata="Q746153" start="28524" end="28553" title="University of the West Indies" label="University of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q746153" start="28806" end="28835" title="University of the West Indies" label="University of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933935" start="28990" end="29003" title="Virgin Islands Creole" label="local dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="29026" end="29038" title="Puerto Rican people" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247924" start="29040" end="29049" title="People of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286140" start="29190" end="29198" title="cornmeal" label="cornmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80531" start="29240" end="29244" title="okra" label="okra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277255" start="29426" end="29434" title="calabash" label="calabash"/>
<link wikidata="Q243998" start="29447" end="29453" title="Bongo drum" label="bongos"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="29458" end="29465" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425594" start="30630" end="30663" title="Caribbean Basketball Championship" label="Caribbean Basketball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564847" start="30717" end="30749" title="List of British Virgin Islanders" label="List of British Virgin Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147731" start="30751" end="30788" title="Outline of the British Virgin Islands" label="Outline of the British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="31374" end="31392" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="31400" end="31427" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3470" wikidata="Q965" url="?curid=3470" title="Burkina Faso">
<text>Burkina Faso is a landlocked country in West Africa, bordered by Mali to the northwest, Niger to the northeast, Benin to the southeast, Togo and Ghana to the south, and Ivory Coast to the southwest. It covers an area of 274,223 km2 (105,878 sq mi). In 2024, the country had an estimated population of approximately 23,286,000. Previously called the Republic of Upper Volta (1958–1984), it was renamed Burkina Faso by former president Thomas Sankara. Its citizens are known as &quot;Burkinabè&quot;, and its capital and largest city is Ouagadougou.

The largest ethnic group in Burkina Faso is the Mossi people, who settled the area in the 11th and 13th centuries. They established powerful kingdoms such as the Ouagadougou, Tenkodogo, and Yatenga. In 1896, it was colonized by the French as part of French West Africa; in 1958, Upper Volta became a self-governing colony within the French Community. In 1960, it gained full independence with Maurice Yaméogo as president. Since it gained its independence, the country has been subject to instability, droughts, famines and corruption. There have also been various coups, in 1966, 1980, 1982, 1983, 1987, and twice in 2022 (January and September). There were also unsuccessful coup attempts in 1989, 2015, and 2023.

Thomas Sankara came to power following a successful coup in 1983. As president, Sankara embarked on a series of ambitious socioeconomic reforms which included a nationwide literacy campaign, land redistribution to peasants, vaccinations for over 2 million children, railway and road construction, equalized access to education, and the outlawing of female genital mutilation, forced marriages, and polygamy. He served as the country&#x27;s president until 1987 when he was deposed and assassinated in a coup led by Blaise Compaoré, who became president and ruled the country until his removal on 31 October 2014.

Since the mid-2010s, Burkina Faso has been severely affected by the rise of insurgencies in the Sahel. Several militias, partly allied with the Islamic State (IS) or al-Qaeda, operate in Burkina Faso and across the border in Mali and Niger. More than one million of the country&#x27;s 21 million inhabitants are internally displaced persons. Burkina Faso&#x27;s military seized power in a coup d&#x27;état on 23 and 24 January 2022, overthrowing President Roch Marc Kaboré. On 31 January, the military junta restored the constitution and appointed Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba as interim president, but he was himself overthrown in a second coup on 30 September and replaced by military captain Ibrahim Traoré.

Burkina Faso remains one of the least developed countries in the world, with a GDP of $16.226 billion in 2022. Approximately 63.8% of its population practices Islam, while 26.3% practices Christianity. The country&#x27;s four official languages are Mooré, Bissa, Dyula and Fula, with the first one being spoken by over half the population; the Burkinabè government also officially recognizes 60 indigenous languages. The former government and business language was French until January 2024, whose status was demoted to that of a &quot;working language&quot; alongside English by ratification of a constitutional amendment.

The country&#x27;s territory is geographically biodiverse, and includes plentiful reserves of gold, manganese, copper and limestone. Due to its multicultural make-up, Burkinabè art has a rich and long history, and is globally renowned for its orthodox style. The country is governed as a semi-presidential republic, with executive, legislative and judicial powers. It is a member of the United Nations, La Francophonie and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. On 18 January 2024, Burkina Faso announced its exit from ECOWAS and the African Union.

==Etymology==
Formerly the Republic of Upper Volta, the country was renamed &quot;Burkina Faso&quot; on 4 August 1984 by then-President Thomas Sankara. The words &quot;Burkina&quot; and &quot;Faso&quot; stem from different languages spoken in the country: &quot;Burkina&quot; comes from Mooré and means &quot;upright&quot;, showing how the people are proud of their integrity, while &quot;Faso&quot; comes from the Dyula language (as written in N&#x27;Ko: &quot;faso&quot;) and means &quot;fatherland&quot; (literally, &quot;father&#x27;s house&quot;). The &quot;-bé&quot; suffix added onto &quot;Burkina&quot; to form the demonym &quot;Burkinabé&quot; comes from the Fula language and means &quot;women or men&quot;. The CIA summarizes the etymology as &quot;land of the honest (incorruptible) men&quot;.

The French Colony of Upper Volta was named for its location on the upper courses of the Volta River (the Black, Red and White Volta).

==History==
===Early history===
The northwestern part of present-day Burkina Faso was populated by hunter-gatherers from 14,000 BCE to 5,000 BCE. Their tools, including scrapers, chisels and arrowheads, were discovered in 1973 through archaeological excavations. Agricultural settlements were established between 3600 and 2600 BCE. The Bura culture was an Iron-Age civilization centred in the southwest portion of modern-day Niger and in the southeast part of contemporary Burkina Faso. Iron industry, in smelting and forging for tools and weapons, had developed in Sub-Saharan Africa by 1200 BCE. To date, the oldest evidence of iron smelting found in Burkina Faso dates from 800 to 700 BCE and forms part of the Ancient Ferrous Metallurgy World Heritage Site. From the 3rd to the 13th centuries CE, the Iron Age Bura culture existed in the territory of present-day southeastern Burkina Faso and southwestern Niger. Various ethnic groups of present-day Burkina Faso, such as the Mossi, Fula and Dioula, arrived in successive waves between the 8th and 15th centuries. From the 11th century, the Mossi people established several separate kingdoms.
===8th to 18th centuries===
There is debate about the exact dates when Burkina Faso&#x27;s many ethnic groups arrived to the area. The Proto-Mossi arrived in the far eastern part of what is today Burkina Faso sometime between the 8th and 11th centuries, and accepted Islam as their religion in the 11th century. The Samo arrived around the 15th century. The Dogon lived in Burkina Faso&#x27;s north and northwest regions until sometime in the 15th or 16th centuries, and many of the other ethnic groups that make up the country&#x27;s population arrived in the region during this time.


During the Middle Ages, the Mossi established several separate kingdoms including those of Tenkodogo, Yatenga, Zandoma, and Ouagadougou. Sometime between 1328 and 1338, Mossi warriors raided Timbuktu but the Mossi were defeated by Sonni Ali of Songhai at the Battle of Kobi in Mali in 1483.

During the early 16th century, the Songhai conducted many slave raids into what is today Burkina Faso. During the 18th century, the Gwiriko Empire was established at Bobo Dioulasso and ethnic groups such as the Dyan, Lobi, and Birifor settled along the Black Volta.

===From colony to independence (1890s–1958)===

Starting in the early 1890s during the European Scramble for Africa, a series of European military officers made attempts to claim parts of what is today Burkina Faso. At times these colonialists and their armies fought the local peoples; at times they forged alliances with them and made treaties. The colonialist officers and their home governments also made treaties among themselves. The territory of Burkina Faso was invaded by France, becoming a French protectorate in 1896.

The eastern and western regions, where a standoff against the forces of the powerful ruler Samori Ture complicated the situation, came under French occupation in 1897. By 1898, the majority of the territory corresponding to Burkina Faso was nominally conquered; however, French control of many parts remained uncertain.

The Franco-British Convention of 14 June 1898 created the country&#x27;s modern borders. In the French territory, a war of conquest against local communities and political powers continued for about five years. In 1904, the largely pacified territories of the Volta basin were integrated into the Upper Senegal and Niger colony of French West Africa as part of the reorganization of the French West African colonial empire. The colony had its capital in Bamako.

The language of colonial administration and schooling became French. The public education system started from humble origins. Advanced education was provided for many years during the colonial period in Dakar.

The indigenous population was highly discriminated against. For example, African children were not allowed to ride bicycles or pick fruit from trees, &quot;privileges&quot; reserved for the children of colonists. Violating these regulations could land parents in jail.

Draftees from the territory participated in the European fronts of World War I in the battalions of the Senegalese Rifles. Between 1915 and 1916, the districts in the western part of what is now Burkina Faso and the bordering eastern fringe of Mali became the stage of one of the most important armed oppositions to colonial government: the Volta-Bani War.

The French government finally suppressed the movement but only after suffering defeats. It also had to organize its largest expeditionary force of its colonial history to send into the country to suppress the insurrection. Armed opposition wracked the Sahelian north when the Tuareg and allied groups of the Dori region ended their truce with the government.

French Upper Volta was established on 1 March 1919. The French feared a recurrence of armed uprising and had related economic considerations. To bolster its administration, the colonial government separated the present territory of Burkina Faso from Upper Senegal and Niger.

The new colony was named &quot;Haute Volta&quot; for its location on the upper courses of the Volta River (the Black, Red and White Volta), and François Charles Alexis Édouard Hesling became its first governor. Hesling initiated an ambitious road-making program to improve infrastructure and promoted the growth of cotton for export. The cotton policy – based on coercion – failed, and revenue generated by the colony stagnated. The colony was dismantled on 5 September 1932, being split between the French colonies of Ivory Coast, French Sudan and Niger. Ivory Coast received the largest share, which contained most of the population as well as the cities of Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso.

France reversed this change during the period of intense anti-colonial agitation that followed the end of World War II. On 4 September 1947, it revived the colony of Upper Volta, with its previous boundaries, as a part of the French Union. The French designated its colonies as departments of metropolitan France on the European continent.

On 11 December 1958 the colony achieved self-government as the Republic of Upper Volta; it joined the Franco-African Community. A revision in the organization of French Overseas Territories had begun with the passage of the Basic Law (Loi Cadre) of 23 July 1956. This act was followed by reorganization measures approved by the French parliament early in 1957 to ensure a large degree of self-government for individual territories. Upper Volta became an autonomous republic in the French community on 11 December 1958. Full independence from France was received in 1960.

===Upper Volta (1958–1984)===

The Republic of Upper Volta () was established on 11 December 1958 as a self-governing colony within the French Community. The name &quot;Upper Volta&quot; related to the nation&#x27;s location along the upper reaches of the Volta River. The river&#x27;s three tributaries are called the Black, White and Red Volta. These were expressed in the three colors of the former national flag.

Before attaining autonomy, it had been French Upper Volta and part of the French Union. On 5 August 1960, it attained full independence from France. The first president, Maurice Yaméogo, was the leader of the Voltaic Democratic Union (UDV). The 1960 constitution provided for election by universal suffrage of a president and a national assembly for five-year terms. Soon after coming to power, Yaméogo banned all political parties other than the UDV. The government lasted until 1966. After much unrest, including mass demonstrations and strikes by students, labor unions, and civil servants, the military intervened.

==== Lamizana&#x27;s rule and multiple coups ====

The 1966 military coup deposed Yaméogo, suspended the constitution, dissolved the National Assembly, and placed Lt. Col. Sangoulé Lamizana at the head of a government of senior army officers. The army remained in power for four years. On 14 June 1976, the Voltans ratified a new constitution that established a four-year transition period toward complete civilian rule. Lamizana remained in power throughout the 1970s as president of military or mixed civil-military governments. Lamizana&#x27;s rule coincided with the beginning of the Sahel drought and famine which had a devastating impact on Upper Volta and neighboring countries. After conflict over the 1976 constitution, a new constitution was written and approved in 1977. Lamizana was re-elected by open elections in 1978.

Lamizana&#x27;s government faced problems with the country&#x27;s traditionally powerful trade unions, and on 25 November 1980, Col. Saye Zerbo overthrew President Lamizana in a bloodless coup. Colonel Zerbo established the Military Committee of Recovery for National Progress as the supreme governmental authority, thus eradicating the 1977 constitution.

Colonel Zerbo also encountered resistance from trade unions and was overthrown two years later by Maj. Dr. Jean-Baptiste Ouédraogo and the Council of Popular Salvation (CSP) in the 1982 Upper Voltan coup d&#x27;état. The CSP continued to ban political parties and organizations, yet promised a transition to civilian rule and a new constitution.

====1983 coup d&#x27;état====

Infighting developed between the right and left factions of the CSP. The leader of the leftists, Capt. Thomas Sankara, was appointed prime minister in January 1983, but was subsequently arrested. Efforts to free him, directed by Capt. Blaise Compaoré, resulted in a military coup d&#x27;état on 4 August 1983.

The coup brought Sankara to power and his government began to implement a series of revolutionary programs which included mass-vaccinations, infrastructure improvements, the expansion of women&#x27;s rights, encouragement of domestic agricultural consumption, and anti-desertification projects.

=== Burkina Faso (since 1984) ===
On 2 August 1984, on Sankara&#x27;s initiative, the country&#x27;s name changed from &quot;Upper Volta&quot; to &quot;Burkina Faso&quot;, or &quot;land of the honest men&quot;; (the literal translation is &quot;land of the upright men&quot;). The presidential decree was confirmed by the National Assembly on 4 August 1984.

Sankara&#x27;s government comprised the National Council for the Revolution (CNR – ), with Sankara as its president, and established popular Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (CDRs). The Pioneers of the Revolution youth programme was also established.

Sankara launched an ambitious socioeconomic programme for change, one of the largest ever undertaken on the African continent. His foreign policies centred on anti-imperialism, with his government rejecting all foreign aid, pushing for odious debt reduction, nationalising all land and mineral wealth and averting the power and influence of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank. His domestic policies included a nationwide literacy campaign, land redistribution to peasants, railway and road construction and the outlawing of female genital mutilation, forced marriages and polygamy.

Sankara pushed for agrarian self-sufficiency and promoted public health by vaccinating 2,500,000 children against meningitis, yellow fever, and measles. His national agenda also included planting over 10,000,000 trees to halt the growing desertification of the Sahel. Sankara called on every village to build a medical dispensary and had over 350 communities build schools with their own labour.

In the 1980s, when ecological awareness was still very low, Sankara was one of the few African leaders to consider environmental protection a priority. He engaged in three major battles: against bush fires &quot;which will be considered as crimes and will be punished as such&quot;; against cattle roaming &quot;which infringes on the rights of peoples because unattended animals destroy nature&quot;; and against the illegitimate cutting of firewood &quot;whose profession will have to be organized and regulated&quot;. As part of a development program involving a large part of the population, ten million trees were planted in Burkina Faso in fifteen months during the revolution. To face the advancing desert and recurrent droughts, Sankara also proposed the planting of wooded strips about fifty kilometers wide, crossing the country from east to west. Cereal production, close to 1.1 billion tons before 1983, was predicted to rise to 1.6 billion tons in 1987. Jean Ziegler, former UN special rapporteur for the right to food, said that the country &quot;had become food self-sufficient.&quot;

==== Compaoré presidency ====

On 15 October 1987, Sankara and twelve other government officials were assassinated in a coup d&#x27;état organized by Blaise Compaoré, Sankara&#x27;s former colleague, who took over as Burkina Faso&#x27;s president. He held the position until October 2014. After the coup and although Sankara was known to be dead, some CDRs mounted an armed resistance to the army for several days. A majority of Burkinabè citizens hold that France&#x27;s foreign ministry, the Quai d&#x27;Orsay, was behind Compaoré in organizing the coup. There is some evidence for France&#x27;s support of the coup.

Compaoré gave the deterioration in relations with neighbouring countries as one of the reasons for the coup. He argued that Sankara had jeopardised foreign relations with the former colonial power (France) and with neighbouring Ivory Coast. Following the coup, Compaoré immediately reversed the nationalizations, overturned nearly all of Sankara&#x27;s policies, returned the country back into the IMF fold, and ultimately spurned most of Sankara&#x27;s legacy. Following an alleged coup-attempt in 1989, Compaoré introduced limited democratic reforms in 1990. Under the new (1991) constitution, Compaoré was re-elected without opposition in December 1991. In 1998 Compaoré won election in a landslide. In 2004, 13 people were tried for plotting a coup against President Compaoré and the coup&#x27;s alleged mastermind was sentenced to life imprisonment.

In 2000, the constitution was amended to reduce the presidential term to five years and set term limits to two, preventing successive re-election. The amendment took effect during the 2005 elections. If passed beforehand, it would have prevented Compaoré from being reelected. Other presidential candidates challenged the election results. But in October 2005, the constitutional council ruled that, because Compaoré was the sitting president in 2000, the amendment would not apply to him until the end of his second term in office. This cleared the way for his candidacy in the 2005 election. On 13 November 2005, he was reelected in a landslide, because of a divided political opposition.

In the 2010 presidential election, Compaoré was re-elected. Only 1.6 million Burkinabè voted, out of a total population 10 times that size. In February 2011, the death of a schoolboy provoked the 2011 Burkinabè protests, a series of popular protests, coupled with a military mutiny and a magistrates&#x27; strike, that called for Compaoré&#x27;s resignation, democratic reforms, higher wages for troops and public servants and economic freedom. As a result, governors were replaced and wages for public servants were raised. In April 2011, there was an army mutiny; the president named new chiefs of staff, and a curfew was imposed in Ouagadougou.

Compaoré&#x27;s government played the role of negotiator in several West-African disputes, including the 2010–2011 Ivorian crisis, the Inter-Togolese Dialogue (2007), and the 2012 Malian Crisis. , Burkina Faso remained one of the least-developed countries in the world.

===== Kafando presidency =====

Starting on 28 October 2014 protesters began to march and demonstrate in Ouagadougou against President Compaoré, who appeared ready to amend the constitution and extend his 27-year rule. On 30 October some protesters set fire to the parliament building and took over the national TV headquarters. Ouagadougou International Airport closed and MPs suspended the vote on changing the constitution (the change would have allowed Compaoré to stand for re-election in 2015). Later in the day, the military dissolved all government institutions and imposed a curfew.

On 31 October 2014, Compaoré resigned. Lt. Col. Isaac Zida said that he would lead the country during its transitional period before the planned 2015 presidential election, but there were concerns over his close ties to the former president. In November 2014 opposition parties, civil-society groups and religious leaders adopted a plan for a transitional authority to guide Burkina Faso to elections. Under the plan Michel Kafando became the transitional president and Lt. Col. Zida became the acting Prime Minister and Defense Minister.

On 16 September 2015, the Regiment of Presidential Security (RSP) carried out a coup d&#x27;état, seizing the president and prime minister and then declaring the National Council for Democracy the new national government. However, on 22 September 2015, the coup leader, Gilbert Diendéré, apologized and promised to restore civilian government. On 23 September 2015 the prime minister and interim president were restored to power.

==== Kaboré presidency and Jihadist insurgency (2015–2023) ====
General elections took place on 29 November 2015. Roch Marc Christian Kaboré won the election in the first round with 53.5% of the vote, defeating businessman Zéphirin Diabré, who took 29.7%. Kaboré was sworn in as president on 29 December 2015. Kaboré was re-elected in the general election of 22 November 2020, but his party Mouvement du Peuple pour le Progrès (MPP), failed to reach absolute parliamentary majority. It secured 56 seats out of a total of 127. The Congress for Democracy and Progress (CDP), the party of former President Blaise Compaoré, was distant second with 20 seats.

A Jihadist insurgency began in August 2015, part of the Islamist insurgency in the Sahel. Between August 2015 and October 2016, seven different posts were attacked across the country. On 15 January 2016, terrorists attacked the capital city of Ouagadougou, killing 30 people. Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb and Al-Mourabitoune, which until then had mostly operated in neighbouring Mali, claimed responsibility for the attack.

In 2016, attacks increased after a new group Ansarul Islam, led by imam Ibrahim Malam Dicko, was founded. Its attacks focused particularly on Soum province and it killed dozens of people in the attack on Nassoumbou on 16 December.

Between 27 March – 10 April 2017, the governments of Mali, France, and Burkina Faso launched a joint operation named &quot;Operation Panga&quot;, which involved 1,300 soldiers from the three countries, in the Fhero Forest, near the Burkina Faso-Mali border, considered a sanctuary for Ansarul Islam. The head of Ansarul Islam, Ibrahim Malam Dicko, was killed in June 2017 and Jafar Dicko became leader.

On 2 March 2018, Jama&#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin attacked the French embassy in Ouagadougou as well as the general staff of the Burkinabè army. Eight soldiers and eight attackers were killed, and a further 61 soldiers and 24 civilians were injured. The insurgency expanded to the east of the country and, in early October, the Armed Forces of Burkina Faso launched a major military operation in the country&#x27;s East, supported by French forces. According to Human Rights Watch, between mid-2018 to February 2019, at least 42 people were murdered by jihadists and a minimum of 116 mostly Fulani civilians were killed by military forces without trial. The attacks increased significantly in 2019. According to the ACLED, armed violence in Burkina Faso jumped by 174% in 2019, with nearly 1,300 civilians dead and 860,000 displaced. Jihadist groups also began to specifically target Christians.

On 8 July 2020, the United States raised concerns after a Human Rights Watch report revealed mass graves with at least 180 bodies, which were found in northern Burkina Faso where soldiers were fighting jihadists. On 4 June 2021, the Associated Press reported that according to the government of Burkina Faso, gunmen killed at least 100 people in Solhan village in northern Burkina Faso near the Niger border. A local market and several homes were also burned down. A government spokesman blamed jihadists. Heni Nsaibia, senior researcher at the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project said it was the deadliest attack recorded in Burkina Faso since the beginning of the jihadist insurgency.

From 4–5 June 2021, unknown militants massacred over 170 people in the villages of Solhan and Tadaryat. Jihadists killed 80 people in Gorgadji on 20 August. On 14 November, the Jama&#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin attacked a gendarmerie in Inata, killing 53 soldiers, the heaviest loss of life by the Burkinabe military during the insurgency, and a major morale loss in the country. In December Islamists killed 41 people in an ambush, including the popular vigilante leader Ladji Yoro. Yoro was a central figure in the Volunteers for the Defense of the Homeland (VDP) a pro-government militia that had taken a leading role in the struggle against Islamists.

In 2023, shortly after the murder of a Catholic priest at the hands of insurgents, the bishop of Dori, Laurent Dabiré, claimed in an interview with Catholic charity Aid to the Church in Need that around 50% of the country was in the hands of Islamists.

==== 2022 coups d&#x27;état ====
In a successful coup on 24 January 2022, mutinying soldiers arrested and deposed President Roch Marc Christian Kaboré following gunfire. The Patriotic Movement for Safeguard and Restoration (MPSR) supported by the military declared itself to be in power, led by Lieutenant Colonel Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba. On 31 January, the military junta restored the constitution and appointed Damiba interim president. In the aftermath of the coup, ECOWAS and the African Union suspended Burkina Faso&#x27;s membership. On 10 February, the Constitutional Council declared Damiba president. He was sworn in as president on 16 February. On 1 March 2022, the junta approved a charter allowing a military-led transition of 3 years. The charter provides for the transition process to be followed by the holding of elections. President Kaboré, who had been detained since the military junta took power, was released on 6 April 2022.

The insurgency continued following the coup, with about 60% of the country under government control. The Siege of Djibo began in February 2022 and continued as of June 2023. Between 100 and 165 people were killed in Seytenga Department, Séno Province on 12–13 June and around 16,000 people fled their homes. In June 2022, the Government announced the creation of &quot;military zones&quot;, which civilians were required to vacate so that the country&#x27;s Armed and Security Forces could fight insurgents without any &quot;hindrances&quot;.

On 30 September 2022, Damiba was ousted in a military coup led by Capt. Ibrahim Traoré. This came eight months after Damiba seized power. The rationale given by Traoré for the coup d&#x27;état was the purported inability of Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba to deal with an Islamist insurgency. Damiba resigned and left the country. On 6 October 2022, Captain Ibrahim Traoré was officially appointed as president. Apollinaire Joachim Kyélem de Tambèla was appointed interim Prime Minister on 21 October 2022.

On 13 April 2023, authorities in Burkina Faso declared a mobilisation in order to give the nation all means necessary to combat terrorism and create a &quot;legal framework for all the actions to be taken&quot; against the insurgents in recapturing 40% of the national territory from Islamist insurgents. On 20 April, the Rapid Intervention Brigade committed the Karma massacre, rounding up and executing civilians &quot;en masse&quot;. Between 60 and 156 civilians were killed.

On 25 August 2024, JNIM again launched a major attack in the region of Barsalogho, killing at least 400 people.

==Geography==

Burkina Faso lies mostly between latitudes 9° and 15° N (a small area is north of 15°), and longitudes 6° W and 3° E.

It is made up of two major types of countryside. The larger part of the country is covered by a peneplain, which forms a gently undulating landscape with, in some areas, a few isolated hills, the last vestiges of a Precambrian massif. The southwest of the country, on the other hand, forms a sandstone massif, where the highest peak, Ténakourou, is found at an elevation of . The massif is bordered by sheer cliffs up to high. The average altitude of Burkina Faso is and the difference between the highest and lowest terrain is no greater than . Burkina Faso is therefore a relatively flat country.

The country owes its former name of Upper Volta to three rivers which cross it: the Black Volta (or &quot;Mouhoun&quot;), the White Volta (&quot;Nakambé&quot;) and the Red Volta (&quot;Nazinon&quot;). The Black Volta is one of the country&#x27;s only two rivers which flow year-round, the other being the Komoé, which flows to the southwest. The basin of the Niger River also drains 27% of the country&#x27;s surface.

The Niger&#x27;s tributaries – the Béli, Gorouol, Goudébo, and Dargol – are seasonal streams and flow for only four to six months a year. They still can flood and overflow, however. The country also contains numerous lakes – the principal ones are Tingrela, Bam, and Dem. The country contains large ponds, as well, such as Oursi, Béli, Yomboli, and Markoye. Water shortages are often a problem, especially in the north of the country.
Burkina Faso lies within two terrestrial ecoregions: Sahelian Acacia savanna and West Sudanian savanna.

In Burkina Faso forest cover is around 23% of the total land area, equivalent to 6,216,400 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 7,716,600 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 6,039,300 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 177,100 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 16% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.

===Climate===
Burkina Faso has a primarily tropical climate with two very distinct seasons. In the rainy season, the country receives between of rainfall; in the dry season, the harmattan – a hot dry wind from the Sahara – blows. The rainy season lasts around four months, May/June to September, but is shorter in the north of the country. Three climatic zones can be defined: the Sahel, the Sudan-Sahel, and the Sudan-Guinea. The Sahel in the north typically receives less than of rainfall per year and has high temperatures, .

A relatively dry tropical savanna, the Sahel extends beyond the borders of Burkina Faso, from the Horn of Africa to the Atlantic Ocean, and borders the Sahara to its north and the fertile region of the Sudan to the south. Situated between 11° 3′ and 13° 5′ north latitude, the Sudan-Sahel region is a transitional zone with regard to rainfall and temperature. Further to the south, the Sudan-Guinea zone receives more than of rain each year and has cooler average temperatures.

Geography and environment contribute to Burkina Faso&#x27;s food insecurity. As the country is situated in the Sahel region, it has some of the most radical climatic variation in the world, ranging from severe flooding to extreme drought. The unpredictable climatic shocks can make it very difficult for Burkina Faso citizens to rely on and prosper from agriculture.

Burkina Faso&#x27;s climate also renders its crops vulnerable to insect attacks, including attacks from locusts and crickets, which destroy crops and further inhibit food production. Not only is most of the population of Burkina Faso dependent on agriculture as a source of income, but they also rely on the agricultural sector for food that will directly feed the household. Due to the vulnerability of agriculture, more and more families are having to look for other sources of non-farm income, and often have to travel outside of their regional zone to find work.

=== Natural resources ===
Burkina Faso&#x27;s natural resources include gold, manganese, limestone, marble, phosphates, pumice, and salt.

===Wildlife===
Burkina Faso has a larger number of elephants than many countries in West Africa. Lions, leopards and buffalo can also be found here, including the dwarf or red buffalo, a smaller reddish-brown animal which looks like a fierce kind of short-legged cow. Other large predators live in Burkina Faso, such as the cheetah, the caracal or African lynx, the spotted hyena and the African wild dog, one of the continent&#x27;s most endangered species.

Burkina Faso&#x27;s fauna and flora are protected in four national parks:
* The W National Park in the east which passes Burkina Faso, Benin, and Niger
* The Arly Wildlife Reserve (Arly National Park in the east)
* The Léraba-Comoé Classified Forest and Partial Reserve of Wildlife in the west
* The Mare aux Hippopotames in the west

and several reserves: see List of national parks in Africa and List of protected areas of Burkina Faso.

==Government and politics==
The constitution of 2 June 1991 established a semi-presidential government: its parliament could be dissolved by the President of the Republic, who was to be elected for a term of seven years. In 2000, the constitution was amended to reduce the presidential term to five years and set term limits to two, preventing successive re-election. The amendment took effect during the 2005 elections.

The parliament consisted of one chamber known as the National Assembly, which had 111 seats with members elected to serve five-year terms. There was also a constitutional chamber, composed of ten members, and an economic and social council whose roles were purely consultative. The 1991 constitution created a bicameral parliament, but the upper house (Chamber of Representatives) was abolished in 2002.

The Compaoré administration had worked to decentralize power by devolving some of its powers to regions and municipal authorities. The widespread distrust of politicians and lack of political involvement by many residents complicated this process. Critics described this as a hybrid decentralisation.

Political freedoms are severely restricted in Burkina Faso. Human rights organizations had criticised the Compaoré administration for numerous acts of state-sponsored violence against journalists and other politically active members of society.

The prime minister is head of government and is appointed by the president with the approval of the National Assembly. He is responsible for recommending a cabinet for appointment by the president.

=== Constitution ===
In 2015, Kaboré promised to revise the 1991 constitution. The revision was completed in 2018. One condition prevents any individual from serving as president for more than ten years either consecutively or intermittently and provides a method for impeaching a president. A referendum on the constitution for the Fifth Republic was scheduled for 24 March 2019.

Certain rights are also enshrined in the revised wording: access to drinking water, access to decent housing and a recognition of the right to civil disobedience, for example. The referendum was required because the opposition parties in Parliament refused to sanction the proposed text.

Following the January 2022 coup d&#x27;état, the military dissolved the parliament, government and constitution. On 31 January, the military junta restored the constitution, but it was suspended again following the September 2022 coup d&#x27;état.

===Administrative divisions===

The country is divided into 13 administrative regions. These regions encompass 45 provinces and 301 departments. Each region is administered by a governor.

===Foreign relations===
Burkina Faso is a member of the Community of Sahel–Saharan States, La Francophonie, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and United Nations. It is currently suspended from ECOWAS and the African Union. Until December 2023 Burkina Faso was a member of G5 Sahel, a small group formed in 2014 to co-operate with development and security matters. However, in December 2023 the country withdrew from the organisation due to concerns of &quot;serving foreign interests to the detriments of our people&quot; along with Niger and Mali.

===Military===
The army consists of some 6,000 men in voluntary service, augmented by a part-time national People&#x27;s Militia composed of civilians between 25 and 35 years of age who are trained in both military and civil duties. According to &quot;Jane&#x27;s Sentinel Country Risk Assessment&quot;, Burkina Faso&#x27;s Army is undermanned for its force structure and poorly equipped, but has wheeled light-armour vehicles, and may have developed useful combat expertise through interventions in Liberia and elsewhere in Africa.

In terms of training and equipment, the regular Army is believed to be neglected in relation to the élite Regiment of Presidential Security ( – RSP). Reports have emerged in recent years of disputes over pay and conditions. There is an air force with some 19 operational aircraft, but no navy, as the country is landlocked. Military expenses constitute approximately 1.2% of the nation&#x27;s GDP.

===Law enforcement===

Burkina Faso employs numerous police and security forces, generally modeled after organizations used by French police. France continues to provide significant support and training to police forces. The &quot;Gendarmerie Nationale&quot; is organized along military lines, with most police services delivered at the brigade level. The Gendarmerie operates under the authority of the Minister of Defence, and its members are employed chiefly in the rural areas and along borders.

There is a municipal police force controlled by the Ministry of Territorial Administration; a national police force controlled by the Ministry of Security; and an autonomous Regiment of Presidential Security (&quot;Régiment de la Sécurité Présidentielle&quot;, or RSP), a &#x27;palace guard&#x27; devoted to the protection of the President of the Republic. Both the gendarmerie and the national police are subdivided into both administrative and judicial police functions; the former are detailed to protect public order and provide security, the latter are charged with criminal investigations.

All foreigners and citizens are required to carry photo ID passports, or other forms of identification or risk a fine, and police spot identity checks are commonplace for persons traveling by auto, bush-taxi, or bus.

==Economy==

The value of Burkina Faso&#x27;s exports fell from $2.77 billion in 2011 to $754 million in 2012. Agriculture represents 32% of its gross domestic product and occupies 80% of the working population. It consists mostly of rearing livestock. Especially in the south and southwest, the people grow crops of sorghum, pearl millet, maize (corn), peanuts, rice and cotton, with surpluses to be sold. A large part of the economic activity of the country is funded by international aid, despite having gold ores in abundance.

The top five export commodities in 2017 were, in order of importance: gems and precious metals, US$1.9 billion (78.5% of total exports), cotton, $198.7 million (8.3%), ores, slag, ash, $137.6 million (5.8%), fruits, nuts: $76.6 million (3.2%) and oil seeds: $59.5 million (2.5%).

A December 2018 report from the World Bank indicates that in 2017, economic growth increased to 6.4% in 2017 (vs. 5.9% in 2016) primarily due to gold production and increased investment in infrastructure. The increase in consumption linked to growth of the wage bill also supported economic growth. Inflation remained low, 0.4% that year but the public deficit grew to 7.7% of GDP (vs. 3.5% in 2016). The government was continuing to get financial aid and loans to finance the debt. To finance the public deficit, the Government combined concessional aid and borrowing on the regional market. The World Bank said that the economic outlook remained favorable in the short and medium term, although that could be negatively impacted. Risks included high oil prices (imports), lower prices of gold and cotton (exports) as well as terrorist threat and labour strikes.

Burkina Faso is part of the West African Monetary and Economic Union (UMEOA) and has adopted the CFA franc. This is issued by the Central Bank of the West African States (BCEAO), situated in Dakar, Senegal. The BCEAO manages the monetary and reserve policy of the member states, and provides regulation and oversight of financial sector and banking activity. A legal framework regarding licensing, bank activities, organizational and capital requirements, inspections and sanctions (all applicable to all countries of the Union) is in place, having been reformed significantly in 1999. Microfinance institutions are governed by a separate law, which regulates microfinance activities in all WAEMU countries. The insurance sector is regulated through the Inter-African Conference on Insurance Markets (CIMA).

In 2018, tourism was almost non-existent in large parts of the country. The U.S. government (and others) warn their citizens not to travel into large parts of Burkina Faso: &quot;The northern Sahel border region shared with Mali and Niger due to crime and terrorism. The provinces of Kmoandjari, Tapoa, Kompienga, and Gourma in East Region due to crime and terrorism&quot;.

The 2018 CIA World Factbook provides this updated summary. &quot;Burkina Faso is a poor, landlocked country that depends on adequate rainfall. Irregular patterns of rainfall, poor soil, and the lack of adequate communications and other infrastructure contribute to the economy&#x27;s vulnerability to external shocks. About 80% of the population is engaged in subsistence farming and cotton is the main cash crop. The country has few natural resources and a weak industrial base. Cotton and gold are Burkina Faso&#x27;s key exports ...The country has seen an upswing in gold exploration, production, and exports.

While the end of the political crisis has allowed Burkina Faso&#x27;s economy to resume positive growth, the country&#x27;s fragile security situation could put these gains at risk. Political insecurity in neighboring Mali, unreliable energy supplies, and poor transportation links pose long-term challenges.&quot; The report also highlights the 2018–2020 International Monetary Fund program, including the government&#x27;s plan to &quot;reduce the budget deficit and preserve critical spending on social services and priority public investments&quot;.

A 2018 report by the African Development Bank Group discussed a macroeconomic evolution: &quot;higher investment and continued spending on social services and security that will add to the budget deficit&quot;. This group&#x27;s prediction for 2018 indicated that the budget deficit would be reduced to 4.8% of GDP in 2018 and to 2.9% in 2019. Public debt associated with the National Economic and Social Development Plan was estimated at 36.9% of GDP in 2017.

Burkina Faso is a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA). The country also belongs to the United Nations, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and World Trade Organization.

=== Mining ===

There is mining of copper, iron, manganese, gold, cassiterite (tin ore), and phosphates. These operations provide employment and generate international aid. Gold production increased 32% in 2011 at six gold mine sites, making Burkina Faso the fourth-largest gold producer in Africa, after South Africa, Mali and Ghana. Gold production of Burkina Faso&#x27;s in 2015 is 36 metric tonnes.

A 2018 report indicated that the country expected record 55 tonnes of gold in that year, a two-thirds increase over 2013. According to Oumarou Idani, there is a more important issue. &quot;We have to diversify production. We mostly only produce gold, but we have huge potential in manganese, zinc, lead, copper, nickel and limestone&quot;.

===Infrastructure===
==== Water ====

While services remain underdeveloped, the National Office for Water and Sanitation (ONEA), a state-owned utility company run along commercial lines, is emerging as one of the best-performing utility companies in Africa. High levels of autonomy and a skilled and dedicated management have driven ONEA&#x27;s ability to improve production of and access to clean water.

Since 2000, nearly 2 million more people have access to water in the four principal urban centres in the country; the company has kept the quality of infrastructure high (less than 18% of the water is lost through leaks – one of the lowest in sub-Saharan Africa), improved financial reporting, and increased its annual revenue by an average of 12% (well above inflation). Challenges remain, including difficulties among some customers in paying for services, with the need to rely on international aid to expand its infrastructure. The state-owned, commercially run venture has helped the nation reach its Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets in water-related areas, and has grown as a viable company.

However, access to drinking water has improved over the last 28 years. According to UNICEF, access to drinking water has increased from 39 to 76% in rural areas between 1990 and 2015. In this same time span, access to drinking water increased from 75 to 97% in urban areas.

==== Electricity ====
A 33-megawatt solar power plant in Zagtouli, near Ouagadougou, came online in late November 2017. At the time of its construction, it was the largest solar power facility in West Africa.

==== Other ====
The growth rate in Burkina Faso is high although it continues to be plagued by corruption and incursions from terrorist groups from Mali and Niger.

====Transport====
Transport in Burkina Faso is limited by relatively underdeveloped infrastructure.

As of June 2014 the main international airport, Ouagadougou Airport, had regularly scheduled flights to many destinations in West Africa as well as Paris, Brussels and Istanbul. The other international airport, Bobo Dioulasso Airport, has flights to Ouagadougou and Abidjan.

Rail transport in Burkina Faso consists of a single line which runs from Kaya to Abidjan in Ivory Coast via Ouagadougou, Koudougou, Bobo Dioulasso and Banfora. &quot;Sitarail&quot; operates a passenger train three times a week along the route.

There are 15,000 kilometres of roads in Burkina Faso, of which 2,500 kilometres are paved.

===Science and technology===
In 2009, Burkina Faso spent 0.20% of GDP on research and development (R&amp;D), one of the lowest ratios in West Africa. There were 48 researchers (in full-time equivalents) per million inhabitants in 2010, which is more than twice the average for sub-Saharan Africa (20 per million population in 2013) and higher than the ratio for Ghana and Nigeria (39). It is, however, much lower than the ratio for Senegal (361 per million inhabitants). In Burkina Faso in 2010, 46% of researchers were working in the health sector, 16% in engineering, 13% in natural sciences, 9% in agricultural sciences, 7% in the humanities and 4% in social sciences. 
In January 2011, the government created the Ministry of Scientific Research and Innovation. Up until then, management of science, technology and innovation had fallen under the Department of Secondary and Higher Education and Scientific Research. Within this ministry, the Directorate General for Research and Sector Statistics is responsible for planning. A separate body, the Directorate General of Scientific Research, Technology and Innovation, coordinates research. This is a departure from the pattern in many other West African countries where a single body fulfills both functions. The move signals the government&#x27;s intention to make science and technology a development priority. Burkina Faso was ranked 129th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

In 2012, Burkina Faso adopted a &quot;National Policy for Scientific and Technical Research&quot;, the strategic objectives of which are to develop R&amp;D and the application and commercialization of research results. The policy also makes provisions for strengthening the ministry&#x27;s strategic and operational capacities. One of the key priorities is to improve food security and self-sufficiency by boosting capacity in agricultural and environmental sciences. The creation of a centre of excellence in 2014 at the International Institute of Water and Environmental Engineering in Ouagadougou within the World Bank project provides essential funding for capacity-building in these priority areas.

A dual priority is to promote innovative, effective and accessible health systems. The government wishes to develop, in parallel, applied sciences and technology and social and human sciences. To complement the national research policy, the government has prepared a &quot;National Strategy to Popularize Technologies, Inventions and Innovations&quot; (2012) and a &quot;National Innovation Strategy&quot; (2014). Other policies also incorporate science and technology, such as that on &quot;Secondary and Higher Education and Scientific Research&quot; (2010), the &quot;National Policy on Food and Nutrition Security&quot; (2014) and the &quot;National Programme for the Rural Sector&quot; (2011).

In 2013, Burkina Faso passed the Science, Technology and Innovation Act establishing three mechanisms for financing research and innovation, a clear indication of high-level commitment. These mechanisms are the National Fund for Education and Research, the National Fund for Research and Innovation for Development and the Forum of Scientific Research and Technological Innovation.

==Demographics==


Burkina Faso is an ethnically integrated, secular state where most people are concentrated in the south and centre, where their density sometimes exceeds . Hundreds of thousands of Burkinabè migrate regularly to Ivory Coast and Ghana, mainly for seasonal agricultural work. These flows of workers are affected by external events; the September 2002 coup attempt in Ivory Coast and the ensuing fighting meant that hundreds of thousands of Burkinabè returned to Burkina Faso. The regional economy suffered when they were unable to work.

The total fertility rate of Burkina Faso was estimated to be 5.93 children born per woman in 2014, the sixth highest in the world.

In 2009 the U.S. Department of State&#x27;s &quot;Trafficking in Persons Report&quot; reported that slavery in Burkina Faso continued to exist and that Burkinabè children were often the victims. Slavery in the Sahel states in general, is an entrenched institution with a long history that dates back to the trans-Saharan slave trade. In 2018, an estimated 82,000 people in the country were living under &quot;modern slavery&quot; according to the Global Slavery Index.
===Ethnic groups===

Burkina Faso&#x27;s 23 million people belong to two major West African ethnic cultural groups: the Voltaic and the Mandé (whose common language is Dioula). The Voltaic Mossi make up about one-half of the population. The Mossi claim descent from warriors who migrated to present-day Burkina Faso from northern Ghana around 1100 AD. They established an empire that lasted more than 800 years. Predominantly farmers, the Mossi kingdom is led by the &quot;Mogho Naba,&quot; whose court is in Ouagadougou.

===Languages===

Burkina Faso is a multilingual country. The working languages are French, which was introduced during the colonial period, and English. In December 2023, due to deteriorating relations between Burkina Faso and the French government, the Burkina Faso government announced it was elevating (Mooré, Bissa, Dyula and Fula) to the status of official languages. In January 2024, French was dropped as an official language, becoming a working language with English instead. Altogether, an estimated 69 languages are spoken in the country, of which about 60 languages are indigenous. The Mooré language is the most spoken language in Burkina Faso, spoken by about half the population, mainly in the central region around the capital, Ouagadougou.

According to the 2006 census, the languages spoken natively in Burkina Faso were Mooré by 40.5% of the population, Fula by 9.3%, Gourmanché by 6.1%, Bambara by 4.9%, Bissa by 3.2%, Bwamu by 2.1%, Dagara by 2%, San by 1.9%, Lobiri with 1.8%, Lyélé with 1.7%, Bobo and Sénoufo with 1.4% each, Nuni by 1.2%, Dafing by 1.1%, Tamasheq by 1%, Kassem by 0.7%, Gouin by 0.4%, Dogon, Songhai, and Gourounsi by 0.3% each, Ko, Koussassé, Sembla, and Siamou by 0.1% each, other national languages by 5%, other African languages by 0.2%, French (the official language) by 1.3%, and other non-indigenous languages by 0.1%.

In the west, Mandé languages are widely spoken, the most predominant being Dyula (also known as Jula or Dioula), others including Bobo, Samo, and Marka. Fula is widespread, particularly in the north. Gourmanché is spoken in the east, while Bissa is spoken in the south.

===Religion===

The government of Burkina Faso&#x27;s 2019 census reported that 63.8% of the population practiced Islam, and that the majority of this group belong to the Sunni branch, while a small minority adheres to Shia Islam. A significant number of Sunni Muslims identify with the Tijaniyah Sufi order.

The 2019 census also found that 26.3% of the population were Christians (20.1% being Roman Catholics and 6.2% members of Protestant denominations) and 9.0% followed traditional indigenous beliefs such as the Dogon religion, 0.2% followed other religions, and 0.7% were non-religious.

Animists are the largest religious group in the country&#x27;s Sud-Ouest region, forming 48.1% of its total population.

===Health===

In 2016, the average life expectancy was estimated at 60 for males and 61 for females. In 2018, the under-five mortality rate and the infant mortality rate was 76 per 1000 live births. In 2014, the median age of its inhabitants was 17 and the estimated population growth rate was 3.05%.

In 2011, health expenditures was 6.5% of GDP; the maternal mortality ratio was estimated at 300 deaths per 100000 live births and the physician density at 0.05 per 1000 population in 2010. In 2012, it was estimated that the adult HIV prevalence rate (ages 15–49) was 1.0%. According to the 2011 UNAIDS Report, HIV prevalence is declining among pregnant women who attend antenatal clinics. According to a 2005 World Health Organization report, an estimated 72.5% of Burkina Faso&#x27;s girls and women have had female genital mutilation, administered according to traditional rituals.

Central government spending on health was 3% in 2001. , studies estimated there were as few as 10 physicians per 100,000 people. In addition, there were 41 nurses and 13 midwives per 100,000 people. Demographic and Health Surveys has completed three surveys in Burkina Faso since 1993, and had another in 2009.

A Dengue fever outbreak in 2016 killed 20 patients. Cases of the disease were reported from all 12 districts of Ouagadougou.

In the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Burkina Faso ranks 98th out of 127 countries and has a serious level of hunger with a score of 24.6

===Education===
Education in Burkina Faso is divided into primary, secondary and higher education. High school costs approximately CFA 25,000 (US$50) per year, which is far above the means of most Burkinabè families. Boys receive preference in schooling; as such, girls&#x27; education and literacy rates are far lower than their male counterparts. An increase in girls&#x27; schooling has been observed because of the government&#x27;s policy of making school cheaper for girls and granting them more scholarships.

To proceed from primary to middle school, middle to high school or high school to college, national exams must be passed. Institutions of higher education include the University of Ouagadougou, The Polytechnic University of Bobo-Dioulasso, and the University of Koudougou, which is also a teacher training institution. There are some small private colleges in the capital city of Ouagadougou but these are affordable to only a small portion of the population.

There is also the International School of Ouagadougou (ISO), an American-based private school located in Ouagadougou.

The 2008 UN Development Program Report ranked Burkina Faso as the country with the lowest level of literacy in the world, despite a concerted effort to double its literacy rate from 12.8% in 1990 to 25.3% in 2008.

==Food insecurity ==
According to the Global Hunger Index, a multidimensional tool used to measure and track a country&#x27;s hunger levels, Burkina Faso ranked 65 out of 78 countries in 2013. It is estimated that there are currently over 1.5 million children who are at risk of food insecurity in Burkina Faso, with around 350,000 children who are in need of emergency medical assistance. However, only about a third of these children will actually receive adequate medical attention. Only 11.4 percent of children under the age of two receive the daily recommended number of meals. Stunted growth as a result of food insecurity is a severe problem in Burkina Faso, affecting at least a third of the population from 2008 to 2012. Additionally, stunted children, on average, tend to complete less school than children with normal growth development, further contributing to the low levels of education of the Burkina Faso population.

The European Commission expects that approximately 500,000 children under age 5 in Burkina Faso will suffer from acute malnutrition in 2015, including around 149,000 who will suffer from its most life-threatening form. Rates of micronutrient deficiencies are also high. According to the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS 2010), 49 percent of women and 88 percent of children under the age of five suffer from anemia. Forty percent of infant deaths can be attributed to malnutrition, and in turn, these infant mortality rates have decreased Burkina Faso&#x27;s total work force by 13.6 percent, demonstrating how food security affects more aspects of life beyond health.

These high rates of food insecurity and the accompanying effects are even more prevalent in rural populations compared to urban ones, as access to health services in rural areas is much more limited and awareness and education of children&#x27;s nutritional needs is lower.

An October 2018 report by USAid stated that droughts and floods remained problematic, and that &quot;violence and insecurity are disrupting markets, trade and livelihoods activities in some parts of Burkina Faso&#x27;s northern and eastern areas&quot;. The report estimated that over 954,300 people needed food security support, and that, according to UNICEF, an &quot;estimated 187,200 children under 5 years of age will experience severe acute malnutrition&quot;. Agencies providing assistance at the time included USAID&#x27;s Office of Food for Peace (FFP) working with the UN World Food Programme, the NGO Oxfam Intermón and ACDI/VOCA.

===Approaches to improving food security===

====World Food Programme====
The United Nations&#x27; World Food Programme has worked on programs that are geared towards increasing food security in Burkina Faso.
The Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation 200509 (PRRO) was formed to respond to the high levels of malnutrition in Burkina Faso, following the food and nutrition crisis in 2012. The efforts of this project are mostly geared towards the treatment and prevention of malnutrition and include take home rations for the caretakers of those children who are being treated for malnutrition. Additionally, the activities of this operation contribute to families&#x27; abilities to withstand future food crises. Better nutrition among the two most vulnerable groups, young children and pregnant women, prepares them to be able to respond better in times when food security is compromised, such as in droughts.

The Country Programme (CP) has two parts: food and nutritional assistance to people with HIV/AIDS, and a school feeding program for all primary schools in the Sahel region. The HIV/AIDS nutrition program aims to better the nutritional recovery of those who are living with HIV/AIDS and to protect at-risk children and orphans from malnutrition and food security. As part of the school feeding component, the Country Programme&#x27;s goals are to increase enrollment and attendance in schools in the Sahel region, where enrollment rates are below the national average. Furthermore, the program aims at improving gender parity rates in these schools, by providing girls with high attendance in the last two years of primary school with take-home rations of cereals as an incentive to households, encouraging them to send their girls to school.

The WFP concluded the formation of a subsequently approved plan in August 2018 &quot;to support the Government&#x27;s vision of &#x27;a democratic, unified and united nation, transforming the structure of its economy and achieving a strong and inclusive growth through patterns of sustainable consumption and production.&#x27; It will take important steps in WFP&#x27;s new strategic direction for strengthened national and local capacities to enable the Government and communities to own, manage, and implement food and nutrition security programmes by 2030&quot;.

====World Bank====
The World Bank was established in 1944, and comprises five institutions whose shared goals are to end extreme poverty by 2030 and to promote shared prosperity by fostering income growth of the lower forty percent of every country. One of the main projects the World Bank is working on to reduce food insecurity in Burkina Faso is the Agricultural Productivity and Food Security Project. According to the World Bank, the objective of this project is to &quot;improve the capacity of poor producers to increase food production and to ensure improved availability of food products in rural markets.&quot; The Agricultural Productivity and Food Security Project has three main parts. Its first component is to work towards the improvement of food production, including financing grants and providing &#x27;voucher for work&#x27; programs for households who cannot pay their contribution in cash. The project&#x27;s next component involves improving the availability of food products, particularly in rural areas. This includes supporting the marketing of food products, and aims to strengthen the capabilities of stakeholders to control the variability of food products and supplies at local and national levels. Lastly, the third component of this project focuses on institutional development and capacity building. Its goal is to reinforce the capacities of service providers and institutions who are specifically involved in project implementation. The project&#x27;s activities aim to build capacities of service providers, strengthen the capacity of food producer organizations, strengthen agricultural input supply delivery methods, and manage and evaluate project activities.

The December 2018 report by the World Bank indicated that the poverty rate fell slightly between 2009 and 2014, from 46% to a still high 40.1%. The report provided this updated summary of the country&#x27;s development challenges: &quot;Burkina Faso remains vulnerable to climatic shocks related to changes in rainfall patterns and to fluctuations in the prices of its export commodities on world markets. Its economic and social development will, to some extent, be contingent on political stability in the country and the sub-regions, its openness to international trade, and export diversification&quot;.

==Culture==

Literature in Burkina Faso is based on the oral tradition, which remains important. In 1934, during French occupation, Dim-Dolobsom Ouedraogo published his &quot;Maximes, pensées et devinettes mossi&quot; (&quot;Maxims, Thoughts and Riddles of the Mossi&quot;), a record of the oral history of the Mossi people.

The oral tradition continued to have an influence on Burkinabè writers in the post-independence Burkina Faso of the 1960s, such as Nazi Boni and Roger Nikiema. The 1960s saw a growth in the number of playwrights being published. Since the 1970s, literature has developed in Burkina Faso with many more writers being published.

The theatre of Burkina Faso combines traditional Burkinabè performance with the colonial influences and post-colonial efforts to educate rural people to produce a distinctive national theatre. Traditional ritual ceremonies of the many ethnic groups in Burkina Faso have long involved dancing with masks. Western-style theatre became common during colonial times, heavily influenced by French theatre. With independence came a new style of theatre inspired by forum theatre aimed at educating and entertaining Burkina Faso&#x27;s rural people.

Slam poetry is increasing in popularity in the country, in part due to the efforts of slam poet Malika Outtara. She uses her skills to raise awareness around issues such as blood donation, albinism and the impact of COVID-19.

===Arts and crafts===

In addition to several rich traditional artistic heritages among the peoples, there is a large artist community in Burkina Faso, especially in Ouagadougou. Much of the crafts produced are for the country&#x27;s growing tourist industry.

Burkina Faso also hosts the International Art and Craft Fair, Ouagadougou. It is better known by its French name as SIAO, &quot;Le Salon International de l&#x27; Artisanat de Ouagadougou&quot;, and is one of the most important African handicraft fairs.

===Music===

The music of Burkina Faso includes the folk music of 60 different ethnic groups. The Mossi people, centrally located around the capital, Ouagadougou, account for 40% of the population while, to the south, Gurunsi, Gurma, Dagaaba and Lobi populations, speaking Gur languages closely related to the Mossi language, extend into the coastal states. In the north and east the Fulani of the Sahel preponderate, while in the south and west the Mande languages are common; Samo, Bissa, Bobo, Senufo and Marka. Burkinabé traditional music has continued to thrive and musical output remains quite diverse. Popular music is mostly in French: Burkina Faso has yet to produce a major pan-African success.

===Media===

The nation&#x27;s principal media outlet is its state-sponsored combined television and radio service, &quot;Radio Télévision du Burkina&quot; (RTB). &quot;RTB&quot; broadcasts on two medium-wave (AM) and several FM frequencies. Besides RTB, there are privately owned sports, cultural, music, and religious FM radio stations. &quot;RTB&quot; maintains a worldwide short-wave news broadcast (&quot;Radio Nationale Burkina&quot;) in the French language from the capital at Ouagadougou using a 100 kW transmitter on 4.815 and 5.030 MHz.

Attempts to develop an independent press and media in Burkina Faso have been intermittent. In 1998, investigative journalist Norbert Zongo, his brother Ernest, his driver, and another man were assassinated by unknown assailants, and the bodies burned. The crime was never solved. However, an independent Commission of Inquiry later concluded that Norbert Zongo was killed for political reasons because of his investigative work into the death of David Ouedraogo, a chauffeur who worked for François Compaoré, President Blaise Compaoré&#x27;s brother.

In January 1999, François Compaoré was charged with the murder of David Ouedraogo, who had died as a result of torture in January 1998. The charges were later dropped by a military tribunal after an appeal. In August 2000, five members of the President&#x27;s personal security guard detail (&quot;Régiment de la Sécurité Présidentielle&quot;, or RSP) were charged with the murder of Ouedraogo. RSP members Marcel Kafando, Edmond Koama, and Ousseini Yaro, investigated as suspects in the Norbert Zongo assassination, were convicted in the Ouedraogo case and sentenced to lengthy prison terms.

Since the death of Norbert Zongo, several protests regarding the Zongo investigation and treatment of journalists have been prevented or dispersed by government police and security forces. In April 2007, popular radio reggae host Karim Sama, whose programs feature reggae songs interspersed with critical commentary on alleged government injustice and corruption, received several death threats.

Sama&#x27;s personal car was later burned outside the private radio station &quot;Ouaga FM&quot; by unknown vandals. In response, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) wrote to President Compaoré to request his government investigate the sending of e-mailed death threats to journalists and radio commentators in Burkina Faso who were critical of the government. In December 2008, police in Ouagadougou questioned leaders of a protest march that called for a renewed investigation into the unsolved Zongo assassination. Among the marchers was Jean-Claude Meda, the president of the Association of Journalists of Burkina Faso.

===Cinema===

The cinema of Burkina Faso is an important part of the West African film industry and African film as a whole. Burkina&#x27;s contribution to African cinema started with the establishment of the film festival FESPACO (Festival Panafricain du Cinéma et de la Télévision de Ouagadougou), which was launched as a film week in 1969. Many of the nation&#x27;s filmmakers are known internationally and have won international prizes.

For many years the headquarters of the Federation of Panafrican Filmmakers (FEPACI) was in Ouagadougou, rescued in 1983 from a period of moribund inactivity by the enthusiastic support and funding of President Sankara. (In 2006 the Secretariat of FEPACI moved to South Africa, but the headquarters of the organization is still in Ouagadougou.) Among the best known directors from Burkina Faso are Gaston Kaboré, Idrissa Ouedraogo and Dani Kouyate. Burkina produces popular television series such as &quot;Les Bobodiouf&quot;. Internationally known filmmakers such as Ouedraogo, Kabore, Yameogo, and Kouyate make popular television series.

===Cuisine===

Typical of West African cuisine, Burkina Faso&#x27;s cuisine is based on staple foods of sorghum, millet, rice, maize, peanuts, potatoes, beans, yams and okra. The most common sources of animal protein are chicken, chicken eggs and freshwater fish. A typical Burkinabè beverage is Banji or Palm Wine, which is fermented palm sap; and Zoom-kom, or &quot;grain water&quot; purportedly the national drink of Burkina Faso. Zoom-kom is milky-looking and whitish, having a water and cereal base, best drunk with ice cubes. In the more rural regions, in the outskirts of Burkina, you would find Dolo, which is drink made from fermented millet. In times of crisis, one legume native to Burkina, &quot;Zamnè,&quot; can be served as a main dish or in a sauce.

===Cultural festivals and events===
Every two years, Ouagadougou hosts the Panafrican Film and Television Festival of Ouagadougou (FESPACO), the largest African cinema festival on the continent (February, odd years).

Held every two years since 1988, the International Art and Craft Fair, Ouagadougou (SIAO), is one of Africa&#x27;s most important trade shows for art and handicrafts (late October-early November, even years).

Also every two years, the Symposium de sculpture sur granit de Laongo takes place on a site located about from Ouagadougou, in the province of Oubritenga.

The National Culture Week of Burkina Faso, better known by its French name La Semaine Nationale de la culture (SNC), is one of the most important cultural activities of Burkina Faso. It is a biennial event which takes place every two years in Bobo Dioulasso, the second-largest city in the country.

The Festival International des Masques et des Arts (FESTIMA), celebrating traditional masks, is held every two years in Dédougou.

===Sports===
Sport in Burkina Faso is widespread and includes football, basketball, cycling, rugby union, handball, tennis, boxing and martial arts. Football is the most popular sport in Burkina Faso, played both professionally, and informally in towns and villages across the country. The national team is nicknamed &quot;Les Etalons&quot; (&quot;the Stallions&quot;) in reference to the legendary horse of Princess Yennenga.

In 1998, Burkina Faso hosted the Africa Cup of Nations for which the Omnisport Stadium in Bobo-Dioulasso was built. Burkina Faso qualified for the 2013 African Cup of Nations in South Africa and reached the final, but then lost to Nigeria 0–1. The country has never qualified for a FIFA World Cup.

Basketball is another sport which enjoys much popularity for both men and women. The country&#x27;s men&#x27;s national team had its most successful year in 2013 when it qualified for the AfroBasket, the continent&#x27;s prime basketball event.

At the 2020 Summer Olympics, the athlete Hugues Fabrice Zango won Burkina Faso&#x27;s first Olympic medal, winning bronze in the men&#x27;s triple jump. Cricket is also picking up in Burkina Faso with Cricket Burkina Faso running a 10 club league.

==See also==

* Index of Burkina Faso-related articles
* Outline of Burkina Faso
* 2023 in Burkina Faso

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

==Further reading==

* Engberg-Perderson, Lars, &quot;Endangering Development: Politics, Projects, and Environment in Burkina Faso&quot; (Praeger Publishers, 2003).
* Englebert, Pierre, &quot;Burkina Faso: Unsteady Statehood in West Africa&quot; (Perseus, 1999).
* Howorth, Chris, &quot;Rebuilding the Local Landscape: Environmental Management in Burkina Faso&quot; (Ashgate, 1999).
* McFarland, Daniel Miles and Rupley, Lawrence A, &quot;Historical Dictionary of Burkina Faso&quot; (Scarecrow Press, 1998).
* Manson, Katrina and Knight, James, &quot;Burkina Faso&quot; (Bradt Travel Guides, 2011).
* Roy, Christopher D and Wheelock, Thomas G B, &quot;Land of the Flying Masks: Art and Culture in Burkina Faso: The Thomas G.B. Wheelock Collection&quot; (Prestel Publishing, 2007).
* Sankara, Thomas, &quot;Thomas Sankara Speaks: The Burkina Faso Revolution 1983–1987&quot; (Pathfinder Press, 2007).
* Sankara, Thomas, &quot;We are the Heirs of the World&#x27;s Revolutions: Speeches from the Burkina Faso Revolution 1983–1987&quot; (Pathfinder Press, 2007).
== External links ==

* , official government portal. 
* LeFaso.net, a news information site 
* Burkina Faso profile from ECOWAS
* Burkina Faso profile from the BBC News.
* News headline links from Al Jazeera.
* Burkina Faso, Democracy Now!
* Country profile at New Internationalist.
* Burkina Faso Business Facts from Bizpages</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="0" end="12" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="18" end="36" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="40" end="51" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="65" end="69" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="88" end="93" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="112" end="117" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="136" end="140" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="145" end="150" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="169" end="180" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q797422" start="349" end="372" title="Republic of Upper Volta" label="Republic of Upper Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444685" start="393" end="400" title="Geographical renaming" label="renamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q290004" start="424" end="433" title="List of heads of state of Burkina Faso" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q202155" start="434" end="448" title="Thomas Sankara" label="Thomas Sankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="507" end="514" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="535" end="546" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="561" end="573" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165955" start="597" end="609" title="Mossi people" label="Mossi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q862522" start="690" end="698" title="Mossi Kingdoms" label="kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="764" end="773" title="Colonization" label="colonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="781" end="787" title="French colonial empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="799" end="817" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448101" start="849" end="870" title="self-governing colony" label="self-governing colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120363" start="882" end="898" title="French Community" label="French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q442765" start="942" end="957" title="Maurice Yaméogo" label="Maurice Yaméogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q290004" start="961" end="970" title="List of heads of state of Burkina Faso" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q426944" start="1051" end="1059" title="Droughts in the Sahel" label="droughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="1114" end="1119" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coups"/>
<link wikidata="Q18609298" start="1124" end="1128" title="1966 Upper Voltan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604615" start="1130" end="1134" title="1980 Upper Voltan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604542" start="1136" end="1140" title="1982 Upper Voltan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q108570220" start="1142" end="1146" title="1983 Upper Voltan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764387" start="1148" end="1152" title="1987 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q110663445" start="1173" end="1180" title="January 2022 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="January"/>
<link wikidata="Q114341504" start="1185" end="1194" title="September 2022 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="September"/>
<link wikidata="Q18600449" start="1243" end="1247" title="1989 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977821" start="1249" end="1253" title="2015 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q123004839" start="1259" end="1263" title="2023 Burkina Faso coup attempt" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q202155" start="1266" end="1280" title="Thomas Sankara" label="Thomas Sankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1388" end="1401" title="socioeconomic" label="socioeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="1438" end="1446" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="1457" end="1476" title="land redistribution" label="land redistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="1480" end="1487" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="1615" end="1640" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="1642" end="1657" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="1664" end="1672" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57324" start="1781" end="1796" title="Blaise Compaoré" label="Blaise Compaoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q18380506" start="1847" end="1877" title="2014 Burkinabè uprising" label="his removal on 31 October 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="1991" end="1998" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="2024" end="2037" title="Islamic State" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="2046" end="2054" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q89035147" start="2056" end="2079" title="Jihadist insurgency in Burkina Faso" label="operate in Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="2105" end="2109" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="2114" end="2119" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145466" start="2192" end="2219" title="internally displaced person" label="internally displaced person"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022671" start="2222" end="2250" title="Burkina Faso Armed Forces" label="Burkina Faso&amp;#x27;s military"/>
<link wikidata="Q110663445" start="2269" end="2311" title="January 2022 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état on 23 and 24 January 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q599988" start="2336" end="2352" title="Roch Marc Christian Kaboré" label="Roch Marc Kaboré"/>
<link wikidata="Q110666454" start="2428" end="2454" title="Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba" label="Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q114341504" start="2512" end="2539" title="September 2022 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="second coup on 30 September"/>
<link wikidata="Q114341246" start="2573" end="2587" title="Ibrahim Traoré" label="Ibrahim Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="2622" end="2647" title="least developed countries" label="least developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081878" start="2749" end="2754" title="Islam in Burkina Faso" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="2839" end="2844" title="Mossi language" label="Mooré"/>
<link wikidata="Q32934" start="2846" end="2851" title="Bissa language" label="Bissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="2853" end="2858" title="Dyula language" label="Dyula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="2863" end="2867" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3055" end="3061" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3159" end="3166" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="3309" end="3313" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="3315" end="3324" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="3326" end="3332" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="3337" end="3346" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821849" start="3382" end="3395" title="Art of Burkina Faso" label="Burkinabè art"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="3503" end="3529" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3602" end="3616" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="3618" end="3633" title="La Francophonie" label="La Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="3642" end="3677" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="3736" end="3742" title="ECOWAS" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="3751" end="3764" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q797422" start="3794" end="3817" title="Republic of Upper Volta" label="Republic of Upper Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q202155" start="3903" end="3917" title="Thomas Sankara" label="Thomas Sankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="4054" end="4059" title="Mooré" label="Mooré"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="4182" end="4196" title="Dyula language" label="Dyula language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062587" start="4212" end="4221" title="N&amp;#x27;Ko script" label="N&amp;#x27;Ko"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="4435" end="4448" title="Fula language" label="Fula language"/>
<link wikidata="Q192415" start="4662" end="4673" title="Volta River" label="Volta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256528" start="4679" end="4684" title="Black Volta" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083328" start="4686" end="4689" title="Red Volta" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259188" start="4694" end="4705" title="White Volta" label="White Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="4808" end="4823" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605626" start="4878" end="4886" title="scraper (archaeology)" label="scrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q474188" start="4888" end="4894" title="chisel" label="chisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643900" start="4900" end="4909" title="arrowhead" label="arrowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="4944" end="4970" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="archaeological excavations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443523" start="5045" end="5057" title="Bura culture" label="Bura culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5065" end="5073" title="Iron Age" label="Iron-Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="5074" end="5086" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285982" start="5196" end="5209" title="Iron industry" label="Iron industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="5214" end="5222" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="5227" end="5234" title="forging" label="forging"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="5275" end="5293" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q65685157" start="5423" end="5449" title="Ancient Ferrous Metallurgy Sites of Burkina Faso" label="Ancient Ferrous Metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5514" end="5522" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443523" start="5523" end="5535" title="Bura culture" label="Bura culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165955" start="5689" end="5694" title="Mossi people" label="Mossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="5696" end="5700" title="Fula people" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711628" start="5705" end="5711" title="Dyula people" label="Dioula"/>
<link wikidata="Q862522" start="5829" end="5854" title="Mossi Kingdoms" label="several separate kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5991" end="6002" title="Moosei people" label="Proto-Mossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="6123" end="6128" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36327" start="6172" end="6176" title="Samo language (Burkina)" label="Samo"/>
<link wikidata="Q215583" start="6214" end="6219" title="Dogon people" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6455" end="6466" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="6635" end="6643" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q945436" start="6675" end="6684" title="Sonni Ali" label="Sonni Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q202687" start="6688" end="6695" title="Songhai Empire" label="Songhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q21076431" start="6868" end="6882" title="Gwiriko" label="Gwiriko Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q223761" start="6902" end="6916" title="Bobo Dioulasso" label="Bobo Dioulasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256528" start="6989" end="7000" title="Black Volta" label="Black Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="7099" end="7118" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="7234" end="7246" title="Colonialism" label="colonialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="7484" end="7490" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="7503" end="7522" title="French colonial empire" label="French protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q469314" start="7624" end="7635" title="Samori Ture" label="Samori Ture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821553" start="7858" end="7899" title="Anglo-French Convention of 1898" label="Franco-British Convention of 14 June 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q192415" start="8114" end="8125" title="Volta River" label="Volta basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271523" start="8151" end="8174" title="Upper Senegal and Niger" label="Upper Senegal and Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="8185" end="8203" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703" start="8308" end="8314" title="Bamako" label="Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="8798" end="8806" title="Conscription" label="Draftees"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8865" end="8876" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853565" start="8902" end="8919" title="Tirailleurs sénégalais" label="Senegalese Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940702" start="9139" end="9153" title="Volta-Bani War" label="Volta-Bani War"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="9432" end="9438" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q797440" start="9516" end="9534" title="French Upper Volta" label="French Upper Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q192415" start="9886" end="9897" title="Volta River" label="Volta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256528" start="9903" end="9908" title="Black Volta" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083328" start="9910" end="9913" title="Red Volta" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259188" start="9918" end="9929" title="White Volta" label="White Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q797440" start="9993" end="10001" title="List of governors of Upper Volta" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="10155" end="10163" title="coercion" label="coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="10311" end="10322" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q508014" start="10324" end="10336" title="French Sudan" label="French Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="10341" end="10346" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10591" end="10603" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q848478" start="10711" end="10723" title="French Union" label="French Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="10778" end="10797" title="metropolitan France" label="metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="10866" end="10881" title="Self-governance" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q797422" start="10889" end="10912" title="Republic of Upper Volta" label="Republic of Upper Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448101" start="11501" end="11522" title="self-governing colony" label="self-governing colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120363" start="11534" end="11550" title="French Community" label="French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q192415" start="11654" end="11665" title="Volta River" label="Volta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="11690" end="11701" title="Tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256528" start="11717" end="11722" title="Black Volta" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259188" start="11724" end="11729" title="White Volta" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083328" start="11734" end="11743" title="Red Volta" label="Red Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q134252" start="11793" end="11813" title="Flag of Upper Volta" label="former national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q69829" start="11957" end="11963" title="French Fourth Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q442765" start="11986" end="12001" title="Maurice Yaméogo" label="Maurice Yaméogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147080" start="12025" end="12049" title="Voltaic Democratic Union" label="Voltaic Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="12104" end="12122" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18609298" start="12491" end="12509" title="1966 Upper Voltan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1966 military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q529272" start="12608" end="12625" title="Sangoulé Lamizana" label="Sangoulé Lamizana"/>
<link wikidata="Q426944" start="13024" end="13037" title="Sahel drought" label="Sahel drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q557941" start="13403" end="13413" title="Saye Zerbo" label="Saye Zerbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604615" start="13448" end="13462" title="1980 Upper Voltan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="bloodless coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q558209" start="13734" end="13757" title="Jean-Baptiste Ouédraogo" label="Jean-Baptiste Ouédraogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604542" start="13808" end="13842" title="1982 Upper Voltan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1982 Upper Voltan coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q202155" start="14108" end="14122" title="Thomas Sankara" label="Thomas Sankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q57324" start="14240" end="14255" title="Blaise Compaoré" label="Blaise Compaoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398323" start="15112" end="15156" title="Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (Burkina Faso)" label="Committees for the Defense of the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894086" start="15169" end="15195" title="Pioneers of the Revolution" label="Pioneers of the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="15394" end="15410" title="anti-imperialism" label="anti-imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="15446" end="15457" title="foreign aid" label="foreign aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518365" start="15471" end="15482" title="odious debt" label="odious debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="15580" end="15607" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="15618" end="15628" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="15777" end="15802" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="15804" end="15819" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="15825" end="15833" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="15950" end="15960" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="15962" end="15974" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="15980" end="15987" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="16074" end="16089" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="16097" end="16102" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022671" start="17726" end="17730" title="Army of Burkina Faso" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q789848" start="17792" end="17822" title="Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs (France)" label="France&amp;#x27;s foreign ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146988" start="17828" end="17845" title="Quai d&amp;#x27;Orsay" label="Quai d&amp;#x27;Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="18152" end="18158" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="18182" end="18193" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q18600449" start="18437" end="18457" title="1989 Burkina Faso coup attempt" label="coup-attempt in 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590520" start="18536" end="18548" title="Constitution of Burkina Faso" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999067" start="18563" end="18573" title="1991 Burkinabé presidential election" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999068" start="18632" end="18640" title="1998 Burkinabé presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586547" start="19385" end="19402" title="2005 Burkinabé presidential election" label="the 2005 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114998" start="19509" end="19535" title="2010 Burkinabé presidential election" label="2010 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458264" start="19698" end="19721" title="2011 Burkinabè protests" label="2011 Burkinabè protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458264" start="20055" end="20066" title="2011 Burkina Faso mutiny" label="army mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="20137" end="20148" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q909819" start="20256" end="20280" title="2010–2011 Ivorian crisis" label="2010–2011 Ivorian crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q875912" start="20326" end="20344" title="2012 Malian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2012 Malian Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="20381" end="20406" title="Least developed country" label="least-developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q773547" start="20751" end="20784" title="Ouagadougou Airport" label="Ouagadougou International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q223625" start="21006" end="21012" title="curfew" label="curfew"/>
<link wikidata="Q18402168" start="21054" end="21073" title="Yacouba Isaac Zida" label="Lt. Col. Isaac Zida"/>
<link wikidata="Q22342945" start="21160" end="21186" title="2015 Burkinabè general election" label="2015 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="21294" end="21307" title="civil society" label="civil-society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105972" start="21432" end="21446" title="Michel Kafando" label="Michel Kafando"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559344" start="21581" end="21614" title="Regiment of Presidential Security" label="Regiment of Presidential Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977821" start="21635" end="21651" title="2015 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005891" start="21717" end="21747" title="National Council for Democracy" label="National Council for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978710" start="21825" end="21841" title="Gilbert Diendéré" label="Gilbert Diendéré"/>
<link wikidata="Q22342945" start="22050" end="22067" title="2015 Burkinabè general election" label="General elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q599988" start="22100" end="22126" title="Roch Marc Christian Kaboré" label="Roch Marc Christian Kaboré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576507" start="22209" end="22224" title="Zéphirin Diabré" label="Zéphirin Diabré"/>
<link wikidata="Q84523592" start="22325" end="22361" title="2020 Burkinabè general election" label="general election of 22 November 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q89035147" start="22643" end="22662" title="Jihadist insurgency in Burkina Faso" label="Jihadist insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q86831539" start="22697" end="22729" title="Islamist insurgency in the Sahel" label="Islamist insurgency in the Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082207" start="22856" end="22881" title="2016 Ouagadougou attacks" label="attacked the capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="22885" end="22896" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635966" start="22917" end="22948" title="Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb" label="Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16525650" start="22953" end="22968" title="Al-Mourabitoun (militant group)" label="Al-Mourabitoune"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="23023" end="23027" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q28499712" start="23114" end="23127" title="Ansar ul Islam (Western Africa)" label="Ansarul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q30726938" start="23141" end="23160" title="Ibrahim Malam Dicko" label="Ibrahim Malam Dicko"/>
<link wikidata="Q385973" start="23211" end="23224" title="Soum Province" label="Soum province"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162879" start="23263" end="23283" title="Nassoumbou attack" label="attack on Nassoumbou"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="23354" end="23358" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089020" start="23533" end="23557" title="Burkina Faso-Mali border" label="Burkina Faso-Mali border"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23677" end="23688" title="Jafar Dicko" label="Jafar Dicko"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877411" start="23722" end="23761" title="Jama&amp;#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin" label="Jama&amp;#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50312175" start="23762" end="23789" title="2018 Ouagadougou attacks" label="attacked the French embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="23793" end="23804" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="24174" end="24192" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850126" start="24378" end="24409" title="2019 attacks in Burkina Faso" label="increased significantly in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354074" start="24428" end="24433" title="Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project" label="ACLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110506" start="24596" end="24606" title="Christianity in Burkina Faso" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="24667" end="24685" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354074" start="25154" end="25200" title="Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project" label="Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q107113646" start="25346" end="25410" title="Solhan and Tadaryat massacres" label="massacred over 170 people in the villages of Solhan and Tadaryat"/>
<link wikidata="Q997197" start="25442" end="25450" title="Gorgadji Department" label="Gorgadji"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877411" start="25485" end="25524" title="Jama&amp;#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin" label="Jama&amp;#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112338979" start="25551" end="25556" title="Inata, Burkina Faso" label="Inata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="25666" end="25672" title="morale" label="morale"/>
<link wikidata="Q108175012" start="25831" end="25873" title="Volunteers for the Defense of the Homeland" label="Volunteers for the Defense of the Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635965" start="26136" end="26161" title="Aid to the Church in Need" label="Aid to the Church in Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q599988" start="26349" end="26375" title="Roch Marc Christian Kaboré" label="Roch Marc Christian Kaboré"/>
<link wikidata="Q110666433" start="26399" end="26447" title="Patriotic Movement for Safeguard and Restoration" label="Patriotic Movement for Safeguard and Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q110666454" start="26539" end="26565" title="Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba" label="Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="26697" end="26703" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="26712" end="26725" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q599988" start="27068" end="27084" title="Roch Marc Christian Kaboré" label="President Kaboré"/>
<link wikidata="Q114796471" start="27281" end="27295" title="Siege of Djibo" label="Siege of Djibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q112570893" start="27377" end="27388" title="2022 Seytenga massacre" label="were killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q997262" start="27392" end="27411" title="Seytenga Department" label="Seytenga Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061214" start="27413" end="27426" title="Séno Province" label="Séno Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q114341246" start="27792" end="27806" title="Ibrahim Traoré" label="Ibrahim Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q114835874" start="28127" end="28164" title="Apollinaire Joachim Kyélem de Tambèla" label="Apollinaire Joachim Kyélem de Tambèla"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904076" start="28586" end="28600" title="Karma massacre" label="Karma massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877411" start="28722" end="28726" title="Jama&amp;#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal-Muslimin" label="JNIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q129811621" start="28742" end="28756" title="2024 Barsalogho attack" label="a major attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q809135" start="28774" end="28784" title="Barsalogho Department" label="Barsalogho"/>
<link wikidata="Q932426" start="28874" end="28876" title="9th parallel north" label="9°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255490" start="28881" end="28886" title="15th parallel north" label="15° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701439" start="28934" end="28938" title="6th meridian west" label="6° W"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703436" start="28943" end="28947" title="3rd meridian east" label="3° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q163967" start="29046" end="29055" title="peneplain" label="peneplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="29165" end="29176" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061151" start="29177" end="29183" title="massif" label="massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="29242" end="29251" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q116675" start="29284" end="29294" title="Ténakourou" label="Ténakourou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256528" start="29634" end="29645" title="Black Volta" label="Black Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259188" start="29676" end="29687" title="White Volta" label="White Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083328" start="29718" end="29727" title="Red Volta" label="Red Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q615662" start="29855" end="29860" title="Komoé River" label="Komoé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="29909" end="29920" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="29926" end="29932" title="drainage basin" label="drains"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="29986" end="29997" title="tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="30045" end="30061" title="Torrent (stream)" label="seasonal streams"/>
<link wikidata="Q632463" start="30227" end="30230" title="Lake Bam" label="Bam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="30327" end="30342" title="Drought" label="Water shortages"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="30457" end="30480" title="Sahelian Acacia savanna" label="Sahelian Acacia savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474468" start="30485" end="30506" title="West Sudanian savanna" label="West Sudanian savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="30525" end="30537" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="30856" end="30870" title="primary forest" label="primary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="31097" end="31113" title="State ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q214152" start="31294" end="31303" title="harmattan" label="harmattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="31497" end="31502" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290693" start="31663" end="31679" title="tropical savanna" label="tropical savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="31744" end="31758" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="31798" end="31804" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q209703" start="31848" end="31853" title="Sudan (region)" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="31909" end="31917" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="32236" end="32241" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83931" start="32597" end="32603" title="locust" label="locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776776" start="32609" end="32617" title="Cricket (insect)" label="crickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q39313" start="33087" end="33124" title="Natural resources of Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso&amp;#x27;s natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="33139" end="33148" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="33150" end="33159" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="33161" end="33167" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="33169" end="33178" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="33181" end="33187" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148489" start="33193" end="33197" title="Salt mining" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="33251" end="33259" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001362" start="33680" end="33695" title="Wildlife in Burkina Faso" label="fauna and flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q726863" start="33740" end="33755" title="W National Park" label="W National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q173837" start="33841" end="33859" title="Arly National Park" label="Arly National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778136" start="33960" end="33981" title="Mare aux Hippopotames" label="Mare aux Hippopotames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239630" start="34021" end="34053" title="List of national parks in Africa" label="List of national parks in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971503" start="34058" end="34097" title="List of protected areas of Burkina Faso" label="List of protected areas of Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590520" start="34132" end="34144" title="Constitution of Burkina Faso" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="34174" end="34202" title="Semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential government"/>
<link wikidata="Q290004" start="34245" end="34270" title="List of heads of state of Burkina Faso" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354647" start="34286" end="34293" title="Elections in Burkina Faso" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="34550" end="34561" title="unicameralism" label="one chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q619238" start="34575" end="34592" title="National Assembly (Burkina Faso)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="34832" end="34841" title="bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34969" end="34987" title="Decentralization#Government decentralization" label="decentralize power"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="35229" end="35246" title="Political freedom" label="Political freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="35289" end="35315" title="Political freedom" label="Human rights organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q110663445" start="36359" end="36388" title="January 2022 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="January 2022 coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q114341504" start="36560" end="36591" title="September 2022 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="September 2022 coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q867094" start="36654" end="36679" title="Regions of Burkina Faso" label="13 administrative regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q852151" start="36705" end="36717" title="Provinces of Burkina Faso" label="45 provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566190" start="36722" end="36737" title="Departments of Burkina Faso" label="301 departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q605883" start="36839" end="36872" title="Community of Sahel–Saharan States" label="Community of Sahel–Saharan States"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="36874" end="36889" title="La Francophonie" label="La Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="36891" end="36926" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="36979" end="36985" title="ECOWAS" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="36994" end="37007" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18816679" start="37058" end="37066" title="G5 Sahel" label="G5 Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="37319" end="37324" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="37329" end="37333" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022671" start="37355" end="37359" title="Army of Burkina Faso" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776019" start="38396" end="38409" title="French police" label="French police"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="38625" end="38636" title="Gendarmerie" label="Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867573" start="38822" end="38860" title="Ministry of Territorial Administration" label="Ministry of Territorial Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559344" start="38944" end="38977" title="Regiment of Presidential Security" label="Regiment of Presidential Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q842389" start="39565" end="39574" title="Share taxi" label="bush-taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="39902" end="39909" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q50840653" start="39911" end="39923" title="pearl millet" label="pearl millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929699" start="41291" end="41331" title="West African Monetary and Economic Union" label="West African Monetary and Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="41360" end="41369" title="West African CFA franc" label="CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q620942" start="41393" end="41432" title="Central Bank of the West African States" label="Central Bank of the West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="41454" end="41459" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q926217" start="41849" end="41861" title="Microfinance" label="Microfinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029901" start="44110" end="44170" title="Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa" label="Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="44335" end="44341" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="44343" end="44347" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="44349" end="44358" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="44360" end="44364" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q191222" start="44366" end="44377" title="cassiterite" label="cassiterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="45089" end="45097" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="45176" end="45187" title="state-owned" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="45188" end="45203" title="utility company" label="utility company"/>
<link wikidata="Q625083" start="45601" end="45615" title="Water infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="45694" end="45712" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="46057" end="46084" title="Millennium Development Goal" label="Millennium Development Goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q773547" start="46958" end="46977" title="Ouagadougou Airport" label="Ouagadougou Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="47065" end="47073" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="47078" end="47086" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q598661" start="47121" end="47143" title="Bobo Dioulasso Airport" label="Bobo Dioulasso Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165280" start="47176" end="47183" title="Port Bouet Airport" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q291317" start="47186" end="47216" title="Rail transport in Burkina Faso" label="Rail transport in Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q766464" start="47259" end="47263" title="Kaya, Burkina Faso" label="Kaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="47267" end="47274" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="47294" end="47305" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q460697" start="47307" end="47316" title="Koudougou" label="Koudougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q639674" start="47337" end="47344" title="Banfora" label="Banfora"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="47885" end="47890" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="47895" end="47902" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="47955" end="47962" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="48927" end="48950" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="51308" end="51328" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="51448" end="51472" title="U.S. Department of State" label="U.S. Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004847" start="51536" end="51543" title="Slavery in modern Africa" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="51646" end="51651" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104778119" start="51743" end="51768" title="trans-Saharan slave trade" label="trans-Saharan slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q33536" start="52025" end="52032" title="Gur languages" label="Voltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407391" start="52041" end="52046" title="Mandé peoples" label="Mandé"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="52073" end="52079" title="Dioula language" label="Dioula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165955" start="52094" end="52099" title="Mossi people" label="Mossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q502215" start="52226" end="52240" title="Northern Region (Ghana)" label="northern Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619497" start="52378" end="52388" title="Mogho Naba" label="Mogho Naba"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="52463" end="52475" title="multilingual" label="multilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q629071" start="52489" end="52505" title="working language" label="working language"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="52511" end="52517" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="52572" end="52579" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="52734" end="52739" title="Mossi language" label="Mooré"/>
<link wikidata="Q32934" start="52741" end="52746" title="Bissa language" label="Bissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="52748" end="52753" title="Dyula language" label="Dyula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="52758" end="52762" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="52818" end="52824" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q629071" start="52873" end="52889" title="working language" label="working language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="52895" end="52902" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q645304" start="53009" end="53019" title="indigenous language" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="53266" end="53271" title="Mossi language" label="Mooré"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="53300" end="53304" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="53314" end="53324" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="53334" end="53341" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q32934" start="53351" end="53356" title="Bissa language" label="Bissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35157" start="53366" end="53371" title="Bwamu language" label="Bwamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="53381" end="53387" title="Dagara language" label="Dagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q33614" start="53395" end="53398" title="San language" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q35807" start="53408" end="53414" title="Lobiri language" label="Lobiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089032" start="53426" end="53431" title="Lyélé language" label="Lyélé"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628055" start="53443" end="53447" title="Bobo language" label="Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33795" start="53452" end="53459" title="Sénoufo language" label="Sénoufo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069841" start="53476" end="53480" title="Nuni language" label="Nuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q36030" start="53490" end="53496" title="Dafing language" label="Dafing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="53506" end="53514" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="53522" end="53528" title="Kasena language" label="Kassem"/>
<link wikidata="Q35074" start="53538" end="53543" title="Gouin language" label="Gouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234776" start="53553" end="53558" title="Dogon language" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="53560" end="53567" title="Songhai language" label="Songhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q721007" start="53573" end="53582" title="Gourounsi language" label="Gourounsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35708" start="53601" end="53610" title="Koussassé language" label="Koussassé"/>
<link wikidata="Q36274" start="53612" end="53618" title="Sembla language" label="Sembla"/>
<link wikidata="Q36252" start="53624" end="53630" title="Siamou language" label="Siamou"/>
<link wikidata="Q33681" start="53808" end="53823" title="Mande languages" label="Mandé languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="53870" end="53875" title="Dyula language" label="Dyula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628055" start="53925" end="53929" title="Bobo language" label="Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36327" start="53931" end="53935" title="Samo language (Burkina)" label="Samo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36030" start="53941" end="53946" title="Marka language" label="Marka"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="53948" end="53952" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="53995" end="54005" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q32934" start="54035" end="54040" title="Bissa language" label="Bissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155715" start="54086" end="54112" title="government of Burkina Faso" label="government of Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="54237" end="54242" title="Sunni" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="54285" end="54295" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760132" start="54353" end="54362" title="Tijaniyah" label="Tijaniyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="54363" end="54367" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q386498" start="54541" end="54571" title="African traditional religion" label="traditional indigenous beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q215583" start="54584" end="54598" title="Dogon religion" label="Dogon religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="54661" end="54669" title="Animism" label="Animists"/>
<link wikidata="Q429149" start="54724" end="54733" title="Sud-Ouest Region (Burkina Faso)" label="Sud-Ouest"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="55318" end="55328" title="prevalence" label="prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="55594" end="55619" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81886" start="55868" end="55898" title="Demographic and Health Surveys" label="Demographic and Health Surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q30953" start="55983" end="55995" title="Dengue fever" label="Dengue fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076606" start="56931" end="56956" title="University of Ouagadougou" label="University of Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551817" start="56958" end="57002" title="The Polytechnic University of Bobo-Dioulasso" label="The Polytechnic University of Bobo-Dioulasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551610" start="57012" end="57035" title="University of Koudougou" label="University of Koudougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="57144" end="57155" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053014" start="57243" end="57278" title="International School of Ouagadougou" label="International School of Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421372" start="57597" end="57616" title="Global Hunger Index" label="Global Hunger Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="58498" end="58517" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q81886" start="58781" end="58810" title="Demographic and Health Surveys" label="Demographic and Health Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="58964" end="58976" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="59467" end="59472" title="USAid" label="USAid"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="59793" end="59799" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="60022" end="60042" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q267941" start="60052" end="60066" title="Oxfam Intermón" label="Oxfam Intermón"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650581" start="60071" end="60080" title="ACDI/VOCA" label="ACDI/VOCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="60182" end="60202" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q320863" start="62431" end="62441" title="World Bank Group" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263750" start="64729" end="64755" title="Literature in Burkina Faso" label="Literature in Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="64772" end="64786" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165955" start="65027" end="65039" title="Mossi people" label="Mossi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296131" start="65173" end="65182" title="Nazi Boni" label="Nazi Boni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777499" start="65374" end="65397" title="theatre of Burkina Faso" label="theatre of Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q161524" start="65667" end="65671" title="mask" label="mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777510" start="65755" end="65769" title="French theatre" label="French theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269058" start="65829" end="65842" title="Theatre of the Oppressed" label="forum theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20852" start="65914" end="65925" title="Poetry slam" label="Slam poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q87191238" start="66010" end="66024" title="Malika Ouattara" label="Malika Outtara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="66307" end="66318" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554385" start="66518" end="66522" title="SIAO" label="SIAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="66708" end="66718" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="66735" end="66747" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165955" start="66754" end="66766" title="Mossi people" label="Mossi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="66806" end="66817" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q766258" start="66874" end="66881" title="Gurunsi people" label="Gurunsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294392" start="66883" end="66888" title="Gurma people" label="Gurma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157179" start="66890" end="66897" title="Dagaaba people" label="Dagaaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q961201" start="66902" end="66906" title="Lobi people" label="Lobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33536" start="66929" end="66942" title="Gur languages" label="Gur languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="66966" end="66980" title="Mossi language" label="Mossi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="67040" end="67046" title="Fulani" label="Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="67054" end="67059" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33681" start="67106" end="67121" title="Mande languages" label="Mande languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36327" start="67134" end="67138" title="Samo language (Burkina)" label="Samo"/>
<link wikidata="Q866644" start="67140" end="67145" title="Bissa people" label="Bissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q888796" start="67147" end="67151" title="Bobo people" label="Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266038" start="67153" end="67159" title="Senufo people" label="Senufo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351953" start="67164" end="67169" title="Marka people" label="Marka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126422" start="67484" end="67511" title="Radio Télévision du Burkina" label="Radio Télévision du Burkina"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="67559" end="67570" title="medium-wave" label="medium-wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="67572" end="67574" title="Amplitude modulation" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="67588" end="67590" title="Frequency modulation" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q339733" start="68035" end="68048" title="Norbert Zongo" label="Norbert Zongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18687970" start="69286" end="69296" title="Sams&amp;#x27;K Le Jah" label="Karim Sama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115813" start="69587" end="69619" title="Committee to Protect Journalists" label="Committee to Protect Journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973144" start="70103" end="70125" title="cinema of Burkina Faso" label="cinema of Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q387670" start="70241" end="70255" title="African cinema" label="African cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202380" start="70308" end="70315" title="FESPACO" label="FESPACO"/>
<link wikidata="Q202155" start="70727" end="70744" title="Thomas Sankara" label="President Sankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495587" start="70924" end="70937" title="Gaston Kaboré" label="Gaston Kaboré"/>
<link wikidata="Q113628" start="70939" end="70956" title="Idrissa Ouedraogo" label="Idrissa Ouedraogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q530045" start="70961" end="70973" title="Dani Kouyate" label="Dani Kouyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="71255" end="71266" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="71271" end="71278" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="71280" end="71286" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="71320" end="71324" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="71327" end="71330" title="yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q80531" start="71336" end="71340" title="okra" label="okra"/>
<link wikidata="Q839492" start="71502" end="71510" title="Palm wine" label="palm sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202380" start="72008" end="72062" title="Panafrican Film and Television Festival of Ouagadougou" label="Panafrican Film and Television Festival of Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554385" start="72188" end="72233" title="International Art and Craft Fair, Ouagadougou" label="International Art and Craft Fair, Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261738" start="72387" end="72430" title="Symposium de sculpture sur granit de Laongo" label="Symposium de sculpture sur granit de Laongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="72472" end="72483" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142026" start="72504" end="72514" title="Oubritenga" label="Oubritenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972022" start="72521" end="72558" title="National Culture Week of Burkina Faso" label="National Culture Week of Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814492" start="72821" end="72867" title="Festival International des Masques et des Arts" label="Festival International des Masques et des Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309418" start="72891" end="72908" title="Traditional African masks" label="traditional masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q934436" start="72937" end="72945" title="Dédougou" label="Dédougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600088" start="73365" end="73373" title="Yennenga" label="Yennenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="73409" end="73430" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q688351" start="73523" end="73550" title="2013 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2013 African Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="73658" end="73672" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q14513647" start="73775" end="73799" title="Burkina Faso national basketball team" label="men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q610579" start="73863" end="73873" title="AfroBasket" label="AfroBasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="73928" end="73948" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20976240" start="73962" end="73982" title="Hugues Fabrice Zango" label="Hugues Fabrice Zango"/>
<link wikidata="Q65242128" start="74050" end="74072" title="Athletics at the 2020 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s triple jump" label="men&amp;#x27;s triple jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017958" start="74186" end="74224" title="Index of Burkina Faso-related articles" label="Index of Burkina Faso-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112215" start="74227" end="74250" title="Outline of Burkina Faso" label="Outline of Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q116039576" start="74253" end="74273" title="2023 in Burkina Faso" label="2023 in Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="75498" end="75504" title="ECOWAS" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="75537" end="75545" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="75574" end="75584" title="Al Jazeera" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998753" start="75638" end="75658" title="New Internationalist" label="New Internationalist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3477" wikidata="Q535370" url="?curid=3477" title="Economy of the Bahamas">
<text>The economy of the Bahamas is dependent upon tourism and offshore banking. The Bahamas is the richest country in the West Indies and is ranked 14th in North America for nominal GDP. It is a stable, developing nation in the Lucayan Archipelago, with a population of 391,232 (2016). Steady growth in tourism receipts and a boom in construction of new hotels, resorts, and residences had led to solid GDP growth for many years. The slowdown in the Economy of the United States and the September 11 attacks held back growth in these sectors from 2001 to 2003. 

Financial services constitute the second-most important sector of the Bahamian economy, accounting for about 15% of GDP. However, since December 2000, when the government enacted new regulations on the financial sector, many international businesses have left the Bahamas. Manufacturing and agriculture together contribute approximately 10% of GDP and show little growth, despite government incentives for those sectors. Overall growth prospects in the short run rest heavily on the fortunes of the tourism sector, which depends on growth in the United States, the source of more than 80% of the visitors. In addition to tourism and banking, the government supports the development of a &quot;2nd-pillar&quot;, e-commerce.

==Features of the Bahamian economy==
The Bahamian economy is almost entirely dependent on tourism and financial services to generate foreign exchange earnings. The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the Bahamas is approximately $5.7 billion with tourism accounting for 50%, financial services nearly 20% and the balance spread among retail and wholesale trade, fishing, light manufacturing and agriculture. The European Union lists the Bahamas as one of several Caribbean &quot;uncooperative jurisdictions&quot; because it fails to meet tax fairness and transparency benchmarks.

===Tourism===

Tourism alone provides an estimated 51% of the gross domestic product (GDP) and employs about half the Bahamian workforce. In 2016, over 3 million tourists visited the Bahamas, most of whom are from the United States and Canada.

A major contribution to the recent growth in the overall Bahamian economy is Kerzner International&#x27;s Atlantis Resort and Casino, which took over the former Paradise Island Resort and has provided a much needed boost to the economy. In addition, the opening of Breezes Super Club and Sandals Resort also aided this turnaround. The Bahamian Government also has adopted a proactive approach to courting foreign investors and has conducted major investment missions to the Far East, Europe, Latin America, and Canada. The primary purpose of the trips was to restore the reputation of the Bahamas in these markets.

===Offshore financial services===
Financial services constitute the second-most important sector of the Bahamian economy, accounting for up to 17% of GDP, due to the country&#x27;s status as an offshore financial center. As of December 1998, 418 banks and trust companies have been licensed in the Bahamas. The Bahamas promulgated the International Business Companies (IBC) Act in January 1990 to enhance the country&#x27;s status as a leading financial center. The Act simplified and reduced the cost of incorporating offshore companies in the Bahamas. Within 9 years, more than 100,000 IBC-type companies had been established. In February 1991, the government also legalized the establishment of Asset Protection Trusts in the Bahamas. In December 2000, partly as a response to appearing the plenary FATF Blacklist, the government enacted a legislative package to better regulate the financial sector, including creation of a Financial Intelligence Unit and enforcement of &quot;know-your-customer&quot; rules. Other initiatives include the enactment of the Foundations Act in 2004 and the planned introduction of legislation to regulate Private Trust Companies. After being later off the blacklist, in December 2020 Bahamas also was taken off the FATF greylist.

===Agriculture===


Agriculture and fisheries industry together account for 5% of GDP. The Bahamas exports lobster and some fish but does not raise these items commercially. There is no large scale agriculture, and most agricultural products are consumed domestically. The Bahamas imports more than $250 million in foodstuffs per year, representing about 80% of its food consumption. The government aims to expand food production to reduce imports and generate foreign exchange. It actively seeks foreign investment aimed at increasing agricultural exports, particularly specialty food items. The government officially lists beef and pork production and processing, fruits and nuts, dairy production, winter vegetables, and mariculture (shrimp farming) as the areas in which it wishes to encourage foreign investment.

=== Trade ===
The Bahamian Government maintains the value of the Bahamian dollar on a par with the U.S. dollar. The Bahamas is a beneficiary of the U.S.-Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act (CBTPA), Canada&#x27;s CARIBCAN program, and the European Union&#x27;s Lome IV Agreement. Although the Bahamas participates in the political aspects of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), it has not entered into joint economic initiatives with other Caribbean states.

===Industry===
The Bahamas has a few notable industrial firms: the Freeport pharmaceutical firm, PharmaChem Technologies (GrandBahama) Ltd. (formerly Syntex); the BORCO oil facility, also in Freeport, which transships oil in the region; the Commonwealth Brewery in Nassau, which produces Heineken, Guinness, and Kalik beers; and Bacardi Corp., which distills rum in Nassau for shipment to the U.S. and European markets. Other industries include sun-dried sea salt in Great Inagua, a wet dock facility in Freeport for repair of cruise ships, and mining of aragonite—a type of limestone with several industrial uses—from the sea floor at Ocean Cay. Other smaller but more nimble players in the banking industry include Fidelity Bank (Bahamas) Ltd. (FBB) and Royal Fidelity Merchant Bank &amp; Trust Limited (RFMBT). FBB offers a wide range of innovative banking products including loan products with built-in savings plans. RFMBT is the only merchant bank in the Bahamas and is a joint venture with Royal Bank of Canada. It provides investment products and services and attracts the majority of the corporate business deals in the Bahamas, most recently acting as financial advisor and placement agent for the largest initial public offering (IPO) ever in the Bahamas with the IPO of Commonwealth Brewery, a Heineken subsidiary.

The Hawksbill Creek Agreement established a duty-free zone in Freeport, the Bahamas&#x27; second-largest city, with a nearby industrial park to encourage foreign industrial investment. The Hong Kong-based firm, Hutchison Whampoa, has opened a container port in Freeport. The Bahamian Parliament approved legislation in 1993 that extended most Freeport tax and duty exemptions through 2054.

==Taxation==
The Bahamas has no income tax, corporate tax, capital gains tax, or wealth tax. Payroll taxes fund social insurance benefits and amount to 3.9% paid by the employee and 5.9% paid by the employer. In 2010, overall tax revenue was 17.2% of GDP. A value-added tax (VAT) of 7.5% has been levied 1 January 2015. It then increased from 7.5% to 12% effective from 1 July 2018.

==Statistics==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2017.

* Household income or consumption by percentage share—highest 10%: 27% (2000)
* Agriculture - products—citrus, vegetables, poultry
* Electricity - production—2,505 GWh (2007 est.) - Rank 133
* Electricity - consumption—1,793 GWh (2007) - Rank 133
* Oil - consumption— (2006 est.) - Rank 115
* Oil - exports—transhipments of (2003)
* Exchange rate—Bahamian dollar is pegged to the U.S. dollar on a one-to-one basis

The Bahamas has the 47th freest economy in the world according to The Heritage Foundation 2010 &quot;Index of Economic Freedom&quot;. The Bahamas is ranked 7th out of 29 countries in the South and Central America/Caribbean region, and its overall score is higher than the regional and world averages. Total government spending, including consumption and transfer payments, is relatively low. In the most recent year, government spending was 23.4% of GDP.

== See also ==
* List of Commonwealth of Nations countries by GDP
* List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP growth
* List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (nominal)
* List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)

==References==

* &quot;Some of the material in this article comes from the CIA World Factbook 2009.&quot;

== External links ==
* Bahamian Government Statistics </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q535370" start="4" end="26" title="Economy of the Bahamas" label="economy of the Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="45" end="52" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593736" start="57" end="70" title="offshore bank" label="offshore bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="75" end="86" title="The Bahamas" label="The Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="117" end="128" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363289" start="223" end="242" title="Lucayan Archipelago" label="Lucayan Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="445" end="473" title="Economy of the United States" label="Economy of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="482" end="502" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1921" end="1943" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2077" end="2090" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2095" end="2101" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="2578" end="2586" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2588" end="2594" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="2596" end="2609" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2615" end="2621" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054493" start="3308" end="3311" title="International Business Company" label="IBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808780" start="3418" end="3441" title="Asset-protection trust" label="Asset Protection Trusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q607466" start="3522" end="3536" title="FATF Blacklist" label="FATF Blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q106145" start="3701" end="3719" title="Know your customer" label="know-your-customer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8303885" start="3860" end="3883" title="Trust company" label="Private Trust Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="4006" end="4017" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q194339" start="4870" end="4885" title="Bahamian dollar" label="Bahamian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="4904" end="4915" title="United States dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039351" start="4958" end="4995" title="Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act" label="Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008815" start="5019" end="5027" title="CARIBCAN" label="CARIBCAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q205995" start="5152" end="5171" title="Caribbean Community" label="Caribbean Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5505" end="5525" title="Commonwealth Brewery" label="Commonwealth Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467" start="5529" end="5535" title="Nassau, Bahamas" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q854383" start="5552" end="5560" title="Heineken Pilsener" label="Heineken"/>
<link wikidata="Q194297" start="5562" end="5570" title="Guinness" label="Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q66861871" start="5576" end="5581" title="Kalik" label="Kalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q685395" start="5593" end="5606" title="Bacardi" label="Bacardi Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="6781" end="6790" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15805" start="6803" end="6820" title="Hutchison Whampoa" label="Hutchison Whampoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q129820879" start="6835" end="6861" title="Freeport Container Port" label="container port in Freeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="7241" end="7256" title="value-added tax" label="value-added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q194339" start="7799" end="7814" title="Bahamian dollar" label="Bahamian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="7832" end="7843" title="United States dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="7933" end="7956" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="The Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="7968" end="7993" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55385841" start="8340" end="8388" title="List of Commonwealth of Nations countries by GDP" label="List of Commonwealth of Nations countries by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716033" start="8391" end="8451" title="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP growth" label="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25242041" start="8454" end="8517" title="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (nominal)" label="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (nominal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462848" start="8520" end="8579" title="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)" label="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="8657" end="8675" title="The World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3514" wikidata="Q5589182" url="?curid=3514" title="Government of Barbados">
<text>The Government of Barbados (GoB) is a unitary parliamentary republic, where the President of Barbados is the head of state and the Prime Minister of Barbados is the head of government.

==Structure==

The country has a bicameral legislature and a political party system, based on universal adult suffrage and fair elections. The Senate has 21 members, appointed by the President, 12 on the advice of the Prime Minister, two on the advice of the Leader of the Opposition, and seven at the President&#x27;s sole discretion. The House of Assembly has 30 members, all elected. Both houses debate all legislation. However, the House of Assembly may override Senate&#x27;s rejection of money bills and other bills except bills amending the Constitution.

Officers of each house (President and Deputy President of the Senate; Speaker, Deputy Speaker, and Chairman of Committees of the Assembly) are elected from the members of the respective houses.

In keeping with the Westminster system of governance, Barbados has evolved into an independent parliamentary democracy, meaning that all political power rests with the Parliament under a non-political President as head of state. Executive authority is vested in the President, who normally acts only on the advice of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, who are collectively responsible to Parliament. Barbadian law is rooted in English common law, and the Constitution of Barbados implemented in 1966, is the supreme law of the land.

Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are set out in the Constitution and are protected by a strict legal code.

The Cabinet is headed by the Prime Minister, who must be an elected member of Parliament, and other ministers are appointed from either chamber by the President, as advised by the Prime Minister.
The President appoints as Leader of the Opposition the member of House of Assembly who commands the support of the largest number of members of that House in opposition to the ruling party&#x27;s government.

The maximum duration of a Parliament is five years from the first sitting. There is a simultaneous dissolution of both Houses of Parliament by the President, acting on the advice of the Prime Minister.

There is an established non-political civil service. Also, there are separate constitutional commissions for the Judicial and Legal Service, the Public Service, and the Police Service.

==History==

The government has been chosen by elections since 1961 elections, when Barbados achieved full self-governance. Before then, the government was a Crown colony consisting of either colonial administration solely (such as the Executive Council), or a mixture of colonial rule and a partially elected assembly, such as the Legislative Council.

Between 1966 and 2021, the head of state of Barbados was the Monarchy of Barbados represented by the Governor-General of Barbados as its representative. After decades of republicanism, the monarchy was abolished and replaced with a new head of state office, the President of Barbados, on 30 November 2021. 

Since independence the Democratic Labour Party (DLP) held office 1966 to 1976, from 1986 to 1994, and from January 2008 to 2018. The Barbados Labour Party (BLP) governed from 1976 to 1986, from September 1994–2008 and has formed the government from 2018–Present.

== Executive branch ==

| President
| &lt;br&gt;
 Sandra Mason
| Independent
| 30 November 2021
|Prime Minister
| &lt;br&gt;
 Mia Mottley
|Barbados Labour Party
|25 May 2018
The Executive Branch of government conducts the ordinary business of government. These functions are called out by the Prime Minister and cabinet ministers. The prime minister chooses the ministers of government they wish to have in the cabinet but they are actually appointed by the President.
*Heads of State
** President
*Head of Government
** Prime Minister
** Attorney General&#x27;s
** Ministers
Source: St.Lucia Times 

Source: St.Lucia Times 
Source: BGIS

== Legislative Branch ==
Under Barbados&#x27; version of the Westminster system of government, the executive and legislative branches are partly intertwined.
The only official Cabinet office (other than Prime Minister) expressly mentioned in the Constitution of Barbados is Office of the Attorney-General.
* President
* Chief Secretaries (Abolished)
* Auditors-General
* Senators
** Presidents of the Senate
* Members of the House ( a/k/a Members of Parliament)
** Speakers of the House of Assembly
* Clerks of Parliament

=== Law ===
The Constitution of Barbados is the supreme law of the nation. The Attorney General heads the independent judiciary. Historically, Barbadian law was based entirely on English common law with a few local adaptations. At the time of independence, the Parliament of the United Kingdom lost its ability to legislate for Barbados, but the existing English and British common law and statutes in force at that time, together with other measures already adopted by the Barbadian Parliament, became the basis of the new country&#x27;s legal system.

Legislation may be shaped or influenced by such organisations as the United Nations, the Organization of American States, or other international bodies to which Barbados has obligatory commitments by treaty. Additionally, through international co-operation, other institutions may supply the Barbados Parliament with key sample legislation to be adapted to meet local circumstances before enacting it as local law.

New acts are passed by the Barbadian Parliament and require approval by the President to become law. The President, has the power to &quot;withhold assent&quot; from laws by vetoing the proposed law without parliamentary override.

==Judicial branch ==
The judiciary is the legal system through which punishments are handed out to individuals who break the law. The functions of the judiciary are to enforce laws; to interpret laws; to conduct court hearings; to hear court appeals.

The local court system of Barbados is made up of:
*Magistrates&#x27; Courts: Covering Criminal, Civil, Domestic, Domestic Violence, and Juvenile matters. But can also take up matters dealing with Coroner&#x27;s Inquests, Liquor Licences, and civil marriages. Further, the Magistrates&#x27; Courts deal with Contract and Tort law where claims do not exceed $10,000.00.
*The Supreme Court: is made up of High Court and Court of Appeals.
**High Court: Consisting of Civil, Criminal, and Family law divisions.
**Court of Appeal: Handles appeals from the High Court and Magistrates&#x27; Court. It hears appeals in both the civil, and criminal law jurisdictions. It may consist of a single Justice of Appeal sitting in Chambers; or may sit as a Full Court of three Justices of Appeals.
*The Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ), (based in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago), is the court of last resort (final jurisdiction) over Barbadian law. It replaced the London-based Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (JCPC). The CCJ may resolve other disputed matters dealing with the Caribbean Single Market and Economy (CSME).
* Chief Justices
** Justices of Appeals
** Magistrates

==Perception==
Transparency International ranked Barbados as 29th place (of 180) in the world on its Corruption Perceptions Index in 2021, being the least corrupt country in the Caribbean.

== See also ==
* Politics of Barbados
* Monarchy of Barbados
* Parliament of Barbados
* Prime Minister of Barbados
* Cabinet of Barbados
* List of government budgets by country
* List of countries by tax revenue as percentage of GDP

==References==
==Further reading==

==Gallery==
== External links ==
* Barbadian Government Website
* The Barbados Governmental System, Photius Coutsoukis
* Barbados Government statement on the proper titles for members of Government
*Social Security provided by the Government of Barbados
*Laws of Barbados, The World Law Guide
*Laws of Barbados, The World Intellectual Property Organization</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5589182" start="4" end="26" title="Government of Barbados" label="Government of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="38" end="45" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="46" end="59" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="60" end="68" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108857904" start="80" end="101" title="President of Barbados" label="President of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921525" start="131" end="157" title="Prime Minister of Barbados" label="Prime Minister of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="219" end="228" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q586461" start="329" end="335" title="Senate (Barbados)" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q570619" start="526" end="543" title="House of Assembly (Barbados)" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="964" end="982" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="998" end="1006" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="1039" end="1062" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="1081" end="1096" title="political power" label="political power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="1368" end="1386" title="English law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164166" start="1396" end="1420" title="Constitution of Barbados" label="Constitution of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503503" start="1457" end="1472" title="law of the land" label="law of the land"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015493" start="1604" end="1611" title="Cabinet (Barbados)" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921525" start="1629" end="1643" title="Prime Minister of Barbados" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="2246" end="2259" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858567" start="2457" end="2471" title="Barbadian general election, 1961" label="1961 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448101" start="2501" end="2516" title="Self-governing colony" label="self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="2552" end="2564" title="Crown colony" label="Crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419809" start="2630" end="2647" title="Executive Council (Commonwealth countries)" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q586461" start="2726" end="2745" title="Legislative Council of Barbados" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257585" start="2809" end="2829" title="Monarchy of Barbados" label="Monarchy of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261556" start="2849" end="2877" title="Governor-General of Barbados" label="Governor-General of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314726" start="2918" end="2931" title="Republicanism in Barbados" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995869" start="2950" end="2959" title="Abolition of monarchy" label="abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q956182" start="3079" end="3102" title="Democratic Labour Party (Barbados)" label="Democratic Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q740420" start="3189" end="3210" title="Barbados Labour Party" label="Barbados Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q108857904" start="3346" end="3355" title="President of Barbados" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333540" start="3370" end="3382" title="Sandra Mason" label="Sandra Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="3385" end="3396" title="Independent (politician)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921525" start="3417" end="3431" title="Prime Minister of Barbados" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827147" start="3446" end="3457" title="Mia Mottley" label="Mia Mottley"/>
<link wikidata="Q740420" start="3459" end="3480" title="Barbados Labour Party" label="Barbados Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="4020" end="4038" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164166" start="4498" end="4522" title="Constitution of Barbados" label="Constitution of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="4600" end="4609" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="4661" end="4679" title="English common law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="4743" end="4775" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565909" start="4956" end="4976" title="Barbadian Parliament" label="Barbadian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="5125" end="5156" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644922" start="6309" end="6322" title="Supreme Court of Barbados" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q775029" start="6722" end="6748" title="Caribbean Court of Justice" label="Caribbean Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q39178" start="6766" end="6779" title="Port of Spain" label="Port of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="6901" end="6940" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250504" start="7009" end="7044" title="CARICOM Single Market and Economy" label="Caribbean Single Market and Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="7124" end="7150" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="7210" end="7238" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155602" start="7316" end="7336" title="Politics of Barbados" label="Politics of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257585" start="7339" end="7359" title="Monarchy of Barbados" label="Monarchy of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565909" start="7362" end="7384" title="Parliament of Barbados" label="Parliament of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921525" start="7387" end="7413" title="Prime Minister of Barbados" label="Prime Minister of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015493" start="7416" end="7435" title="Cabinet of Barbados" label="Cabinet of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q154820" start="7438" end="7475" title="List of government budgets by country" label="List of government budgets by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529105" start="7478" end="7531" title="List of countries by tax revenue as percentage of GDP" label="List of countries by tax revenue as percentage of GDP"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3533" wikidata="Q997640" url="?curid=3533" title="Government of Belarus">
<text>The Government of the Republic of Belarus (), which consists of the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus (), is the executive branch of state power in Belarus, and is appointed by the President of Belarus. The head of the Government is the President of Belarus, who manages the main agenda of the government and direct the ministers. The National Assembly of Belarus is the continuation of the Supreme Soviet of the BSSR and acts as the functioning parliament for Belarus.

==Council of Ministers==
Below are the 30 members of the Council of Ministers as of 19 August 2020, as well as the head of the presidential administration and the chairmen of the State Committees, who are not technically ministers but are included in the Council of Ministers. Offices which are not technically counted as ministerial posts are italicized. The prime minister, the first deputy prime minister(s), the deputy prime minister(s), the ministers of economy, finance, and foreign affairs, the head of the presidential administration, and the chairman of the State Control Committee together form the Presidium of the Council of Ministers. These officials are highlighted in yellow. The incumbent government resigned en masse on 17 August 2020. A new government was formed on 19 August 2020, consisting of mostly the same people.

===Composition===
&quot;As of 2023:&quot;
==See also==
*Supreme Soviet of Belarus, the preceding supreme state power in Belarus
*National Assembly of Belarus, the current supreme state power in Belarus

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q997640" start="4" end="41" title="Government of Belarus" label="Government of the Republic of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q997640" start="68" end="115" title="Government of Belarus" label="Council of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="162" end="169" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049659" start="195" end="215" title="President of Belarus" label="President of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049659" start="251" end="271" title="President of Belarus" label="President of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798607" start="349" end="377" title="National Assembly of Belarus" label="National Assembly of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115302" start="1094" end="1103" title="Presidium" label="Presidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634021" start="1380" end="1405" title="Supreme Soviet of Belarus" label="Supreme Soviet of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798607" start="1453" end="1481" title="National Assembly of Belarus" label="National Assembly of Belarus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3535" wikidata="Q55445402" url="?curid=3535" title="Telecommunications in Belarus">
<text>Telecommunications in Belarus involves the availability and use of electronic devices and services, such as the telephone, television, radio or computer, for the purpose of communication.

==Telephone system==

* Telephone lines in use: 3,9741 million (2011).
* Mobile/cellular: 11,559,473 subscribers (Q1 2019).
* The phone calling code for Belarus is +375.

The Ministry of Telecommunications controls all telecommunications originating within the country through its carrier unitary enterprise, Beltelecom.
 Minsk has a digital metropolitan network; waiting lists for telephones are long; fixed line penetration is improving although rural areas continue to be underserved; intercity – Belarus has developed a fibre-optic backbone system presently serving at least 13 major cities (1998). Belarus&#x27;s fibre optics form synchronous digital hierarchy rings through other countries&#x27; systems.

===International connection===
Belarus is a member of the Trans-European Line (TEL), Trans-Asia-Europe Fibre-Optic Line (TAE) and has access to the Trans-Siberia Line (TSL); three fibre-optic segments provide connectivity to Latvia, Poland, Russia, and Ukraine; worldwide service is available to Belarus through this infrastructure; Intelsat, Eutelsat, and Intersputnik earth stations.

In 2006 it was announced that Belarus and Russia completed the second broadband link between the two countries, the Yartsevo-Vitebsk cable. The capacity of this high speed terrestrial link which based on DWDM and STM technology is 400 Gbit/s with the ability to upgrade in the future.

===Cellular communications===
Belarus has 3 GSM/UMTS operators – A1, MTS, life:). For 4G data operators use the infrastructure managed by state operator beCloud, VoLTE service currently is offered only with A1.

==Radio and television==
* Television broadcast stations: 100 of which 59 are privately owned.

Belarus has switched from an analog to digital broadcast television. The process finished in May 2015. Belarus broadcasts according to the DVB-T2 standard with MPEG-4 compression.

* Radio broadcast stations: 173 with 24 privately owned, including 30 FM stations.
* Radios: 3.02 million (1997).

==Internet==
* Country code: .by

The state telecom monopoly, Beltelecom, holds the exclusive interconnection with Internet providers outside of Belarus. Beltelecom owns all the backbone channels that linked to the Lattelecom, TEO LT, Tata Communications (former Teleglobe), Synterra, Rostelecom, Transtelekom and MTS ISP&#x27;s. Beltelecom is the only operator licensed to provide commercial VoIP services in Belarus.

Until 2005–2006 broadband access (mostly using ADSL) was available only in a few major cities in Belarus. In Minsk there were a dozen privately owned ISP&#x27;s and in some larger cities Beltelecom&#x27;s broadband was available. Outside these cities the only options for Internet access were dial-up from Beltelecom or GPRS/cdma2000 from mobile operators. In 2006 Beltelecom introduced a new trademark, &quot;Byfly&quot;, for its ADSL access. As of 2008 Byfly was available in all administrative centres of Belarus. Other ISPs are expanding their broadband networks beyond Minsk as well.

Internet use:
* According to a 2006 survey of 1,500 adults by Satio, a third of Belarusians use the Internet—38% of the urban population and 16% of the rural population.
* A 2006 study by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development indicates 56.5% of Belarus&#x27; population were internet-users.
* The International Telecommunication Union showed Internet penetration (Internet users per 100 population) in 2009 at 27% for Belarus, 42% for Serbia, 37% for Romania, 29% for Russia, and 17% for Ukraine.
* According to Internet World Stats, Internet penetration in June 2010 was 47.5%. For comparison, Internet penetration in Ukraine was 33.7%, in Romania 35.5%, Russia 42.8%, and Serbia 55.9%.

The most active Internet users in Belarus belong to the 17–22 age group (38 percent), followed by users in the 23–29 age group. Internet access in Belarus is predominantly urban, with 60 percent of users living in the capital Minsk. The profile of the average Internet user is male, university educated, living in the capital, and working in a state enterprise. The Ministry for Statistics and Analysis estimates that one in four families in Belarus owns a computer at home. The popularity of Internet cafés has fallen in recent years, as most users prefer to access the Internet from home or work. Russian is the most widely used language by Belarusians on the Internet, followed by Belarusian, English, and Polish.

In mid-2009 there were more than 22,300 Belarusian Web sites, of which roughly 13,500 domain names were registered with the top-level domain name &quot;.by&quot;.

In June 2011 E-Belarus.org listed:

* 2 ISPs in the Brest region, 4 in the Gomel region, 1 in the Grodno region, 26 in the Minsk region, 1 in the Mogilev region, and 1 in the Vitebsk region
* 4 ADSL providers
* 3 technology parks
* 2 educational networks
* more than 30 Internet cafes and Wi-Fi Hotspots

== Censorship and media freedom ==

Many western human rights groups state that civil rights and free expression are severely limited in Belarus, though there are some individuals and groups that refuse to be controlled and some journalists have disappeared.

Because the Belarus government limits freedom of expression, several opposition media outlets are broadcast from nearby countries to help provide Belarusians an alternative points of view. This includes the Polish state-owned Belsat TV station and European Radio for Belarus (Eŭrapéjskaje Rádyjo dla Biełarúsi)

Reporters Without Borders ranked Belarus 157th out of 178 countries in its 2014 Press Freedom Index. By comparison, the same index ranked neighbor Ukraine, 126th and Russia, 148th.

In the 2011 Freedom House &quot;Freedom of the Press report&quot;, Belarus scored 92 on a scale from 10 (most free) to 99 (least free), because the government allegedly systematically curtails press freedom. This score placed Belarus 9th from the bottom of the 196 countries included in the report and earned the country a &quot;Not Free&quot; status.

==References==

==External links==
*The Ministry of Information of the Republic of Belarus (Belarusian)
*The Ministry of Communications and Informatization of the Republic of Belarus (Belarusian)
*Media in Belarus, e-Belarus.org
*Mass media in Belarus on the official website of the Republic of Belarus

Major telecommunications operators in Belarus (in Belarusian):
*Beltelecom
*MTS (GSM)
*A1 (GSM)
*Life (GSM)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55445402" start="0" end="29" title="Telecommunications in Belarus" label="Telecommunications in Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389604" start="478" end="496" title="unitary enterprise" label="unitary enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082979" start="498" end="508" title="Beltelecom" label="Beltelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="511" end="516" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="1126" end="1132" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1134" end="1140" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="1154" end="1161" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="1234" end="1242" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q848336" start="1244" end="1252" title="Eutelsat" label="Eutelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548793" start="1258" end="1270" title="Intersputnik" label="Intersputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677172" start="1404" end="1412" title="Yartsevo" label="Yartsevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q102217" start="1413" end="1420" title="Vitebsk" label="Vitebsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352150" start="2021" end="2027" title="DVB-T2" label="DVB-T2"/>
<link wikidata="Q219763" start="2042" end="2048" title="MPEG-4" label="MPEG-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q39870" start="2207" end="2210" title=".by" label=".by"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395390" start="2413" end="2432" title="Tata Communications" label="Tata Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517293" start="2441" end="2450" title="Teleglobe" label="Teleglobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477012" start="2463" end="2473" title="Rostelecom" label="Rostelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="2645" end="2649" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="2707" end="2712" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q192731" start="2891" end="2898" title="dial-up" label="dial-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q79708" start="2918" end="2922" title="GPRS" label="GPRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023122" start="2923" end="2931" title="cdma2000" label="cdma2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="3029" end="3033" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="3080" end="3101" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="3380" end="3430" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="3502" end="3539" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q272399" start="4387" end="4400" title="Internet café" label="Internet café"/>
<link wikidata="Q39870" start="4764" end="4767" title=".by" label=".by"/>
<link wikidata="Q272399" start="5046" end="5060" title="Internet cafes" label="Internet cafes"/>
<link wikidata="Q334765" start="5065" end="5079" title="Hotspot (Wi-Fi)" label="Wi-Fi Hotspots"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="5161" end="5172" title="civil right" label="civil right"/>
<link wikidata="Q187409" start="5567" end="5573" title="Belsat" label="Belsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374265" start="5589" end="5615" title="European Radio for Belarus" label="European Radio for Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="5653" end="5678" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="5686" end="5693" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="5733" end="5752" title="Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="5847" end="5860" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3536" wikidata="Q1290238" url="?curid=3536" title="Transport in Belarus">
<text>This article is about transport in [[Belarus]].

== Railways ==

Rail transport in Belarus is operated by Belarusskaya Chyhunka
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;country comparison to the world:&quot; 32
&lt;br&gt;&quot;broad gauge:&quot;
 of gauge ( electrified) (2006)

*City with underground railway system: Minsk, see Minsk Metro
*For tramway systems: see List of town tramway systems in Belarus

== Highways ==
The owners of highways may be the Republic of Belarus, its political subdivisions, legal and natural persons, who own roads, as well as legal entities, which roads are fixed on the basis of economic or operational management.

Republican state administration in the field of roads and road activity is the Department Belavtodor under the Ministry of Transport and Communications of the Republic of Belarus.

In total, in Belarus there are more than of roads and of departmental thousand (agriculture, industry, forestry, etc.), including in cities and towns. The density of paved roads has been relatively low – 337 km per 1,000 km2 territory – for comparison, in European countries with well-developed road network, the figure is an average of .

&quot;total:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;paved:&quot;
 (2003)

== Waterways ==
 (use limited by location on perimeter of country and by shallowness) (2003)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;country comparison to the world:&quot; 37

Belarus&#x27; inland waterways are managed by Dneprobugvodput, Belvodput, and the Dnieper-Berezinsky Enterprise.

== Pipelines ==
gas ; oil ; refined products (2008)

== Ports and harbors ==
* Mazyr - on the river Pripyat

== Airports ==

65 (2008):
&lt;br&gt;&quot;country comparison to the world:&quot; 76

* Minsk International Airport
* Minsk-1
* Gomel Airport

=== Airports - with paved runways ===

&quot;total:&quot;
35
&lt;br&gt;&quot;over :&quot;
2
&lt;br&gt;&quot;:&quot;
22
&lt;br&gt;&quot;:&quot;
4
&lt;br&gt;&quot;:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;under :&quot;
6 (2008)

=== Airports - with unpaved runways ===
&quot;total:&quot;
30
&lt;br&gt;&quot;:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;:&quot;
2
&lt;br&gt;&quot;under :&quot;
26 (2008)

=== Heliports ===
1 (2007)Heliports is where helicopter land.

=== National air-carrier ===
*Belavia

==See also==
*Transport in the Soviet Union
*Vehicle registration plates of Belarus

==References==

==External links==
*Automobiles, Trains And Buses - Getting Around Belarus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1290238" start="22" end="46" title="Transport in Belarus" label="transport in [[Belarus]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q282271" start="65" end="90" title="Rail transport in Belarus" label="Rail transport in Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76987" start="106" end="127" title="Belarusskaya Chyhunka" label="Belarusskaya Chyhunka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="295" end="306" title="rapid transit" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="323" end="328" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q232164" start="334" end="345" title="Minsk Metro" label="Minsk Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643533" start="372" end="411" title="List of town tramway systems in Belarus" label="List of town tramway systems in Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209325" start="487" end="509" title="Administrative divisions of Belarus" label="political subdivisions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="745" end="755" title="Belavtodor" label="Belavtodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q120846735" start="1432" end="1447" title="Dneprobugvodput" label="Dneprobugvodput"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1449" end="1458" title="Belvodput" label="Belvodput"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1468" end="1497" title="Dnieper-Berezinsky Enterprise" label="Dnieper-Berezinsky Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q386487" start="1579" end="1584" title="Mazyr" label="Mazyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q157042" start="1600" end="1607" title="Pripyat River" label="Pripyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q777855" start="1697" end="1724" title="Minsk International Airport" label="Minsk International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373238" start="1727" end="1734" title="Minsk-1" label="Minsk-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q27546" start="1737" end="1750" title="Gomel Airport" label="Gomel Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q815314" start="2237" end="2244" title="Belavia" label="Belavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645915" start="2260" end="2289" title="Transport in the Soviet Union" label="Transport in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740456" start="2291" end="2329" title="Vehicle registration plates of Belarus" label="Vehicle registration plates of Belarus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3537" wikidata="Q276318" url="?curid=3537" title="Armed Forces of Belarus">
<text>The Armed Forces of the Republic of Belarus are the military forces of Belarus. It consists of the Ground Forces and the Air Force and Air Defence Forces, all under the command of the Ministry of Defence. As a landlocked country, Belarus has no navy, however the Belarusian military does have control over some small Soviet inherited naval vessels in its rivers and lakes.

In 2017, IISS estimated that personnel in the armed forces numbered 49,000, and nearly 350,000 reserves. Most soldiers are conscripts serving for a period of 18 months, although there is an alternative service option. The Belarusian military still holds many Soviet military laws and holds high numbers of reserve personnels as a high priority.

Belarus conducted military reforms in the early 2000s which reshaped its armed forces as a relatively effective force for a small state in somewhat difficult economic conditions. Since the 2010s the Belarusian military has been more closely integrated with the Russian Armed Forces, with strategic and operational level exercises placing the ground and special forces of Belarus under Russia&#x27;s 1st Guards Tank Army, and the air and air defense forces under the 6th Air and Air Defence Forces Army.

==History==

The Belarusian People&#x27;s Republic of March 1918 to 1919 did not have time to create armed forces in its brief existence, although attempts to create a military have been documented.

Until 1991, the Soviet Belorussian Military District comprised the 5th Guards Tank Army (HQ Bobruisk), the 7th Tank Army (HQ Borisov), the 28th Army (HQ Grodno), the 120th Guards Motor Rifle Division, the 72nd Guards District Training Center and logistical units and formations. Additionally, the Belorussian SSR hosted the 103rd Guards Airborne Division, the 38th Guards Airborne Brigade, the 11th Air Defence Corps of the 2nd Air Defence Army, and the 26th Air Army, as well as units and formations of the Strategic Rocket Forces, Long Range Aviation, the Navy, and special forces.

In late 1991 the 5th Guards Tank Army comprised the 30th Guards Motor Rifle Division, newly arrived from Czechoslovakia, and the 193rd Tank Division, plus two armament and equipment storage bases (the former 8th Guards and 29th Tank Divisions), and army troops. The 7th Tank Army comprised the 3rd Guards Tank Division, 34th, and 37th Guards Tank Divisions, plus army troops. The 28th Army comprised two divisions, the 6th Guards Tank and 50th Guards Motor Rifle, the 6314th Equipment Storage Base at Slonim, and the 5356th Base for Storage of Weapons and Equipment, formerly a low-status mobilisation division. Also arriving from the Southern Group of Forces in Hungary was the 19th Guards Tank Division.

On September 20, 1991, the Supreme Soviet of Belarus passed resolution &quot;On the formation of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Belarus&quot; and on January 11, 1992, resolution &quot;On the Armed Forces deployed in the territory of the Republic of Belarus.&quot; On March 18, 1992, the parliament passed resolution &quot;On the Armed Forces of the Republic of Belarus&quot; that bound the government &quot;to start the formation of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Belarus as of March 20, 1992&quot; and &quot;to submit to the Supreme Soviet for approval the suggested structure of the Armed Forces, their size and order of their material and technical supplies&quot;.

On May 6, 1992, the Belorussian Military District was abolished. The Belarusian Ministry of Defence and the Main Staff were formed from its resources. The former first deputy commander and military district Chief of Staff, Lieutenant-General Pavel Kozlovskiy, was appointed Minister of Defence on 22 April 1992, taking over from acting Minister of Defence Colonel-General Petr Chaus. On 8 September 1992, the Minsk Higher Military Engineering School and the Minsk Higher Military Command School (now the unified Military Academy of Belarus) were the first to take the military oath of allegiance to the armed forces, with their induction ceremony being held on Independence Square in the presence of defense minister Kozlovskii. This was done to commemorate anniversary of the Lithuanian-Polish victory at the Battle of Orsha, which was considered to be a Day of Belarusian Military Glory.

On August 17, 1992, personnel from the United States Department of Defense made a Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty inspection of an installation in Urechye (near Minsk). The 969th Central Base for Reserve Tanks, and two elements of the 30th Guards Motor Rifle Division: the 30th Guards Tank Regiment and the 20th independent Reconnaissance Battalion were the three units at the site.

On November 3, 1992, Belarus passed the law &quot;On the Armed Forces of the Republic of Belarus&quot; defining the status, structure and guiding principles of the Armed Forces. After the introduction of presidency the law was amended twice: on September 4, 1996, and on November 9, 1999, but on the whole the law retains its initial contents.

On January 1, 1993, all service personnel on Belarusian soil were required to either take an oath of loyalty to Belarus, or leave. This oath however did not alleviate concerns regarding loyalty to Russia in time of crisis, especially since nearly 50% of all military personnel were ethnically Russian in the end of 1992.

In June 1995, President Alexander Lukashenko issued a decree on the Mobile Forces. By June 1996, they comprised a headquarters in Vitebsk, two brigades drawn from the 103rd Guards Airborne Division, the 38th Independent Mobile Brigade (Brest, Belarus), an air transport regiment, and communications, logistics, and engineer units.

Membership in the Commonwealth of Independent States, as well as the 1996 treaty on the Union of Russia and Belarus and the Treaty of the Formation of a Union State in 1999, confirmed a close partnership with Russia. Much of the air defence system was integrated into the Russian air defence network, and in 2006 the two nations signed an agreement on the creation of a unified air defence system.

==Structure==
Belarus government websites say that the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Belarus is supported by Central Command Support Elements and the General Staff of the Armed Forces.
Combat Support Elements of the Armed Forces included Reconnaissance, Electronic Warfare, Signals, Engineer, NBC Defence, Navigation and Topography, and Maintenance organisations. Logistic Elements of the Armed Forces provided Material Support, Logistic Support, Medical Support, Veterinarian Support, and Military Construction.

In 1995 the Military Academy of Belarus was set up on the basis of two military educational institutions – the Minsk Air Defence and Rocket School of the Soviet Air Defence Forces and the Minsk Higher Military Command School. Its 10 departments train officers of 38 specialties for practically all arms of service. Also in 1995 it was given the status of a government institution of secondary special military education for young men.

=== Branches ===

====Ground Forces====

A Library of Congress study of national ground forces said that in 1994 Belarus had ground forces of 52,500. They were organized into three corps headquarters, two motor divisions, one airborne division, the 51st Guards Artillery Division at Osipovichi, three mechanized divisions, one airborne brigade, three surface-to-surface missile brigades, two antitank brigades, one special duties brigade, and seven anti-aircraft missile brigades. Equipment included 3,108 main battle tanks (seventy-nine T-54, 639 T-55, 291 T-62, 299 T-64, eight T-80, and 1,800 T-72), 419 medium-range launchers, sixty surface to-surface missiles, and 350 surface-to-air missiles.

In 1993 the 7th Tank Army was reorganised as the 7th Army Corps. In 1994 the 7th Army Corps was redesignated as the 65th Army Corps, still located at Borisov.

By January 1, 1995, the composition of the Belarusian ground forces had changed. The Library of Congress study estimated at the time that Ministry of Defence forces included the 103rd Guards Airborne Division and the 38th Separate Assault-Landing Brigade; the 28th Army Corps (Grodno Region and Brest Region), composed of headquarters at Grodno, the 6th Guards Kiev-Berlin Mechanised Brigade, the 11th Guards Mechanised Brigade, the 50th Separate Mechanised Infantry Brigade, the Armament and Equipment base, and corps units (missile troops, antiaircraft, chemical and engineer troops, signals, and rear services); the 65th Army Corps (Minsk and Vitebsk Regions), composed of headquarters at Borisov, three armament and equipment bases, and corps units; and the 5th Guards Army Corps (Minsk and Mahilyow regions) made up of headquarters at Babruysk, the 30th Separate Motor Rifle Brigade, two Armament and Equipment bases, and corps units.

Actually, the 103rd Guards Airborne Division had been reorganized as Headquarters, Mobile Forces, in 1993.
On 1 August 1996 the 51st Guards Artillery Division was reorganised as the 51st Guards Central Group of Artillery, still located at Osipovichi.

On 21 December 2001, a major reorganisation of the Ground Forces produced two operational-territorial commands, formed from two former corps headquarters. All Belarus ground forces were now grouped within these two commands, the Western Operational Command at Grodno, former from the previous 28th Army Corps, the former Soviet 28th Army, and the North Western Operational Command, the former 65th Army Corps, at Barysaw (Borisov).

Since about 2001, territorial defence forces, which as of 2002 number around 150,000, have been forming, organised into battalions, companies, and platoons spread across Belarus.

In 2007, the Land Forces consisted of 29,600 soldiers (6th Guards Mechanised Brigade (Grodno), 11th Guards Mechanized Brigade at Slonim, the 120th Guards Mechanised Brigade (Minsk), 38th and 103rd Mobile Brigades (organized similarly to Soviet airborne regiments, not all of them are equipped with BMD-1)), 5th Spetsnaz Brigade (Maryina Horka), five artillery brigades and four regiments, two MRL regiments, 15th, 29th, 115th, 120th and 302nd SAM Brigades, two SSM brigades, two brigades and one regiment of engineers, 8th independent NBC Brigade, two signals brigades, 40th independent NBC battalion. Army equipment includes 1800 main battle tanks (MBT) and 2600 AFV/APC. The weapons and equipment storage bases include the 50th (Brest), 19th, 34th &amp; 37th (former tank divisions), 3rd, and 28th (Baranovichi). Weapons storage bases that have been disbanded include the 29th, 30th, 193rd, and the storage base that used to be the 8th Guards Tank Division at Marina Gorka.

In 2012 it was reported that there were six mechanised brigades in the Ground Forces: three full-strength, the 6th (Grodno), 11th (Slonim), and 120th Guards Mechanised Brigade at Minsk. The others were at reduced strength, where there was one battalion, the 19th (Zaslonova), 37th, and 50th (Baranovichi). By 2017, the number of mechanised brigades had been further reduced to four, with two at full strength and two at reduced strength.

====Air Force and Air Defence Forces====
The 28th Fighter Aviation Regiment, 2nd Air Defence Corps, Moscow Air Defence District was stationed in Krichev in Mogilev Oblast, and disbanded in 1993.

In 2007 the Air Force and Air Defence Force of Belarus (AF &amp; ADF) consisted of 18,170 personnel (two fighter/interceptor bases, four FGA/reconnaissance squadrons, one transport air base, training aircraft, and attack and support helicopters, SAM units). Air Force equipment included in 2004 260 fighter-ground attack/training aircraft and 80 attack helicopters. According to Belarus government websites, the Air Forces now have two commands, the Western Operational-Tactical Command and the North-Western Operational-Tactical Command.

The 61st and 927th Air Bases have now merged into the 61st (fighter) Air Base at Baranovichi, flying MiG-29s, and the 206th Air Base (Ross) has merged into the 116th Guards Assault Air Base at Lida, flying Su-25s.

=== Independent forces ===

==== Special Forces ====

The Special Forces of Belarus is the airmobile and strategic deterrence force. It has been a participant in conflicts such as the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the Libyan Civil War (2011).

==== Transport Troops ====
The Belarusian Transport Troops is responsible for the movement of personnel and material by truck, rail, and air. It is also designed to carry the tasks of the transport support of the military formations from other service branches. General leadership is exercised by the Minister of Defense, while direct control is carried out by the Head of the Transport Support Department, a position that reports directly to the President.

==== Territorial Forces ====

The Territorial Forces (, ) are a homeland defence organization in the armed forces. It is managed by the Department of the Territorial Forces, being a support department of the Ministry of Defence of Belarus and is operated by the General Staff. It is currently located on Kommunisticheskaya Street in Minsk. The current head of the department of territorial forces is Colonel Andrei Paseko. The Territorial Defence system was established in the early 2000s. Over 120,000 troops constitute the size of the Territorial Forces, which is twice as much as it serves in the regular duty military. During an address by President Alexander Lukashenko on 18 February 2016, he announced the allocation of arms and to the territorial forces and the minimum and maximum amount of district troops ranging from one company and a battalion. Personnel of these units are recruited from residents of their respective administrative-territorial regions.

=== Specialized forces ===
Special troops are designed to support the combat activities of the Ground Forces and solve their inherent tasks. They include formations and military units of intelligence, communications, engineering, radiation, chemical and biological defense, electronic warfare, navigation and topographic.

*Electronic Warfare Troops
*Signal Corps
*Engineer troops
*NBC Protection Troops
*Topographic Navigation Service

== Security forces ==
===Internal Troops===

The Internal Troops of Belarus were formed from the former Soviet Internal Troops after the collapse of the Soviet Union. They consist of three independent brigades and seven independent battalions (consecutively numbered).

===Border Guard Service===
The Border Guard Service is the paramilitary force of the State Border Committee of the Republic of Belarus. It covers the borders with Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Lithuania and Latvia.

==Manpower==

The Government Directive of 20 March 1992 &#x27;On the Establishment of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Belarus&#x27; founded the Belarusian army. The Soviet troops of the BMD were smoothly converted into Belarusian military units. Yet one of the first tasks of the Belarusian government was a reduction in its numbers. 240,000 soldiers and officers were serving in the Belarusian Military District. By early 2013 the numbers of military personnel had been scaled down nearly fourfold since 1991. In February 2014, Belorusskaya Voyennaya Gazeta, the official publication of the Ministry of Defense revealed that the Belarusian Armed Forces contains about 59,500 personnel, including 46,000 soldiers and 13,000 civilians.

== Personnel ==

=== Military commandants ===
The military commandants of the Armed Forces of Belarus are regional administrations tasked with overseeing Belarusian regiments in the commandant&#x27;s territory. Units are assigned to a specific commandant based on their location. There are 6 military commandants in the Belarusian Armed Forces.

Units under the command of commandants include military police, honour guards and military bands.

=== Military education ===
*Military Academy of Belarus
*Ministry of the Interior Academy of Belarus
*Border Guard Service Institute of Belarus
*Military Institute of the Belarusian State Medical University
*Military Faculty of the Belarusian State University – The faculty was established on 4 November 1926, by order of the Revolutionary Military Council. In 1941, at the beginning of the Great Patriotic War, military training classes were interrupted only to be resumed in 1943. In the post-war and subsequent years, the military department continued to train reserve officers from among the students in the required military accounting specialties. In 2003, the military department was reorganized into the modern military faculty of Belarusian State University.
*Military Faculty of the Belarusian State University of Informatics and Radioelectronics 
*Military Faculty of the Belarusian National Technical University
*Military Faculty of the Grodno State University
*Military Faculty of the Belarusian State University of Transport
*Military Faculty of the Belarusian State Academy of Aviation

== Equipment ==
The military forces of Belarus are almost exclusively armed with Soviet-era equipment inherited from the Soviet Union. Although large in numbers, some Western experts consider some of it outdated.

&quot;The Belarusian armed forces receive around 100 brand-new and upgraded systems a year&quot;, said in late July 2018, Belarusian Deputy Minister of Defence for Armament and Chief of Armament Major General Sergei Simonenko. The MBTs are of Russian type T-72, T-62, and T-55, the APCs and IFVs are of Russian type MT-LB, BMP-2, BMP-1, and the BMD-1, and Russian type trucks are the GAZ-66 and the KAMAZ-6560. 
While the IISS Military Balance 2016 listed 69 T-80s in service, by 2018 the listing had been removed, and the only MBTs listed were 527 T-72 as well as 5 T-72B3.

The Air Force is equipped with MiG-29 fighters, Su-25 attack aircraft, as well as Mi-8, Mi-24, and some old, Polish built Mi-2 helicopters. In December 2005, Belarus bought 10 L-39C jet trainer aircraft from Ukraine, and in 2017 a contract have been signed to buy 12 Su-30SM fighters. In 2006, four batteries (&quot;divizions&quot; in Russian terminology; about six systems each) of S-300 anti-aircraft systems were acquired from Russia to reinforce the Joint CIS Air Defense System. The Military Balance 2018 listed a brigade with the S-300P and a brigade with the S-300V (SA-12A Gladiator/SA-12B Giant). Moscow and Minsk signed contracts in 2021 for the supply of fighters, helicopters, air defense systems and other weapons to Belarus. S-400 air defense systems and 9K720 Iskander tactical ballistic missiles were delivered in 2022. It was also reported that almost every company was equipped with quadcopters. Kamikaze and surveillance UAVs of domestic development and production were reportedly entered service in 2024.

== Military cooperation ==
=== CSTO ===

The armed forces took part in a joint CSTO military intervention in Kazakhstan during the 2022 Kazakh unrest.

=== Military advisors ===
The armed forces have sent their military specialists to countries such as Côte d&#x27;Ivoire, Venezuela, Libya, Yemen and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, acting both officially and secretly. In Belarus, they have previously trained military personnel from the Nigerian Army. In 2014 and 2015, the special forces of the Nigerian Army were trained on the territory of Belarus, with the Belarusians training the Nigerians in counterterrorism.

In 2007, an agreement was signed in Caracas with Venezuela, according to which Belarusian military specialists for the National Bolivarian Armed Forces of Venezuela were developing a unified air defense and electronic warfare system. The following year, the first ten servicemen went to the country, with Lieutenant-General Oleg Paferov being appointed as the officer responsible for the activities of the advisers. A contingent of about 500 military advisers was also present in Libya during the First Libyan Civil War, supporting the government of Muammar Gaddafi. As of autumn 2013, there were at least two Belarusian advisers in Yemen at the Ministry of Defense. On November 26 of the same year, during an attack on a hotel in Sana&#x27;a, a Belarusian was killed and another was wounded. In February 2020, a dozen Belarusian military instructors arrived in Abidjan (Côte d&#x27;Ivoire), where they were stationed at the Agban military base, which is occupied by one of the country&#x27;s national gendarmerie units.

== Institutions and special units of the armed forces ==

=== Museum of Military History of Belarus ===
The Museum of Military History of Belarus () is located in the Pyershamayski District of Minsk. It was established as the Museum of the History of the Belarusian Military District, opened in Minsk on February 21, 1978. In July 1993, it was converted into a museum on the military history of Belarus. The exhibits are the same as before the collapse of the USSR, with a small section on the medieval history of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania having since been added. Its collection numbers over 18 thousand exhibits. The most ancient of them date back to the 6th century.

=== Drama Theatre of the Belarusian Army ===

=== Belarusian Union of Officers ===
The Public Association &quot;Belarusian Union of Officers&quot; (hereinafter referred to as BSO) is a public association of officers and warrant officers who are on active duty and in retirement. It was established on 20 September 1992 at its founding congress. On September 18, 1993, Deputy of the Supreme Soviet Alexander Lukashenko took part in the 2nd Congress. From October 2005 to January 2015, the Republican Council of the BSO was headed by retired Lieutenant General E. Mikulchik, and until November 2017 was led by retired Major General V. Bamburov.

=== Other ===

*Military Band Service of the Armed Forces
*Belarusian Armed Forces Academic Song and Dance Ensemble
*Central House of Officers (Minsk)
*Honor Guard of the Armed Forces of Belarus
*Belarusian Great Patriotic War Museum
*Belaya Rus demonstration team

== Military holidays ==
*In Belarus, the holiday annual Defender of the Fatherland Day (known as &quot;Дзень абаронцы Айчыны&quot; in the Belarusian language) celebrations on 23 February also coincide with the Day of the Armed Forces (&quot;Дзень Узброеных Сіл&quot;). It commemorates that day 1918 when the first unified military in the country was established as part of the Red Army. Officially declared a public holiday by President Lukashenko on 25 March 2004, it has traditionally been honoured with a wreath laying ceremony by the President of Belarus on Victory Square. Joint festive events with soldiers of the Russian Armed Forces soldiers are also hold on 23 February in connection with their professional holiday. During the centennial of the armed forces in 2018, events were held throughout the year, including a military parade in Gomel and celebrations in Vitebsk.
*Although a national holiday, Independence Day is primarily an armed forces celebration which honours those who took part in the Red Army&#x27;s 1944 Minsk Offensive. The Minsk Independence Day Parade is the main military event done on this day.

== Combat Banners and military marches ==
The Battle Banner of a military unit is a symbol of the unit, retained throughout its lineage. Changes in the name and numbering of a military unit are entered in the Certificate of the President of the Republic of Belarus, issued upon presentation of the Battle Banner. The Battle Banner is awarded to formations, brigades/regiments, battalions, divisions, air squadrons, training units, and military educational institutions. Guards units are awarded with a black-and-orange guards ribbon attached to its shaft. Upon presentation of the Battle Banner to a military unit, a Diploma of the President of the Republic of Belarus is issued. In the event of the loss of the Battle Banner, the commander of a military unit and its servicemen are subject to legal consequences and the military unit is disbanded.

The following is a list of notable Belarusian military pieces:
*Motherland My Dear (Радзіма мая дарагая)
*Victory March (Марш Перамогi)
*Anthem of the Military Academy (Гимн Военной академии)
*Grenadier March (Марш Грэнадыі)
*Our Fatherland&#x27;s Flag (Айчыны нашай сцяг)
*Song from 45 (Письмо из 45-го)

==Notes==
==References==

* , Conflict Studies Research Centre, RMA Sandhurst.

==External links==
* Official website of the Belarusian defense ministry </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q276318" start="4" end="43" title="Armed Forces of Belarus" label="Armed Forces of the Republic of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="71" end="78" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4447370" start="99" end="112" title="Belarusian Ground Forces" label="Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q570232" start="121" end="153" title="Belarusian Air Force" label="Air Force and Air Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576529" start="184" end="203" title="Ministry of Defence (Belarus)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="210" end="228" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="245" end="249" title="navy" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206709" start="383" end="387" title="International Institute for Strategic Studies" label="IISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="497" end="507" title="conscripts" label="conscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="981" end="1001" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Russian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q162559" start="1119" end="1139" title="1st Guards Tank Army" label="1st Guards Tank Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470369" start="1186" end="1221" title="6th Air and Air Defence Forces Army" label="6th Air and Air Defence Forces Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q842199" start="1241" end="1274" title="Belarusian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Belarusian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="1325" end="1337" title="armed forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537819" start="1447" end="1476" title="Belorussian Military District" label="Belorussian Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594845" start="1491" end="1511" title="5th Guards Tank Army" label="5th Guards Tank Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q21684143" start="1531" end="1544" title="7th Tank Army" label="7th Tank Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063817" start="1563" end="1572" title="28th Army (Soviet Union)" label="28th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q281310" start="1590" end="1623" title="120th Guards Mechanised Brigade" label="120th Guards Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031956" start="1629" end="1665" title="72nd Guards Joint Training Centre" label="72nd Guards District Training Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974912" start="1748" end="1778" title="103rd Guards Airborne Division" label="103rd Guards Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16486405" start="1784" end="1812" title="38th Guards Mobile Brigade" label="38th Guards Airborne Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q21634785" start="1848" end="1868" title="2nd Air Defence Army" label="2nd Air Defence Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q30716259" start="1878" end="1891" title="26th Air Army" label="26th Air Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q63113668" start="1932" end="1955" title="Strategic Rocket Forces" label="Strategic Rocket Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055881" start="1957" end="1976" title="Long Range Aviation" label="Long Range Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275953" start="2061" end="2093" title="55th Guards Rifle Division" label="30th Guards Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368371" start="2109" end="2128" title="Central Group of Forces" label="from Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029512" start="2138" end="2157" title="193rd Tank Division" label="193rd Tank Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q56359146" start="2303" end="2327" title="3rd Guards Tank Division" label="3rd Guards Tank Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030956" start="2329" end="2333" title="34th Tank Division" label="34th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031065" start="2339" end="2364" title="37th Guards Tank Division" label="37th Guards Tank Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q863576" start="2510" end="2516" title="Slonim" label="Slonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533923" start="2644" end="2668" title="Southern Group of Forces" label="Southern Group of Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029412" start="2688" end="2713" title="19th Guards Tank Division" label="19th Guards Tank Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537819" start="3415" end="3444" title="Belorussian Military District" label="Belorussian Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580954" start="3907" end="3934" title="Military Academy of Belarus" label="Military Academy of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995558" start="4056" end="4075" title="Independence Square, Minsk" label="Independence Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207310" start="4205" end="4220" title="Battle of Orsha" label="Battle of Orsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="4325" end="4360" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q834195" start="4368" end="4404" title="Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty" label="Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275953" start="4526" end="4558" title="30th Guards Motor Rifle Division" label="30th Guards Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392197" start="5113" end="5128" title="oath of loyalty" label="oath of loyalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q140147" start="5578" end="5592" title="Brest, Belarus" label="Brest, Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="5692" end="5726" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q166110" start="5762" end="5789" title="Union of Russia and Belarus" label="Union of Russia and Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q631009" start="6750" end="6775" title="Soviet Air Defence Forces" label="Soviet Air Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="7075" end="7094" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640097" start="7281" end="7311" title="51st Guards Artillery Brigade (Belarus)" label="51st Guards Artillery Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q742161" start="7315" end="7325" title="Osipovichi" label="Osipovichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19313" start="7882" end="7889" title="Barysaw" label="Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974912" start="8070" end="8100" title="103rd Guards Airborne Division" label="103rd Guards Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16486405" start="8109" end="8146" title="38th Guards Mobile Brigade" label="38th Separate Assault-Landing Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063817" start="8152" end="8167" title="28th Army (Soviet Union)" label="28th Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q191061" start="8169" end="8182" title="Grodno Region" label="Grodno Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q173822" start="8187" end="8199" title="Brest Region" label="Brest Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="8230" end="8236" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q19907240" start="8242" end="8283" title="6th Guards Kiev-Berlin Mechanised Brigade" label="6th Guards Kiev-Berlin Mechanised Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27778616" start="8289" end="8319" title="11th Guards Mechanized Brigade" label="11th Guards Mechanised Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q21684143" start="8511" end="8526" title="65th Army (Soviet Union)" label="65th Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q185700" start="8538" end="8552" title="Vitebsk Region" label="Vitebsk Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q19313" start="8584" end="8591" title="Barysaw" label="Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q742161" start="9072" end="9082" title="Osipovichi" label="Osipovichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21660015" start="9314" end="9341" title="Western Operational Command (Belarus)" label="Western Operational Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="9345" end="9351" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063817" start="9413" end="9422" title="28th Army (Soviet Union)" label="28th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q21684143" start="9432" end="9465" title="North Western Operational Command" label="North Western Operational Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q19313" start="9498" end="9505" title="Barysaw" label="Barysaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q19907240" start="9753" end="9782" title="6th Guards Kiev-Berlin Mechanised Brigade" label="6th Guards Mechanised Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="9784" end="9790" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q27778616" start="9793" end="9823" title="11th Guards Mechanized Brigade" label="11th Guards Mechanized Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q863576" start="9827" end="9833" title="Slonim" label="Slonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q281310" start="9839" end="9870" title="120th Guards Mechanised Brigade" label="120th Guards Mechanised Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="9872" end="9877" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q796336" start="9996" end="10001" title="BMD-1" label="BMD-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057685" start="10005" end="10025" title="5th Spetsnaz Brigade" label="5th Spetsnaz Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q201173" start="10027" end="10040" title="Maryina Horka" label="Maryina Horka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030956" start="10443" end="10447" title="34th Tank Division" label="34th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031065" start="10454" end="10458" title="37th Guards Tank Division" label="37th"/>
<link wikidata="Q56359146" start="10484" end="10487" title="3rd Guards Tank Division" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q237655" start="10499" end="10510" title="Baranovichi" label="Baranovichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029512" start="10584" end="10589" title="193rd Tank Division" label="193rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q201173" start="10660" end="10672" title="Marina Gorka" label="Marina Gorka"/>
<link wikidata="Q281310" start="10819" end="10850" title="120th Guards Mechanised Brigade" label="120th Guards Mechanised Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="10854" end="10859" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q32360867" start="11214" end="11241" title="Moscow Air Defence District" label="Moscow Air Defence District"/>
<link wikidata="Q60838416" start="11259" end="11266" title="Krichev (air base)" label="Krichev"/>
<link wikidata="Q189822" start="11270" end="11284" title="Mogilev Oblast" label="Mogilev Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q570232" start="11322" end="11364" title="Belarusian Air Force" label="Air Force and Air Defence Force of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q84314120" start="11931" end="11942" title="Baranovichi (air base)" label="Baranovichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130681" start="11951" end="11957" title="MiG-29" label="MiG-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824537" start="12043" end="12047" title="Lida (air base)" label="Lida"/>
<link wikidata="Q192137" start="12056" end="12061" title="Su-25" label="Su-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419318" start="12123" end="12148" title="Special Forces of Belarus" label="Special Forces of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="12156" end="12165" title="airmobile" label="airmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="12170" end="12190" title="strategic deterrence" label="strategic deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="12249" end="12288" title="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon" label="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="12297" end="12320" title="Libyan Civil War (2011)" label="Libyan Civil War (2011)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462132" start="12354" end="12381" title="Belarusian Transport Troops" label="Belarusian Transport Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="13115" end="13120" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="13436" end="13456" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="Alexander Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q96839130" start="14237" end="14263" title="Internal Troops of Belarus" label="Internal Troops of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373961" start="14299" end="14314" title="Internal Troops" label="Internal Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146916" start="14543" end="14592" title="State Border Committee of the Republic of Belarus" label="State Border Committee of the Republic of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="14621" end="14627" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="14629" end="14636" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="14638" end="14644" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="14646" end="14655" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="14660" end="14666" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="15802" end="15817" title="military police" label="military police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580954" start="15882" end="15909" title="Military Academy of Belarus" label="Military Academy of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059211" start="15911" end="15954" title="Ministry of the Interior Academy of the Republic of Belarus" label="Ministry of the Interior Academy of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201651" start="15956" end="15997" title="Border Guard Service Institute of Belarus" label="Border Guard Service Institute of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510885" start="16025" end="16060" title="Belarusian State Medical University" label="Belarusian State Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418908" start="16086" end="16113" title="Belarusian State University" label="Belarusian State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703181" start="16180" end="16210" title="Revolutionary Military Council" label="Revolutionary Military Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="16245" end="16264" title="Great Patriotic War" label="Great Patriotic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q816145" start="16647" end="16710" title="Belarusian State University of Informatics and Radioelectronics" label="Belarusian State University of Informatics and Radioelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q815268" start="16737" end="16777" title="Belarusian National Technical University" label="Belarusian National Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986673" start="16803" end="16826" title="Grodno State University" label="Grodno State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964941" start="16852" end="16892" title="Belarusian State University of Transport" label="Belarusian State University of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q155658" start="17426" end="17430" title="T-72" label="T-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q207618" start="17432" end="17436" title="T-62" label="T-62"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="17442" end="17446" title="T-55" label="T-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q167292" start="17486" end="17491" title="MT-LB" label="MT-LB"/>
<link wikidata="Q160357" start="17493" end="17498" title="BMP-2" label="BMP-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q155494" start="17500" end="17505" title="BMP-1" label="BMP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q796336" start="17515" end="17520" title="BMD-1" label="BMD-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q689391" start="17554" end="17560" title="GAZ-66" label="GAZ-66"/>
<link wikidata="Q237135" start="17629" end="17633" title="T-80" label="T-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q130681" start="17777" end="17783" title="MiG-29" label="MiG-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q192137" start="17794" end="17799" title="Su-25" label="Su-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q155635" start="17828" end="17832" title="Mil Mi-8" label="Mi-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q155651" start="17834" end="17839" title="Mi-24" label="Mi-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q608997" start="17868" end="17872" title="Mil Mi-2" label="Mi-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q155899" start="17922" end="17927" title="Aero L-39" label="L-39C"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="17954" end="17961" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204331" start="18013" end="18018" title="Su-30" label="Su-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q48446" start="18129" end="18134" title="S-300 (missile)" label="S-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330412" start="18200" end="18228" title="Joint CIS Air Defense System" label="Joint CIS Air Defense System"/>
<link wikidata="Q48446" start="18282" end="18288" title="S-300P" label="S-300P"/>
<link wikidata="Q48446" start="18312" end="18318" title="S-300V" label="S-300V"/>
<link wikidata="Q48446" start="18320" end="18325" title="SA-12" label="SA-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q48446" start="18337" end="18342" title="SA-12" label="SA-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q861006" start="18485" end="18490" title="S-400" label="S-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q483042" start="18515" end="18529" title="9K720 Iskander" label="9K720 Iskander"/>
<link wikidata="Q318693" start="18851" end="18855" title="CSTO" label="CSTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="18881" end="18891" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110413718" start="18903" end="18921" title="2022 Kazakh unrest" label="2022 Kazakh unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="19217" end="19230" title="Nigerian Army" label="Nigerian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076869" start="19517" end="19562" title="National Bolivarian Armed Forces of Venezuela" label="National Bolivarian Armed Forces of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="19895" end="19917" title="First Libyan Civil War" label="First Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="19948" end="19963" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471" start="20129" end="20140" title="Sana&amp;#x27;a" label="Sana&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045165" start="20587" end="20609" title="Pyershamayski District" label="Pyershamayski District"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="20938" end="20962" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645543" start="21754" end="21795" title="Military Band Service of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Belarus" label="Military Band Service of the Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q27689537" start="21797" end="21853" title="Belarusian Armed Forces Academic Song and Dance Ensemble" label="Belarusian Armed Forces Academic Song and Dance Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917571" start="21855" end="21888" title="Central House of Officers (Minsk)" label="Central House of Officers (Minsk)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42582827" start="21890" end="21932" title="Honor Guard of the Armed Forces of Belarus" label="Honor Guard of the Armed Forces of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073524" start="21934" end="21971" title="Belarusian Great Patriotic War Museum" label="Belarusian Great Patriotic War Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4081633" start="21973" end="22002" title="Belaya Rus (demonstration team)" label="Belaya Rus demonstration team"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="22032" end="22039" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163708" start="22060" end="22090" title="Defender of the Fatherland Day" label="Defender of the Fatherland Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="22142" end="22161" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="22381" end="22389" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049659" start="22542" end="22562" title="President of Belarus" label="President of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635425" start="22566" end="22580" title="Victory Square, Minsk" label="Victory Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="22624" end="22644" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Russian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678" start="22850" end="22855" title="Gomel" label="Gomel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102217" start="22876" end="22883" title="Vitebsk" label="Vitebsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158131" start="22915" end="22931" title="Independence Day (Belarus)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="23014" end="23022" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465049" start="23035" end="23050" title="Minsk Offensive" label="Minsk Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888548" start="23056" end="23085" title="Minsk Independence Day Parade" label="Minsk Independence Day Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160173" start="24318" end="24350" title="Conflict Studies Research Centre" label="Conflict Studies Research Centre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3538" wikidata="Q1061500" url="?curid=3538" title="Foreign relations of Belarus">
<text>The Byelorussian SSR was one of only two Soviet republics to be separate members of the United Nations (the other being the Ukrainian SSR). Both republics and the Soviet Union joined the UN when the organization was founded in 1945.

==Prior to 2001==
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, at which time Belarus gained its independence, Belarus became a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), NATO&#x27;s Partnership for Peace, the North Atlantic Cooperation Council, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank. The adoption by Supreme Council of the BSSR of the declaration of State Sovereignty of Belarus in 1990 was a turning point on the development of the state. It has also been in a supranational union with Russia since 2 April 1996, although this has had little practical effect.

===Belarus–Russia relations===

The introduction of free trade between Russia and Belarus in mid-1995 led to a spectacular growth in bilateral trade, which was only temporarily reversed in the wake of the financial crisis of 1998. President Alexander Lukashenko sought to develop a closer relationship with Russia. The framework for the Union of Russia and Belarus was set out in the Treaty on the Formation of a Community of Russia and Belarus (1996), the Treaty on Russia-Belarus Union, the Union Charter (1997), and the Treaty of the Formation of a Union State (1999). The integration treaties contained commitments to monetary union, equal rights, single citizenship, and a common defence and foreign policy.

===Belarus–European Union relations===

Following the recognition of Belarus as an independent state in December 1991 by the European Community, EC/EU-Belarus relations initially experienced a steady progress. The signature of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) in 1995 signaled a commitment to political, economic and trade cooperation. Some assistance was provided to Belarus within the framework of the TACIS programme and also through various aid programs and loans. However, progress in EU-Belarus relations stalled in 1996 after serious setbacks to the development of democracy, and the Drazdy conflict.

The EU did not recognize the 1996 constitution, which replaced the 1994 constitution. The Council of the European Union decided against Belarus in 1997: The PCA was not concluded, nor was its trade-related part; Belarusian membership in the Council of Europe was not supported; bilateral relations at the ministerial level were suspended and EU technical assistance programs were frozen.

Acknowledging the lack of progress in relation to bilateral relations and the internal situation following the position adopted in 1997, the EU adopted a step-by-step approach in 1999, whereby sanctions would be gradually lifted upon fulfillment of the four benchmarks set by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. In 2000, some moderately positive developments toward the implementation of recommendations made by the OSCE AMG were observed but were not sufficient in the realm of access to fair and free elections.

===Belarus–United States relations===
The United States has encouraged Belarus to conclude and adhere to agreements with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on the program of macroeconomic stabilization and related reform measures, as well as to undertake increased privatization and to create a favorable climate for business and investment. Although there has been some American direct private investment in Belarus, its development has been relatively slow given the uncertain pace of reform. An Overseas Private Investment Corporation agreement was signed in June 1992 but has been suspended since 1995 because Belarus did not fulfill its obligations under the agreement.

Belarus is eligible for Export-Import Bank short-term financing insurance for U.S. investments, but because of the adverse business climate, no projects have been initiated. The IMF granted standby credit in September 1995, but Belarus has fallen off the program and did not receive the second tranche of funding, which had been scheduled for regular intervals throughout 1996.

The United States - along with the European Union - has restricted the travel of President Alexander Lukashenko and members of his inner circle, as well as imposing economic sanctions.

===Belarus–Baltic relations===

==Present situation (2001 onwards)==
===Relations with the European Union===

The structure of Belarus trade reflects the low competitiveness and output decline of manufacturing industry in the country over the past decade, leading to the predominance of primary production, work-intensive goods as exports. Belarusian exports to the EU consist mainly of agricultural and textile products, while imports from the EU are primarily machinery.

Belarus is a beneficiary of the EU&#x27;s Generalised System of Preferences (GSP). The European Commission decided in 2003 to initiate an investigation into violations of freedom of association in Belarus as the first step towards a possible temporary withdrawal of the GSP from Belarus.

In December 2004, the EU adopted a position aimed at imposing travel restrictions on officials from Belarus responsible for the fraudulent parliamentary elections and referendum on 17 October 2004, and for human rights violations during subsequent peaceful political demonstrations in Minsk.
The European Parliament released a statement in March 2005 in which it denounced the Belarusian government as a dictatorship. The European parliamentarians were primarily concerned about the suppression of independent media outlets in the country and the fraudulent referendum. A resolution of the European Parliament declared that the personal bank accounts of President Lukashenko and other high-ranking Belarusian officials should be tracked and frozen.

In 2005, Amnesty International reported a &quot;pattern of deliberate obstruction, harassment and intimidation of human rights defenders&quot; in Belarus. Reporters Without Borders accused the Belarusian authorities of hounding and arresting journalists from the country&#x27;s Polish minority. Lukashenko has closed the country&#x27;s main Polish newspaper, printing a bogus paper instead with the same name and size that praises his incumbent government. Several foreign, mainly Polish, journalists have been arrested or expelled from the country. Lukashenko accused Poland of an attempt to overthrow his government by stirring up a peaceful revolution in Belarus comparable to the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004.

Later in 2005 the Belarusian riot police seized the headquarters of the Union of Poles in Belarus, an association representing the 400,000 ethnic minority Polish living in western areas the country that were part of Poland until World War II. The dispute between Poland and Belarus escalated further as Poland responded by recalling its ambassador from Belarus for indefinite consultations, and called on the European Union to impose sanctions on the Belarusian leadership in order to curtail the human rights abuses in Belarus. Belarusian papers described this as a &#x27;dirty political game&#x27;, and part of a &#x27;cold war&#x27; waged on president Lukashenko. Polish Foreign Minister Adam Rotfeld said a clampdown was under way, aimed at destroying &quot;all elements of political pluralism and independence&quot; in Belarus.

In August 2005 the EU&#x27;s executive commission called for human rights to be respected in Belarus. The commission said it was considering offering support to independent media in the country and had set aside more than eight million euros from its budget to offer support for human rights activities. France expressed her solidarity with Poland on the issue of human rights in Belarus a day after the EU declared it was worried about the situation in that country. Several former Soviet Republics, including neighbouring Ukraine, also expressed their concerns about the development of the situation in Belarus.

In May 2009 Belarus and the EU agree on cooperation in the Eastern Partnership (EaP). However, it is contended by some scholars that the (EaP) is unable to create a workable partnership. This proved to be correct when Belarus withdrew from the Partnership on 30 September 2011.

In August 2012, Belarus expelled all Swedish diplomats, including the Swedish Ambassador to Belarus, Stefan Eriksson, and closed its embassy in Stockholm, after a Swedish public relations firm released teddy bears carrying pro-democracy flyers in parachutes from an airplane over Minsk on 4 July 2012. Lukashenko also fired his air defence chief and the head of the border guards over the incident. Their replacements have been told not to hesitate to use force to stop future intrusions from abroad.

===Relations with Russia===

Russia remains the largest and most important partner for Belarus both in the political and economic fields. After protracted disputes and setbacks, the two countries&#x27; customs duties were unified in March 2001 but the customs controls were soon restored. In terms of trade, almost half of Belarusian export goes to Russia. Due to the structure of Belarusian industry, Belarus relies heavily on Russia both for export markets and for the supply of raw materials and components.

After initial negotiation with the Russian Central Bank on monetary union, the Russian ruble was set to be introduced in Belarus in 2004, but this was postponed first until 2005, then until 2006, and now seems to have been suspended indefinitely.

===Relations with the United States===

Belarus has had an ongoing discussion to relaunch IMF-backed reforms, concluding an arrangement for an IMF Staff-monitored program (SMP) in 2001. However, the authorities did not follow through with reforms as hoped, leaving an uncertain future for IMF-backed cooperation. Belarus authorities have said on several occasions that they find IMF intervention and recommendations in Belarus counter-productive to the economic development of those countries.
The relationships with the United States have been further strained, after Congress of the United States unanimously passed the Belarus Democracy Act of 2004.

On 7 March 2008 the government of Belarus ejected US Ambassador Karen B. Stewart from the country, following a row over travel restrictions placed on President Lukashenko and sanctions against state-owned chemical company Belneftekhim. The Belarusian Foreign Ministry announced at the same time that it was recalling its own ambassador to the US. This was followed by the expulsion of ten other U.S. embassy staff from Minsk in late April. At the same time the government of Belarus ordered the U.S. Embassy in Minsk to cut its staff by half. A White House spokesman described the expulsion as &quot;deeply disappointing&quot;.

===Relations with other countries===
Due to strained relations with the United States and the European Union, as well as occasional high-level disputes with Russia over prices on core imported natural resources such as oil and gas, Belarus aims to develop better relations with countries in other regions, like the Middle East, Asia, and Latin America.

====Hong Kong national security law====
Belarus was one of 53 countries that in June 2020 supported the Hong Kong national security law at the United Nations Human Rights Council.

===Nuclear weapons offer===
In May 2023, the President of Belarus offered nuclear weapons to other countries who join Belarus and Russia.
==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Belarus maintains diplomatic relations with:
== Bilateral relations ==

===Multilateral===
===Africa===
===Americas===
===Asia===
===Europe===
===Oceania===
==See also==
* Belarus–European Union relations 
* Belarus–NATO relations
* List of diplomatic missions in Belarus
* List of diplomatic missions of Belarus
* Visa requirements for Belarusian citizens

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="4" end="20" title="Byelorussian SSR" label="Byelorussian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="41" end="47" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="88" end="102" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="124" end="137" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="163" end="175" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="262" end="293" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="373" end="407" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="419" end="470" title="Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="479" end="483" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="491" end="512" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="518" end="552" title="North Atlantic Cooperation Council" label="North Atlantic Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="558" end="585" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="595" end="605" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q166110" start="780" end="816" title="Union State" label="in a supranational union with Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="937" end="947" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1090" end="1114" title="History of post-Soviet Russia#The crises of 1998" label="financial crisis of 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="1126" end="1146" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="Alexander Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="1507" end="1521" title="monetary union" label="monetary union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="1523" end="1535" title="civil rights" label="equal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="1582" end="1596" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="1724" end="1742" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q630352" start="2018" end="2023" title="TACIS" label="TACIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985601" start="2205" end="2220" title="Drazdy conflict" label="Drazdy conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="2313" end="2342" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="2464" end="2481" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="2892" end="2944" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="3274" end="3301" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384697" start="3852" end="3870" title="Export-Import Bank of the United States" label="Export-Import Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="3892" end="3901" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="5441" end="5446" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="5452" end="5471" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="5915" end="5936" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="6061" end="6086" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q836386" start="6590" end="6607" title="Orange Revolution" label="Orange Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="6611" end="6618" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825410" start="6658" end="6669" title="riot police" label="riot police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005242" start="6701" end="6726" title="Union of Poles in Belarus" label="Union of Poles in Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="6768" end="6783" title="ethnic minority" label="ethnic minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6858" end="6870" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="7126" end="7138" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q319551" start="7320" end="7332" title="Adam Rotfeld" label="Adam Rotfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q208019" start="8137" end="8156" title="Eastern Partnership" label="Eastern Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="8394" end="8401" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="8501" end="8510" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="8528" end="8544" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q213477" start="8559" end="8569" title="teddy bear" label="teddy bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="9061" end="9088" title="customs union" label="customs duties were unified"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="9251" end="9259" title="Industrial sector" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="9340" end="9352" title="raw material" label="raw material"/>
<link wikidata="Q806651" start="9406" end="9426" title="Central Bank of the Russian Federation" label="Russian Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="9430" end="9444" title="monetary union" label="monetary union"/>
<link wikidata="Q41044" start="9450" end="9463" title="Russian ruble" label="Russian ruble"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10188" end="10217" title="Congress of the United States" label="Congress of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881918" start="10241" end="10270" title="Belarus Democracy Act of 2004" label="Belarus Democracy Act of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248345" start="10337" end="10353" title="Karen B. Stewart" label="Karen B. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917821" start="10495" end="10507" title="Belneftekhim" label="Belneftekhim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="10818" end="10829" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="11240" end="11253" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q95976070" start="11360" end="11391" title="2020 Hong Kong national security law" label="Hong Kong national security law"/>
<link wikidata="Q205650" start="11399" end="11434" title="United Nations Human Rights Council" label="United Nations Human Rights Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881974" start="11796" end="11828" title="Belarus–European Union relations" label="Belarus–European Union relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486277" start="11832" end="11854" title="Belarus–NATO relations" label="Belarus–NATO relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510894" start="11857" end="11895" title="List of diplomatic missions in Belarus" label="List of diplomatic missions in Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569133" start="11898" end="11936" title="List of diplomatic missions of Belarus" label="List of diplomatic missions of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q620233" start="11939" end="11980" title="Visa requirements for Belarusian citizens" label="Visa requirements for Belarusian citizens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3545" wikidata="Q2218448" url="?curid=3545" title="Telecommunications in Belgium">
<text>Communications in Belgium are extensive and advanced. Belgium possesses the infrastructure for both mobile and land-based telecom, as well as having significant television, radio and internet infrastructure. The country code for Belgium is BE.

==Services==
===Mail===
Mail regulation is a national competency. Postal service in Belgium is in many cases performed by Belgian Post Group, a semi-private public company. Competitors include DHL and UPS.

Postal codes in Belgium consist of four digits which indicate regional areas, e.g. &quot;9000&quot; is the postal code for Ghent.

===Telephone===
The telephone system itself is highly developed and technologically advanced, with full automation in facilities that handle domestic and international telecom. Domestically speaking, the county has a nationwide cellular telephone system and an extensive network of telephone cables. Telephone regulation is a national competency.

The country code for Belgium is 32 and the international call prefix is 00.

A telephone number in Belgium is a sequence of nine or ten numbers dialled on a telephone to make a call on the telephone network in Belgium. Belgium is under a closed telephone numbering plan, but retains the trunk code, &quot;0&quot;, for all national dialling.

====Fixed telephones====
There were 4.668 million land telephone lines in use in Belgium in 2007, a slight decrease on the 4.769 million in use in 1997.

The majority state-owned public telephone company of Belgium is Proximus. Some other or private operators exist, as Scarlet (Proximus) and Base (Telenet).

====Mobile telephones====
Mobile telephone ownership has increased by nearly one thousand percent in the period 1997–2007, from 974,494 to 10.23 million.

There are three licensed mobile network operators (MNO) in Belgium, Proximus (Belgacom), Orange Belgium (Orange S.A.) and Telenet/Base and numerous mobile virtual network operators (MVNO).

A fourth license will be auctioned off by the government in January 2010.

===Internet===
There were 61 (2003) internet service providers in Belgium, serving 8.113 million internet users in 2009. The country code for Belgian websites is .be.

In September 2009 in Flanders there were 3,048,260 broadband internet customers (DSL and cable), of which 2,520,481 were residential users and 527,779 business users. Only 65,175 dial-up internet access accounts remained in the residential market and 9,580 in the business market.

====Internet providers====
=====xDSL Internet Providers=====
Belgium has numerous copper cable internet providers:
* Altercom *End service 2011
* Base
* Proximus
* Destiny
* Digiweb
* EDPnet
* Evonet
* Full Telecom
* Interxion
* iPFix
* LCL
* Mobistar (Orange S.A.) *End service : 2013
* Numericable (France Numericable)
* Perceval
* Portima
* Proximedia Group
* Scarlet (Belgacom)
* Verizon Business (Verizon Communications)
* Ergatel

Only Belgacom and Numericable currently offers fixed telephony and digital television in a triple play formula. All other companies offer also fixed telephony in a duo play formula.

=====Cable Internet Providers=====
Belgium has three major fiberglass cable internet providers:
* Numéricable for the Brussels region (Ypso Holding)
* Telenet for the Flanders and Brussels regions (Liberty Global)
* VOO for the Walloon and Brussels regions (TECTEO)
*Orange Belgium use Telenet and VOO network combined
These companies all offer fixed telephony and digital television in a triple play formula.
* Interoute Managed Services
* Interxion
* LCL
* Nucleus
* Verizon Business (Verizon Communications)

These companies all offer specialised services.

=====Terrestrial Internet Providers=====
* Clearwire in Brussels, Ghent, Leuven, Aalst, Halle and Vilvoorde (Sprint Nextel)
* Perceval

=====Satellite Internet Providers=====
* Verizon Business (Verizon Communications)

=====ISP for public services=====
* The Brussels Regional Informatics Center (BRIC, Centre d&#x27;Informatique pour la Région Bruxelloise in French) offers Internet access to public administrations in the Brussels-Capital Region, relying directly on the national Belnet network and the IRISnet network.

=====Not categorized=====
Other ISP are Chat.be, Connexeon, HostIT, Microsoft Belgium, Netlog, Ulysse, Ven Brussels, Rack66 (EUSIP bvba), WSD Hosting.

===Other===
The microwave relay network is, however, more limited. For international communications, Belgium has 5 submarine cables and a number of satellite earth stations, two of which are Intelsat, and one Eutelsat.

==References==
==External links==

* BIPT - Belgian Institute for Postal Services and Telecommunications
* ISPA - Internet Service Providers Association of Belgium
* DNS - Domain Name System Belgium
* MAVISE - Belgian TV market
* Agoria - Federation of Belgian IT Employers
* Beltug - Federation of Belgian ICT Professionals
* UPP - Union of Belgian Periodical Press Publishers
* Febelma - Belgian Federation of Magazines
* VRM - Flemish Media Regulator (Dutch community)
* CSA - High Council for the Audiovisual Media (French community)
* MDGB - Germanic Media Council of Belgium (Germanic community)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2218448" start="0" end="25" title="Telecommunications in Belgium" label="Communications in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="54" end="61" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="212" end="224" title="country code" label="country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218448" start="240" end="242" title="Telecommunications in Belgium" label="BE"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="329" end="336" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q740553" start="367" end="385" title="Bpost" label="Belgian Post Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q489815" start="438" end="441" title="DHL Express" label="DHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q155026" start="446" end="449" title="United Parcel Service" label="UPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234018" start="452" end="475" title="Postal codes in Belgium" label="Postal codes in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="575" end="580" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="811" end="836" title="mobile phone" label="cellular telephone system"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="865" end="881" title="coaxial cable" label="telephone cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="935" end="947" title="country code" label="country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190395" start="974" end="999" title="List of international call prefixes" label="international call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q214995" start="1010" end="1026" title="telephone number" label="telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1030" end="1037" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="1169" end="1175" title="telephone numbering plan" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1176" end="1200" title="Telephone numbering plan#Closed dialing plans" label="telephone numbering plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="1328" end="1337" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1354" end="1361" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="1459" end="1476" title="telephone company" label="telephone company"/>
<link wikidata="Q566857" start="1491" end="1499" title="Proximus Group" label="Proximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345207" start="1543" end="1550" title="Scarlet (telco)" label="Scarlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q566857" start="1552" end="1560" title="Proximus Group" label="Proximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q809824" start="1566" end="1570" title="Base (mobile telephony provider)" label="Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696386" start="1572" end="1579" title="Telenet" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="1609" end="1625" title="Mobile phone" label="Mobile telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="1763" end="1786" title="mobile network operator" label="mobile network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005282" start="1806" end="1814" title="Proximus" label="Proximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q566857" start="1816" end="1824" title="Belgacom" label="Belgacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038997" start="1827" end="1841" title="Orange Belgium" label="Orange Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431486" start="1843" end="1854" title="Orange S.A." label="Orange S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q616340" start="1860" end="1867" title="Telenet (Belgium)" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q809824" start="1868" end="1872" title="Base (mobile telephony provider)" label="Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="1886" end="1917" title="mobile virtual network operator" label="mobile virtual network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="2039" end="2064" title="internet service provider" label="internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2100" end="2114" title="internaut" label="internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q39773" start="2165" end="2168" title=".be" label=".be"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2570" end="2578" title="Altercom" label="Altercom"/>
<link wikidata="Q809824" start="2599" end="2603" title="Base (mobile telephony provider)" label="Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005282" start="2606" end="2614" title="Proximus" label="Proximus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2617" end="2624" title="Destiny (telco)" label="Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276294" start="2627" end="2634" title="Digiweb" label="Digiweb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611579" start="2637" end="2643" title="EDPnet" label="EDPnet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2646" end="2652" title="Evonet" label="Evonet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2655" end="2667" title="Full Telecom" label="Full Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q685641" start="2670" end="2679" title="Interxion" label="Interxion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2682" end="2687" title="iPFix" label="iPFix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2690" end="2693" title="LCL (telco)" label="LCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038997" start="2696" end="2704" title="Mobistar" label="Mobistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431486" start="2706" end="2717" title="Orange S.A." label="Orange S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q579473" start="2741" end="2752" title="Numericable" label="Numericable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2754" end="2772" title="France Numericable" label="France Numericable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2776" end="2784" title="Perceval (telco)" label="Perceval"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2787" end="2794" title="Portima" label="Portima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398183" start="2797" end="2813" title="Proximedia Group" label="Proximedia Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345207" start="2816" end="2823" title="Scarlet (telco)" label="Scarlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q566857" start="2825" end="2833" title="Belgacom" label="Belgacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921426" start="2837" end="2853" title="Verizon Business" label="Verizon Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="2855" end="2877" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon Communications"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2881" end="2888" title="Ergatel" label="Ergatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="2937" end="2952" title="fixed telephony" label="fixed telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="2957" end="2975" title="digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142340" start="2981" end="2992" title="triple play (telecommunications)" label="triple play"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="3033" end="3048" title="fixed telephony" label="fixed telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q579473" start="3171" end="3182" title="Numéricable" label="Numéricable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3208" end="3220" title="Ypso Holding" label="Ypso Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q616340" start="3224" end="3231" title="Telenet (Belgium)" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q571779" start="3271" end="3285" title="Liberty Global" label="Liberty Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877682" start="3289" end="3292" title="VOO" label="VOO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3331" end="3337" title="TECTEO" label="TECTEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038997" start="3340" end="3354" title="Orange Belgium" label="Orange Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="3418" end="3433" title="fixed telephony" label="fixed telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="3438" end="3456" title="digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142340" start="3462" end="3473" title="triple play (telecommunications)" label="triple play"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3485" end="3511" title="Interoute Managed Services" label="Interoute Managed Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q685641" start="3514" end="3523" title="Interxion" label="Interxion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3526" end="3529" title="LCL (telco)" label="LCL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3532" end="3539" title="Nucleus (telco)" label="Nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921426" start="3542" end="3558" title="Verizon Business" label="Verizon Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="3560" end="3582" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130975" start="3677" end="3686" title="Clearwire" label="Clearwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="3690" end="3698" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="3700" end="3705" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="3707" end="3713" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121" start="3715" end="3720" title="Aalst, Belgium" label="Aalst"/>
<link wikidata="Q210003" start="3722" end="3727" title="Halle, Belgium" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q318418" start="3732" end="3741" title="Vilvoorde" label="Vilvoorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q301965" start="3743" end="3756" title="Sprint Nextel" label="Sprint Nextel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3760" end="3768" title="Perceval (telco)" label="Perceval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921426" start="3811" end="3827" title="Verizon Business" label="Verizon Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="3829" end="3851" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="4059" end="4082" title="Brussels-Capital Region" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226397" start="4117" end="4123" title="Belnet" label="Belnet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4140" end="4147" title="IRISnet" label="IRISnet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4198" end="4205" title="Chat.be" label="Chat.be"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4207" end="4216" title="Connexeon" label="Connexeon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4218" end="4224" title="HostIT" label="HostIT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4226" end="4243" title="Microsoft Belgium" label="Microsoft Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138672" start="4245" end="4251" title="Netlog" label="Netlog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477915" start="4253" end="4259" title="Ulysse" label="Ulysse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4261" end="4273" title="Ven Brussels" label="Ven Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4275" end="4294" title="Rack66 (EUSIP bvba)" label="Rack66 (EUSIP bvba)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4296" end="4307" title="WSD Hosting" label="WSD Hosting"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="4326" end="4341" title="microwave relay" label="microwave relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="4501" end="4509" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q848336" start="4519" end="4527" title="Eutelsat" label="Eutelsat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3546" wikidata="Q1267580" url="?curid=3546" title="Transport in Belgium">
<text>Transport in Belgium is facilitated with well-developed road, air, rail and water networks. The rail network has of electrified tracks. There are of roads, among which there are of motorways, of main roads and of other paved roads. There is also a well-developed urban rail network in Brussels, Antwerp, Ghent and Charleroi. The ports of Antwerp and Zeebrugge are two of the biggest seaports in Europe. Brussels Airport is Belgium its biggest airport.

==Railways==



Rail transport in Belgium was historically managed by the National Railway Company of Belgium, known as SNCB in French and NMBS in Dutch. In 2005, the public company was split into 2 companies: Infrabel, which manages the rail network and SNCB/NMBS itself, which manages the freight and passenger services. There is a total of , ( double track (as of 1998)), of which are electrified, mainly at 3,000 volts DC but with at 25 kV 50 Hz AC (2004) and all on standard gauge of . In 2004 the National Railway Company of Belgium, carried 178.4 million passengers a total of 8,676 million passenger-kilometres. Due to the high population density, operations are relatively profitable, so tickets are cheap and the frequency of services is high. The SNCB/NMBS is continually updating its rolling stock.

The network currently includes four high speed lines, three operating up to , and one up to . HSL 1 runs from just south of Brussels to the French border, where it continues to Lille, and from there to Paris or London. HSL 2 runs from Leuven to Liège. HSL 3 continues this route from Liège to the German border near Aachen. HSL 4 runs from Antwerp to Rotterdam by meeting HSL-Zuid at the border with Netherlands.

Electrification is at 3 kV DC, with the exception of the new high-speed lines, and of two recently electrified lines in the south of the country which are at 25 kV AC. Trains, contrary to tram and road traffic, run on the left.

===Rail links with adjacent countries===
* France — voltage change 3 kV DC – 25 kV AC
** LGV 1 — voltage remains at 25 kV AC.
** via France to the UK on HSL 1, LGV 1, Channel Tunnel and CTRL (Channel Tunnel Rail Link) — voltage remains at 25 kV AC.
* Germany — voltage change 3 kV DC – 15 kV AC
** HSL 3 — voltage remains at 25 kV AC.
* Netherlands — voltage change 3 kV DC – 1500 V DC
** HSL-Zuid — voltage remains at 25 kV AC.
* Luxembourg — no voltage change at the border (the line Hatrival (Libramont)-Luxembourg is at 25 kV AC and the line Gouvy-Luxembourg is at 25 kV AC)

===Urban rail===

An urban commuter rail network, Brussels RER (, ), is operational in the Brussels-Capital Region and surrounding areas.

===Metros and light rail===

In Belgium an extensive system of tram-like local railways called &quot;vicinal or buurtspoor&quot; lines crossed the country in the first half of the 20th century, and had a greater route length than the main-line railway system. The only survivors of the vicinal/buurtspoor system are the Kusttram (covering almost the entire coast from France to the Netherlands, being the longest tram line in the world) and some sections of the Charleroi lightrail system. Urban tram networks exist in Antwerp (the Antwerp Pre-metro), Ghent and Brussels (the Brussels trams), and are gradually being extended. The only rapid transit system in Belgium is the Brussels Metro. Some heavy metro infrastructures were built in Brussels, Antwerp and the Charleroi area, but these are currently used by light rail vehicles, and their conversion to full metro is not envisaged at present due to lack of funds.

Regional transport in Belgium is operated by regional companies: De Lijn in Flanders operates the Kusttram and the Antwerp pre-metro and tram, and the tram in Gent, as well as a bus network both urban and interurban, TEC in Wallonia operates the Charleroi lightrail system as well as a bus network and MIVB/STIB in the Brussels Capital-Region operates the Brussels metro as well as the Brussels tram and bus network. Despite this regional organization, some bus and tram routes operated by STIB/MIVB go beyond the regional border, and some bus routes operated by TEC or De Lijn transport passengers from the Flemish or Walloon regions to the capital city or in the other regions.

==Road transport==

===Road network===

The road network in Belgium is managed by regional authorities, meaning that a road section in Flanders is managed by the Flemish Government, a road section in Brussels by the Brussels government and a road section in Wallonia by the Walloon Government. This explains that road signs in Flanders are written in Dutch, even when referring to a Walloon region, and conversely, which can be confusing for foreigners who do not know the different translations of Flemish or Walloon cities in the other language. The road network in Belgium is made of highways, national (or regional) roads (the secondary network) and communal roads (or streets). Communal roads are managed at the municipal level. There are also a number of orbital roads in Belgium around major cities.

* &quot;total:&quot; 152,256 km (2006)
* &quot;country comparison to the world:&quot; 35
* &quot;paved:&quot; 119,079 km (including 1,763 km of expressways)
* &quot;unpaved:&quot; 33,177 km

Belgian road numbering evolved during the middle decades of the twentieth century, in a relatively inconsistent way. Road number allocations became less systematic during the surge in road building that took place in the 1960s and 70s. Frequently downgraded and deteriorating older national roads retained two digit numbers while newer major roads were identified with less instantly memorable three digit numbers, if only because the shorter numbers were already taken. 1985 saw a comprehensive renumbering of the &quot;N&quot; (National) roads which now followed the scheme described below.

====Highways====
The highways in Belgium are marked with a letter A and a number. Most often however the European numbering system for the international E-road network is used. There is however not always a one-on-one relationship between the two numbering systems along the whole length of the highways.

*A1 (E19): Brussels - Antwerp - Breda
*A2 (E314): Leuven - Lummen - Genk
*A3 (E40): Brussels - Leuven - Liège - Aachen
*A4 (E411): Brussels - Wavre - Namur - Arlon - Luxembourg
*A10 (E40): Brussels - Ghent - Bruges - Ostend
*A12 (Brussels - Boom - Antwerp - &quot;Netherlands&quot; (Bergen op Zoom):&quot;(includes a section not yet fully upgraded to motorway standard)&quot;
*A13 (E313): Antwerp - Beringen - Hasselt - Liège
*A14 (E17): Lille - Kortrijk - Ghent - Antwerp
*A15 (E42): Charleroi - Namur - Huy - Liège
*A17 (E403): Bruges - Kortrijk - Tournai
*A18 (E40): Bruges - Veurne - Dunkerque

====Ringways====
The ringways (or orbital roads) around bigger cities have their own series of numbers. The names start with a R then a first digit indicating the (old) province, and sometimes a second digit to further differentiate in between different ringways.

Some major examples are:
*R0 is the outer ringway around Brussels. The R20 and R22 are (parts of) inner ringways around Brussels.
*R1 is the southern half ringway and R2 is the northern half ringway around Antwerp.
*R3 is the outer ringway and R9 is the inner ringway around Charleroi. The inner ring is counterclockwise-only.
*R4 is the outer ringway and R40 is the inner ringway around Ghent.
*R6 is the outer ringway and R12 is the inner ringway around Mechelen.
*R8 is the outer ringway and R36 is the inner ringway around Kortrijk.
*R23 is the ringway around Leuven.
*R30 is the inner ringway around Bruges.

====National roads====

The national roads were renumbered in 1985 according to a national scheme and are identified with the letter N followed by a number.

The principal national roads fan out from Brussels, numbered in clockwise order:
*N1: Brussels - Mechelen - Antwerp
*N2: Brussels - Leuven - Diest - Hasselt - Maastricht
*N3: Brussels - Leuven - Tienen - Sint-Truiden - Liège - Aachen
*N4: Brussels - Wavre - Namur - Marche-en-Famenne - Bastogne - Arlon
*N5: Brussels - Charleroi - Philippeville
*N6: Brussels - Halle - Soignies - Mons
*N7: Halle - Ath - Tournai
*N8: Brussels - Ninove - Oudenaarde - Kortrijk - Ypres - Veurne - Koksijde
*N9: Brussels - Aalst - Ghent - Eeklo - Bruges - Ostend

Secondary national roads intersect these.

National roads have an N plus 1, 2 or 3 digits. National roads numbered with 3 digits are provincial roads, their first number indicating the province in which the road begins:
* N1xx Province of Antwerp
* N2xx Provinces of Flemish Brabant and Walloon Brabant
* N3xx Province of West Flanders
* N4xx Province of East Flanders
* N5xx Province of Hainaut
* N6xx Province of Liège
* N7xx Province of Limburg
* N8xx Province of Luxembourg
* N9xx Province of Namur

===Cars===
====Changes====
Between 1993 and 2012 the average age of the passengers cars registered as running in Belgium increased from just over 6 years and 4 months to 8 years and 17 days. 2012 data for other European countries are not yet available, but in 2010 the average age of car Belgium was 7.9 years against a European Union average of 8.3 years. Government policy provides an important clue as to one reason for the relative newness of the national car parc. Despite recent high-profile plant closures by Ford and Renault, Belgium remains an important centre for automobile component and passenger car production, with important plants operated by Volvo and Audi, and this is reflected in a relatively benign taxation environment whereby company cars are a still a popular and relatively tax efficient element in many remuneration packages.

==Water==

===Ports and harbours===
====Sea ports====
*Antwerp - Port of Antwerp (one of the world&#x27;s busiest ports)
*Bruges (Zeebrugge) - Port of Bruges-Zeebrugge (one of the busiest in Europe)
*Ghent - Port of Ghent 
*Ostend - Port of Ostend 

====Main inland ports====
Brussels - Port of Brussels (also accessible for ocean-going ships)
Liège - Port of Liège (one of the busiest in Europe)

====European portuary context====
European Sea Ports Organisation ESPO
European Federation of Inland Ports FEPI
Inland Navigation Europe INE
2002 ranking of world ports by tonnage and by container volume (in TEU) Port ranking

===Merchant marine===
===Waterways===
The Belgian waterway network has 2,043 km, 1,532 km of which is in regular commercial use. The main waterways are:
* the Albert Canal connecting Antwerp to Liège,
* the Ghent–Terneuzen Canal through the port of Ghent connecting Ghent with the Westerschelde,
* the Boudewijn Canal through the port of Bruges-Zeebrugge connecting Bruges with the North Sea,
* the Brussels-Charleroi Canal, Brussels–Scheldt Maritime Canal and Scheldt connecting Charleroi to Antwerp,
* the Nimy-Blaton-Péronnes Canal and Scheldt connecting the Borinage to Antwerp,
* the connection between the North Sea and Antwerp and the connection between Dunkerque and Liège via the Nimy-Blaton-Péronnes Canal,
* the Canal du Centre, the lower Sambre and the Meuse.

Waterways are managed on a regional level in Belgium. The region of Brussels only managed 14 km of waterways from the Anderlecht lock to the Vilvoorde bridge. In Flanders, the management of waterways is outsourced to four companies: NV De Scheepvaart, Departement Mobiliteit en Openbare Werken, Agentschap voor Maritieme Dienstverlening en Kust and Waterwegen en Zeekanaal NV.

==Air transport==

According to the 2009 CIA World Factbook, there are a total of 43 airports in Belgium, 27 of which have paved runways. Five airports have passenger flights; the largest of these is Brussels Airport. The other four are Ostend-Bruges International Airport, Brussels-South Charleroi Airport, Liège Airport and Antwerp International Airport. Other airports are military airports or small civil airports with no scheduled flights. Well-known military airports include the Melsbroek Air Base and the Beauvechain Air Base.

The Belgian national airline was Sabena from 1923 to 2001, until it went into bankruptcy. A new Belgian airline named SN Brussels Airlines was then founded by businessman Étienne Davignon. The company was then renamed as Brussels Airlines in 2006. In 2016, Air Belgium was founded by Nicky Terzakis, former CEO of TNT Airways, with the goal of connecting Belgium, offering long-haul flights. In 2019, Brussels Airlines became a subsidiary of German airline Lufthansa.

== See also ==
* Transport in France
* Transport in Germany
* Transport in the Netherlands
* List of tunnels in Belgium
* Plug-in electric vehicles in Belgium

==References==

==Further reading==


==External links==
*Transport at Belgium.be</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1267580" start="0" end="20" title="Transport in Belgium" label="Transport in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="285" end="293" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="295" end="302" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="304" end="309" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q81046" start="314" end="323" title="Charleroi" label="Charleroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q662529" start="338" end="345" title="port of Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477819" start="350" end="359" title="Port of Zeebrugge" label="Zeebrugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="395" end="401" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="403" end="419" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="423" end="430" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q524255" start="527" end="562" title="National Railway Company of Belgium" label="National Railway Company of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q536120" start="663" end="671" title="Infrabel" label="Infrabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="924" end="938" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754684" start="1296" end="1317" title="High-speed rail in Belgium" label="four high speed lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032137" start="1359" end="1364" title="HSL 1" label="HSL 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="1442" end="1447" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1467" end="1472" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1476" end="1482" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546399" start="1484" end="1489" title="HSL 2" label="HSL 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="1500" end="1506" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="1510" end="1515" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032141" start="1517" end="1522" title="HSL 3" label="HSL 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="1581" end="1587" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032147" start="1589" end="1594" title="HSL 4" label="HSL 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="1616" end="1625" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q225221" start="1637" end="1645" title="HSL-Zuid" label="HSL-Zuid"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1665" end="1676" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110407" start="1701" end="1708" title="List of railway electrification systems" label="3 kV DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110407" start="1837" end="1845" title="List of railway electrification systems" label="25 kV AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13631" start="1951" end="1957" title="Rail transport in France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032137" start="1997" end="2002" title="LGV 1" label="LGV 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412243" start="2024" end="2032" title="25 kV AC railway electrification" label="25 kV AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2041" end="2047" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2055" end="2057" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032137" start="2061" end="2066" title="HSL 1" label="HSL 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032137" start="2068" end="2073" title="LGV 1" label="LGV 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="2075" end="2089" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q277604" start="2094" end="2125" title="High Speed 1" label="CTRL (Channel Tunnel Rail Link)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412243" start="2147" end="2155" title="25 kV AC railway electrification" label="25 kV AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q81418" start="2159" end="2166" title="Rail transport in Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032141" start="2206" end="2211" title="HSL 3" label="HSL 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412243" start="2233" end="2241" title="25 kV AC railway electrification" label="25 kV AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q655891" start="2245" end="2256" title="Rail transport in the Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q225221" start="2297" end="2305" title="HSL-Zuid" label="HSL-Zuid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412243" start="2327" end="2335" title="25 kV AC railway electrification" label="25 kV AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q525359" start="2339" end="2349" title="Rail transport in Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476700" start="2728" end="2749" title="Vicinal tramway" label="vicinal or buurtspoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="2871" end="2878" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510414" start="2947" end="2955" title="Belgian coast tram" label="Kusttram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682845" start="3089" end="3115" title="Métro Léger de Charleroi" label="Charleroi lightrail system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364889" start="3159" end="3176" title="Antwerp Pre-metro" label="Antwerp Pre-metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="3179" end="3184" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q778680" start="3203" end="3217" title="Brussels trams" label="Brussels trams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="3263" end="3276" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q506298" start="3302" end="3316" title="Brussels Metro" label="Brussels Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="3329" end="3334" title="rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="3439" end="3449" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="3489" end="3494" title="rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q614819" start="3611" end="3618" title="De Lijn" label="De Lijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="3622" end="3630" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q366922" start="3763" end="3766" title="Société Régionale Wallonne du Transport" label="TEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="3770" end="3778" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631655" start="3848" end="3857" title="Brussels Intercommunal Transport Company" label="MIVB/STIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="3865" end="3888" title="Brussels Capital-Region" label="Brussels Capital-Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186029" start="4389" end="4407" title="Flemish Government" label="Flemish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441427" start="4443" end="4462" title="Government of the Brussels-Capital Region" label="Brussels government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186375" start="4501" end="4519" title="Walloon Government" label="Walloon Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q106123" start="5959" end="5987" title="international E-road network" label="international E-road network"/>
<link wikidata="Q204081" start="6127" end="6129" title="A1 road (Belgium)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375828" start="6131" end="6134" title="European route E19" label="E19"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6137" end="6145" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="6148" end="6155" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="6158" end="6163" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q785149" start="6165" end="6167" title="A2 motorway (Belgium)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q669854" start="6169" end="6173" title="European route E314" label="E314"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="6176" end="6182" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q329628" start="6185" end="6191" title="Lummen" label="Lummen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189692" start="6194" end="6198" title="Genk" label="Genk"/>
<link wikidata="Q606055" start="6200" end="6202" title="A3 road (Belgium)" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q327162" start="6204" end="6207" title="European route E40" label="E40"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6210" end="6218" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="6221" end="6227" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="6230" end="6235" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="6238" end="6244" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q785166" start="6246" end="6248" title="A4 road (Belgium)" label="A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920250" start="6250" end="6254" title="European route E411" label="E411"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6257" end="6265" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q181314" start="6268" end="6273" title="Wavre" label="Wavre"/>
<link wikidata="Q134121" start="6276" end="6281" title="Namur" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q675960" start="6284" end="6289" title="Arlon" label="Arlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="6292" end="6302" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q785047" start="6304" end="6307" title="A10 road (Belgium)" label="A10"/>
<link wikidata="Q327162" start="6309" end="6312" title="European route E40" label="E40"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6315" end="6323" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="6326" end="6331" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="6334" end="6340" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="6343" end="6349" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q785063" start="6351" end="6354" title="A12 road (Belgium)" label="A12"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6356" end="6364" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q723972" start="6367" end="6371" title="Boom, Antwerp" label="Boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="6374" end="6381" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6390" end="6401" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192508" start="6409" end="6423" title="Bergen op Zoom" label="Bergen op Zoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="6503" end="6506" title="A13 road (Belgium)" label="A13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375855" start="6508" end="6512" title="European route E313" label="E313"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="6515" end="6522" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q242407" start="6525" end="6533" title="Beringen, Belgium" label="Beringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58780" start="6536" end="6543" title="Hasselt" label="Hasselt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="6546" end="6551" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="6553" end="6556" title="A14 road (Belgium)" label="A14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348422" start="6558" end="6561" title="European route E17" label="E17"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="6564" end="6569" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="6572" end="6580" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="6583" end="6588" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="6591" end="6598" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6600" end="6603" title="A15 road (Belgium)" label="A15"/>
<link wikidata="Q599910" start="6605" end="6608" title="European route E42" label="E42"/>
<link wikidata="Q81046" start="6611" end="6620" title="Charleroi" label="Charleroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134121" start="6623" end="6628" title="Namur" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q207095" start="6631" end="6634" title="Huy" label="Huy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="6637" end="6642" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="6644" end="6647" title="A17 road (Belgium)" label="A17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679997" start="6649" end="6653" title="European route E403" label="E403"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="6656" end="6662" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="6665" end="6673" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q173219" start="6676" end="6683" title="Tournai" label="Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="6685" end="6688" title="A18 road (Belgium)" label="A18"/>
<link wikidata="Q327162" start="6690" end="6693" title="European route E40" label="E40"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="6696" end="6702" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q506707" start="6705" end="6711" title="Veurne" label="Veurne"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="6714" end="6723" title="Dunkerque" label="Dunkerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q570917" start="7016" end="7018" title="R0 road (Belgium)" label="R0"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="7047" end="7055" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289679" start="7061" end="7064" title="R20 road (Belgium)" label="R20"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7069" end="7072" title="R22 road (Belgium)" label="R22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537172" start="7121" end="7123" title="R1 ring road (Belgium)" label="R1"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7157" end="7159" title="R2 road (Belgium)" label="R2"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="7196" end="7203" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q546090" start="7206" end="7208" title="R3 ring road (Belgium)" label="R3"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7234" end="7236" title="R9 road (Belgium)" label="R9"/>
<link wikidata="Q81046" start="7265" end="7274" title="Charleroi" label="Charleroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7318" end="7320" title="R4 road (Belgium)" label="R4"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7346" end="7349" title="R40 road (Belgium)" label="R40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="7378" end="7383" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7386" end="7388" title="R6 road (Belgium)" label="R6"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7414" end="7417" title="R12 road (Belgium)" label="R12"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="7446" end="7454" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7457" end="7459" title="R8 road (Belgium)" label="R8"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7485" end="7488" title="R36 road (Belgium)" label="R36"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="7517" end="7525" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7528" end="7531" title="R23 road (Belgium)" label="R23"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="7554" end="7560" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q792334" start="7563" end="7566" title="R30 road (Belgium)" label="R30"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="7595" end="7601" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575047" start="7844" end="7846" title="N1 road (Belgium)" label="N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="7848" end="7856" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="7859" end="7867" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="7870" end="7877" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444960" start="7879" end="7881" title="N2 road (Belgium)" label="N2"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="7883" end="7891" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="7894" end="7900" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q743236" start="7903" end="7908" title="Diest" label="Diest"/>
<link wikidata="Q58780" start="7911" end="7918" title="Hasselt" label="Hasselt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309" start="7921" end="7931" title="Maastricht" label="Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q940734" start="7933" end="7935" title="N3 road (Belgium)" label="N3"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="7937" end="7945" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="7948" end="7954" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q456550" start="7957" end="7963" title="Tienen" label="Tienen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37792" start="7966" end="7978" title="Sint-Truiden" label="Sint-Truiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="7981" end="7986" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="7989" end="7995" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506981" start="7997" end="7999" title="N4 road (Belgium)" label="N4"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="8001" end="8009" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q181314" start="8012" end="8017" title="Wavre" label="Wavre"/>
<link wikidata="Q134121" start="8020" end="8025" title="Namur" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q269908" start="8028" end="8045" title="Marche-en-Famenne" label="Marche-en-Famenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34021" start="8048" end="8056" title="Bastogne" label="Bastogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q675960" start="8059" end="8064" title="Arlon" label="Arlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024191" start="8066" end="8068" title="N5 road (Belgium)" label="N5"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="8070" end="8078" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q81046" start="8081" end="8090" title="Charleroi" label="Charleroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q650239" start="8093" end="8106" title="Philippeville" label="Philippeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799040" start="8108" end="8110" title="N6 road (Belgium)" label="N6"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="8112" end="8120" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q210003" start="8123" end="8128" title="Halle, Belgium" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q462985" start="8131" end="8139" title="Soignies" label="Soignies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83407" start="8142" end="8146" title="Mons, Belgium" label="Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445303" start="8148" end="8150" title="N7 road (Belgium)" label="N7"/>
<link wikidata="Q210003" start="8152" end="8157" title="Halle, Belgium" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q95096" start="8160" end="8163" title="Ath" label="Ath"/>
<link wikidata="Q173219" start="8166" end="8173" title="Tournai" label="Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185953" start="8175" end="8177" title="N8 road (Belgium)" label="N8"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="8179" end="8187" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q385026" start="8190" end="8196" title="Ninove" label="Ninove"/>
<link wikidata="Q12992" start="8199" end="8209" title="Oudenaarde" label="Oudenaarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="8212" end="8220" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q102728" start="8223" end="8228" title="Ypres" label="Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q506707" start="8231" end="8237" title="Veurne" label="Veurne"/>
<link wikidata="Q465545" start="8240" end="8248" title="Koksijde" label="Koksijde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605310" start="8250" end="8252" title="N9 road (Belgium)" label="N9"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="8254" end="8262" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121" start="8265" end="8270" title="Aalst, Belgium" label="Aalst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="8273" end="8278" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12440" start="8281" end="8286" title="Eeklo" label="Eeklo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="8289" end="8295" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="8298" end="8304" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116" start="8545" end="8552" title="Antwerp Province" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118" start="8573" end="8588" title="Flemish Brabant" label="Flemish Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122" start="8593" end="8608" title="Walloon Brabant" label="Walloon Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113" start="8628" end="8641" title="West Flanders" label="West Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114" start="8661" end="8674" title="East Flanders" label="East Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129" start="8694" end="8701" title="Hainaut Province" label="Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127" start="8721" end="8726" title="Liège Province" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095" start="8746" end="8753" title="Limburg (Belgium)" label="Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126" start="8773" end="8783" title="Luxembourg (Belgium)" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125" start="8803" end="8808" title="Namur Province" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="8923" end="8930" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="9130" end="9144" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217352" start="9326" end="9330" title="Genk Body &amp;amp; Assembly" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648363" start="9335" end="9342" title="Vilvoorde Renault Factory" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q383097" start="9469" end="9474" title="Volvo Cars Ghent" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q758757" start="9479" end="9483" title="Audi Brussels" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="9718" end="9725" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q662529" start="9728" end="9743" title="Port of Antwerp" label="Port of Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="9785" end="9791" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q184383" start="9793" end="9802" title="Zeebrugge" label="Zeebrugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477819" start="9806" end="9830" title="Port of Bruges-Zeebrugge" label="Port of Bruges-Zeebrugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="9863" end="9868" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q657718" start="9871" end="9884" title="Port of Ghent" label="Port of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="9887" end="9893" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567884" start="9896" end="9910" title="Port of Ostend" label="Port of Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="9939" end="9947" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567864" start="9950" end="9966" title="Port of Brussels" label="Port of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="10007" end="10012" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228828" start="10015" end="10028" title="Port of Liège" label="Port of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060801" start="10095" end="10126" title="European Sea Ports Organisation" label="European Sea Ports Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q835090" start="10447" end="10459" title="Albert Canal" label="Albert Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009271" start="10495" end="10516" title="Ghent–Terneuzen Canal" label="Ghent–Terneuzen Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524840" start="10569" end="10582" title="Westerschelde" label="Westerschelde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10590" end="10605" title="Boudewijn Canal" label="Boudewijn Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="10670" end="10679" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723575" start="10687" end="10711" title="Brussels-Charleroi Canal" label="Brussels-Charleroi Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117579" start="10713" end="10744" title="Brussels–Scheldt Maritime Canal" label="Brussels–Scheldt Maritime Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37620" start="10749" end="10756" title="Scheldt" label="Scheldt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10796" end="10822" title="Nimy-Blaton-Péronnes Canal" label="Nimy-Blaton-Péronnes Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182920" start="10850" end="10858" title="Borinage" label="Borinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="10949" end="10958" title="Dunkerque" label="Dunkerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032687" start="11011" end="11026" title="Canal du Centre (Belgium)" label="Canal du Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q208267" start="11038" end="11044" title="Sambre" label="Sambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="11053" end="11058" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12886" start="11179" end="11189" title="Anderlecht" label="Anderlecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q318418" start="11202" end="11211" title="Vilvoorde" label="Vilvoorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="11639" end="11655" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432260" start="11676" end="11711" title="Ostend-Bruges International Airport" label="Ostend-Bruges International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431012" start="11713" end="11745" title="Brussels-South Charleroi Airport" label="Brussels-South Charleroi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q606067" start="11747" end="11760" title="Liège Airport" label="Liège Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17480" start="11765" end="11794" title="Antwerp International Airport" label="Antwerp International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q651419" start="11925" end="11943" title="Melsbroek Air Base" label="Melsbroek Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q547627" start="11952" end="11972" title="Beauvechain Air Base" label="Beauvechain Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q141146" start="12008" end="12014" title="Sabena" label="Sabena"/>
<link wikidata="Q638450" start="12093" end="12113" title="SN Brussels Airlines" label="SN Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q289584" start="12146" end="12162" title="Étienne Davignon" label="Étienne Davignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q153571" start="12196" end="12213" title="Brussels Airlines" label="Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q50399835" start="12232" end="12243" title="Air Belgium" label="Air Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="12432" end="12441" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326409" start="12461" end="12480" title="Transport in France" label="Transport in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264683" start="12483" end="12503" title="Transport in Germany" label="Transport in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122732" start="12506" end="12534" title="Transport in the Netherlands" label="Transport in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644048" start="12537" end="12563" title="List of tunnels in Belgium" label="List of tunnels in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q56682959" start="12566" end="12602" title="Plug-in electric vehicles in Belgium" label="Plug-in electric vehicles in Belgium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3565" wikidata="Q2348300" url="?curid=3565" title="Economy of Benin">
<text>The economy of Benin remains underdeveloped and dependent on subsistence agriculture and cotton. Cotton accounts for 40% of Benin&#x27;s GDP and roughly 80% of official export receipts. There is also production of textiles, palm products, and cocoa beans. Maize (corn), beans, rice, peanuts, cashews, pineapples, cassava, yams, and other various tubers are grown for local subsistence. Benin began producing a modest quantity of offshore oil in October 1982. Production ceased in recent years but exploration of new sites is ongoing.

A modest fishing fleet provides fish and shrimp for local subsistence and export to Europe. Formerly government-owned commercial activities are now privatized. A French brewer acquired the former state-run brewery. Smaller businesses are privately owned by Beninese citizens, but some firms are foreign owned, primarily French and Lebanese. The private commercial and agricultural sectors remain the principal contributors to growth.

==Economic development==
Since the transition to a democratic government in 1990, Benin has undergone an economic recovery. A large injection of external investment from both private and public sources has alleviated the economic difficulties of the early 1990s caused by global recession and persistently low commodity prices (although the latter continues to affect the economy). The manufacturing sector is confined to some light industry, which is mainly involved in processing primary products and the cow production of consumer goods. A planned joint hydroelectric project with neighboring Togo is intended to reduce Benin&#x27;s dependence on imported energy mostly from Ghana, which currently accounts for a significant proportion of the country&#x27;s imports.

The service sector has grown quickly, stimulated by economic liberalization and fiscal reform, and the use of modern technology such as automobiles and computers has grown considerably as a result. Membership of the CFA Franc Zone offers reasonable currency stability as well as access to French economic support. Benin sells its products mainly to France and, in smaller quantities, to the Netherlands, Korea, Japan, and India. France is Benin&#x27;s leading source for imports. Benin is also a member of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

Despite its rapid growth, the economy of Benin still remains underdeveloped and dependent on subsistence agriculture, cotton production, and regional trade. Growth in real output averaged a sound 5% since 1996, but a rapid population rise offset much of this growth on a per capita basis. Inflation has subsided over the past several years. Commercial and transport activities, which make up a large part of GDP, are vulnerable to developments in Nigeria, particularly fuel shortages.

Although trade unions in Benin represent up to 75% of the formal workforce, the large informal economy has been noted by the International Trade Union Confederation (ITCU) to contain ongoing problems, including a lack of women&#x27;s wage equality, the use of child labour, and the continuing issue of forced labour.

In December 2014, the Bureau of International Labor Affairs issued a &quot;List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor&quot; in which the Republic of Benin was mentioned among 74 other countries where significant instances of child labor were observed. Two major products involved such working conditions in Benin: cotton and crushed granite.

==Agriculture==
Benin produced in 2018:

* 3.8 million tons of cassava (17th largest producer in the world);
* 2.7 million tons of yam (4th largest producer in the world, losing only to Nigeria, Ghana and Ivory Coast);
* 1.5 million tons of maize;
* 758 thousand tons of cotton (12th largest producer in the world);
* 598 thousand tons of palm oil;
* 459 thousand tons of rice;
* 372 thousand tons of pineapple;
* 319 thousand tons of sorghum;
* 253 thousand tons of tomato;
* 225 thousand tons of peanut;
* 221 thousand tons of soy;
* 215 thousand tons of cashew nuts (5th largest producer in the world, losing only to Vietnam, India, Ivory Coast and Philippines);

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.

==Financial Sector==

Benin&#x27;s financial sector is dominated by banks, and in general remains shallow. However, a series of reforms were undertaken in the 1990s, which resulted in the consolidation of the banking sector and in the privatization of all state banks.

A legal framework regarding licensing, bank activities, organizational and capital requirements, inspections and sanctions (all applicable to all countries of the Union) is in place and underwent significant reforms in 1999. There is no customer deposit insurance system.

Benin has a lively and diversified microfinance sector. Data from 2003 by the Central Bank stated a penetration rate of microfinance services of almost 60 percent. In 2006 the Ministry of Microfinance and Employment of Youth and Women counted 762 organizations with 1308 branches, including Cooperatives, NGOs, Savings/Credit Associations and government projects. Programmes for strengthening the sector are carried out on national and regional levels, such as the PRAFIDE (Programme Régional d’Appui à la finance Décentralisée). The microfinance sector is also subject to supervision through the Central Bank as well as the responsible Ministry for Microfinance and Employment of Youth and Women.

Benin is member of the Bourse Regionale des Valeures Mobilières (BRVM) located in Abidjan, Côte d&#x27;Ivoire. Stocks were issued by a number of companies in the region. Listed bonds were partly issued by companies and partly by governments of the West African Monetary and Economic Union (UEMOA).

The payment and settlement system and clearing mechanisms were reformed in 2004 through the BCEAO and offer RTGS and SWIFT access to banks, financial institutions, the stock exchange as well as the Central bank and special banks.

*Banque Internationale du Bénin (BI.BE)
*Bank of Africa Benin
*Continental Bank Benin
*Diamond Bank Benin (DBB)
*Ecobank
*Financial Bank
*Finadev
*Caisse Nationale d&#x27;Epargne
*Credit du Bénin
*Equibail
* United Bank of Africa
* Africa Bank for the Industry and the trade
* Sahelo-Saharian Bank of the Industry and Trade Development

== Data ==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2024.
==See also==
*Agriculture in Benin
*Fishing in Benin
* United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
*Foreign trade of Benin

==References==
*

==External links==
* Benin Banking Information
* West African Agricultural Market Observer/Observatoire du Marché Agricole (RESIMAO), a project of the West-African Market Information Network (WAMIS-NET), provides live market and commodity prices from fifty seven regional and local public agricultural markets across Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d&#x27;Ivoire, Guinea, Niger, Mali, Senegal, Togo, and Nigeria. Sixty commodities are tracked weekly. The project is run by the Benin Ministry of Agriculture, and a number of European, African, and United Nations agencies.
* Benin latest trade data on ITC Trade Map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2348300" start="4" end="20" title="Economy of Benin" label="economy of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="61" end="84" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="89" end="95" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="124" end="129" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="214" end="221" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="243" end="253" title="cocoa bean" label="cocoa bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="256" end="261" title="Maize" label="Maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="270" end="274" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="277" end="281" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="283" end="289" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="292" end="298" title="cashew" label="cashew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="301" end="310" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="313" end="320" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="322" end="326" title="yam (vegetable)" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="704" end="710" title="brewing" label="brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="866" end="874" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="1021" end="1031" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="1527" end="1540" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="1566" end="1570" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1648" end="1653" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q191511" start="1957" end="1971" title="CFA Franc Zone" label="CFA Franc Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="2251" end="2292" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="2751" end="2758" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832092" start="2799" end="2820" title="trade unions in Benin" label="trade unions in Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071706" start="2915" end="2954" title="International Trade Union Confederation" label="International Trade Union Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="3050" end="3062" title="child labor" label="child labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="3092" end="3105" title="unfree labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998389" start="3130" end="3167" title="Bureau of International Labor Affairs" label="Bureau of International Labor Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869250" start="3183" end="3236" title="List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor" label="List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="3525" end="3532" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="3593" end="3596" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="3703" end="3708" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="3733" end="3739" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="3801" end="3809" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="3834" end="3838" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="3863" end="3872" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="3897" end="3904" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="3929" end="3935" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="3960" end="3966" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="3991" end="3994" title="soy" label="soy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="4019" end="4030" title="cashew nuts" label="cashew nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857064" start="5970" end="6000" title="Banque Internationale du Bénin" label="Banque Internationale du Bénin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300433" start="6010" end="6024" title="Bank of Africa" label="Bank of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165249" start="6032" end="6048" title="Continental Bank" label="Continental Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6056" end="6074" title="Diamond Bank Benin" label="Diamond Bank Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q930225" start="6082" end="6089" title="Ecobank" label="Ecobank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449579" start="6091" end="6105" title="Financial Bank" label="Financial Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6107" end="6114" title="Finadev" label="Finadev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6116" end="6147" title="Caisse Nationale d&amp;#x27;Epargne" label="Caisse Nationale d&amp;#x27;Epargne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6149" end="6164" title="Credit du Bénin" label="Credit du Bénin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6166" end="6174" title="Equibail" label="Equibail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312121" start="6400" end="6420" title="Agriculture in Benin" label="Agriculture in Benin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6422" end="6438" title="Fishing in Benin" label="Fishing in Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="6441" end="6486" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378175" start="6488" end="6510" title="Foreign trade of Benin" label="Foreign trade of Benin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3583" wikidata="Q2035818" url="?curid=3583" title="Economy of Bhutan">
<text>The economy of Bhutan is based on agriculture and forestry, which provide the main livelihood for more than 60% of the population. Agriculture consists largely of subsistence farming and animal husbandry. Rugged mountains dominate the terrain and make the building of roads and other infrastructure difficult. Bhutan is among the richest by gross domestic product (nominal) per capita in South Asia, at $3,491 as of 2022, but it still places 153rd, and among the poorest in the world. The total gross domestic product is only $2,898 billion, and 178th according to IMF.

Bhutan&#x27;s economy is closely aligned with India&#x27;s through strong trade and monetary links and dependence on India&#x27;s financial assistance. Most production in the industrial sector is of the cottage industry type. Most development projects, such as road construction, rely on Indian migrant labour. Model education, social, and environment programs are underway with support from multilateral development organisations.

Each economic program takes into account the government&#x27;s desire to protect the country&#x27;s environment and cultural traditions. For example, the government, in its cautious expansion of the tourist sector, encourages visits by upscale, environmentally conscientious tourists. Detailed controls and uncertain policies in areas such as industrial licensing, trade, labour, and finance continue to hamper foreign investment. Hydropower exports to India have boosted Bhutan&#x27;s overall growth, even though GDP fell in 2008 as a result of a slowdown in India, its predominant export market.

Since 1961, the government of Bhutan has guided the economy through five-year plans in order to promote economic development.

On 8 December 2023, Bhutan graduated from the UN&#x27;s list of least developed countries (LDCs), making it only the 7th country to do so and the first in 3 years.

==Macro-economic trend==
This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Bhutan at market prices by the International Monetary Fund:


Bhutan&#x27;s hydropower potential and its attraction for tourists are key resources. The Bhutanese Government has made some progress in expanding the nation&#x27;s productive base and improving social welfare.

In 2010, Bhutan became the first country in the world to ban smoking and the selling of tobacco. In order to stamp out cross-border smuggling during the pandemic, a new Tobacco Control Rules and Regulations (TCRR) 2021 allowed the import, sales and consumption of tobacco products.

== Membership of economic organizations and agreements ==
In terms of trade, Bhutan is a member of the South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) and the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) and the South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation (SASEC). Bhutan is also a member of the pan-Asian Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD), and the Asian Development Bank.

Bhutan first applied to join the WTO in 1999 and as an applicant, was quickly granted observer status Beyond that, ascension proceedings at the WTO have been much delayed and periodically put on pause, largely stemming from concerns and considerations of the Bhutanese government itself. The Bhutanese government approved ascension to the WTO in April 2023, at least partly hastened by the country&#x27;s upcoming graduation from the UN-defined &#x27;least developed country (LDC) category. Under WTO rules and processes, ascent of a country with LDC status comes with some leniency in certain requirements, more relaxed timeframes for compliance, and additional support; so, whilst the loss of LDC status, as happened in December 2023, was a reflection of Bhutan&#x27;s success and development progress, it also meant much further delay in WTO ascension (that is, ascent after the loss of LDC status) would make the journey through to full WTO member status even harder.

== GNH versus GDP ==
In the 1970s the King placed Gross National Happiness over Gross Domestic Product.

== See also ==
* Agriculture in Bhutan
* Banking in Bhutan
* Mining in Bhutan
* Fishing in Bhutan
* Forestry in Bhutan
* Bhutanese ngultrum, currency

==References==
;Notes
;Public domain
*

;Citations
== Further reading ==
*
*

==External links==
*Global Economic Prospects: Growth Prospects for South Asia The World Bank, 13 December 2006</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2035818" start="4" end="21" title="Economy of Bhutan" label="economy of Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="34" end="45" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="50" end="58" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="163" end="182" title="subsistence farming" label="subsistence farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="187" end="203" title="animal husbandry" label="animal husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="310" end="316" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="341" end="384" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="gross domestic product (nominal) per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="495" end="517" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="565" end="568" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q15320003" start="866" end="880" title="migrant labour" label="migrant labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="1435" end="1445" title="Hydropower" label="Hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455776" start="1671" end="1686" title="Five-Year Plans of Bhutan" label="five-year plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1776" end="1785" title="United Nations" label="UN&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2005" end="2032" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="2050" end="2060" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154429" start="2126" end="2146" title="Bhutanese government" label="Bhutanese Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q751734" start="2305" end="2316" title="smoking ban" label="ban smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566035" start="2634" end="2661" title="South Asian Free Trade Area" label="South Asian Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q795985" start="2678" end="2756" title="Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation" label="Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152890" start="2775" end="2818" title="South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation" label="South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q776874" start="2869" end="2894" title="Asia Cooperation Dialogue" label="Asia Cooperation Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="2910" end="2932" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="3386" end="3409" title="Least developed countries" label="least developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q862253" start="3958" end="3982" title="Gross National Happiness" label="Gross National Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414783" start="4030" end="4051" title="Agriculture in Bhutan" label="Agriculture in Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856335" start="4054" end="4071" title="Banking in Bhutan" label="Banking in Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865553" start="4074" end="4090" title="Mining in Bhutan" label="Mining in Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455040" start="4093" end="4110" title="Fishing in Bhutan" label="Fishing in Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259670" start="4113" end="4131" title="Forestry in Bhutan" label="Forestry in Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201799" start="4134" end="4152" title="Bhutanese ngultrum" label="Bhutanese ngultrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="4321" end="4335" title="The World Bank" label="The World Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3589" wikidata="Q3395165" url="?curid=3589" title="Lhop people">
<text>The Lhop or Doya people (Dzongkha: ལྷོབ་ ་ཡང་ན་ དྲོ་ཡ) are a little-known tribe of southwest Bhutan. The Bhutanese believe them to be the aboriginal inhabitants of the country. The Lhop are found in the low valleys of Dorokha Gewog and near Phuntsholing in the Duars. 
The dress of the Lhop resembles the Lepcha, but they bear little similarity with the Bhutia in the North and the Toto in the west. The Doya trace their descent matrilineally, marry their cross cousins, and embalm the deceased who are then placed in a foetal position in a circular sarcophagus above the ground. They follow a blend of Tibetan Buddhism mixed with animism.

==See also==
*Ethnic groups in Bhutan
*Sharchop

==References==
==External links==
* RAOnline Bhutan: The Lhop</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3395165" start="4" end="8" title="Lhop people" label="Lhop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395165" start="12" end="25" title="Lhop people" label="Doya people ("/>
<link wikidata="Q33081" start="25" end="33" title="Dzongkha" label="Dzongkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395165" start="33" end="54" title="Lhop people" label=": ལྷོབ་ ་ཡང་ན་ དྲོ་ཡ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="93" end="99" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="138" end="148" title="indigenous peoples" label="aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297316" start="218" end="231" title="Dorokha Gewog" label="Dorokha Gewog"/>
<link wikidata="Q856162" start="241" end="253" title="Phuntsholing" label="Phuntsholing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975243" start="261" end="266" title="Duars" label="Duars"/>
<link wikidata="Q972684" start="305" end="311" title="Lepcha people" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975309" start="354" end="360" title="Bhutia" label="Bhutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828379" start="382" end="386" title="Toto tribe" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="429" end="442" title="matrilineality" label="matrilineally"/>
<link wikidata="Q655760" start="456" end="468" title="cross cousin" label="cross cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="603" end="619" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="631" end="638" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263231" start="655" end="678" title="Ethnic groups in Bhutan" label="Ethnic groups in Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364875" start="680" end="688" title="Sharchop people" label="Sharchop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3604" wikidata="Q1275640" url="?curid=3604" title="Geography of Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>Bosnia and Herzegovina is located in Southeastern Europe. Situated in the western Balkans, it has a border with Croatia to the north and southwest, a border with Serbia to the east, and a border with Montenegro to the southeast. It borders the Adriatic Sea along its coastline.

The most striking features of the local terrain are valleys and mountains which measure up to in height. The country is mostly mountainous, encompassing the central Dinaric Alps. The northeastern parts reach into the Pannonian basin, while in the south it borders the Adriatic Sea.

The country&#x27;s natural resources include coal, iron ore, bauxite, manganese, nickel, clay, gypsum, salt, sand, timber and hydropower.

==Regions==

The country&#x27;s name comes from the two regions Bosnia and Herzegovina, which have a very vaguely defined border between them. Bosnia occupies the northern areas which are roughly four fifths of the entire country, while Herzegovina occupies the rest in the southern part of the country.

The major cities are the capital Sarajevo, Banja Luka and Bihać in the northwest region known as Bosanska Krajina, Tuzla in the northeast, Zenica in the central part of Bosnia and Mostar is the capital of Herzegovina.

The south part of Bosnia has Mediterranean climate and a great deal of agriculture. Central Bosnia is the most mountainous part of Bosnia featuring prominent mountains Vlašić, Čvrsnica, and Prenj. Eastern Bosnia also features mountains like Trebević, Jahorina, Igman, Bjelašnica and Treskavica. It was here that the 1984 Winter Olympics were held.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina forest cover is around 43% of the total land area, equivalent to 2,187,910 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 2,210,000 hectares (ha) in 1990. For the year 2015, 74% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership and 26% private ownership. Eastern Bosnia is heavily forested along the river Drina and most forest areas are in Central, Eastern and Western parts of Bosnia. Northern Bosnia contains very fertile agricultural land along the river Sava and the corresponding area is heavily farmed. This farmland is a part of the Parapannonian Plain stretching into neighbouring Croatia and Serbia. The river Sava and corresponding Posavina river basin hold the cities of Brčko, Bosanski Šamac, Bosanski Brod and Bosanska Gradiška.

The northwest part of Bosnia is called Bosanska Krajina and holds the cities of Banja Luka, Prijedor, Sanski Most, Jajce, Cazin, Velika Kladuša and Bihać. Kozara National Park and Mrakovica World War II monument is located in this region.

The country has only of coastline, around the town of Neum in the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton, although surrounded by Croatian peninsulas it is possible to get to the middle of the Adriatic from Neum. Through the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, Bosnia has a right of innocent passage to the outer sea. Neum has many hotels and is an important tourism destination.

==Rivers==

There are seven major rivers of Bosnia and Herzegovina:

*The Una in the northwest part of Bosnia flows along the northern and western border of Bosnia and Croatia and through the Bosnian city of Bihać. It is popular for rafting and adventure sports.
*The Sana flows through the city of Sanski Most and Prijedor and is a tributary of the river Una in the north.
*The Vrbas flows through the cities of Gornji Vakuf – Uskoplje, Bugojno, Jajce, Banja Luka, Srbac and reaches the river Sava in the north. The Vrbas flows through the central part of Bosnia and flows outwards to the North.
*The Bosna is the longest river in Bosnia and is fully contained within the country as it stretches from its source near Sarajevo to the river Sava in the north. It gave its name to the country.
*The Drina flows through the eastern part of Bosnia, at many places in the border between Bosnia and Serbia. The Drina flows through the cities of Foča, Goražde Višegrad and Zvornik.
*The Neretva is the longest river in Herzegovina, flowing from Jablanica south to the Adriatic Sea. The river is famous as it flows through the city of Mostar.

The Sava is the longest river in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, within Bosnia and Herzegovina, it only runs along the border with Croatia. It then flows into Serbia. Towns like Brčko, Bosanski Šamac, and Bosanska Gradiška lie on the river.

==Phytogeography==

Phytogeographically, Bosnia and Herzegovina belongs to the Boreal Kingdom and is shared between the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region and Adriatic province of the Mediterranean Region. According to the WWF, the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina can be subdivided into three ecoregions: the Pannonian mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests and Illyrian deciduous forests.

== Climate ==
Except for the easternmost provinces, the country experiences a wet Mediterranean climate.

The hills and mountains are drier, colder, windier, and cloudier.
The north region has a typical continental climate.

=== Climate change ===
== Mining industry ==
Various archaeological artifacts including relicts of mining activities and tools belonging to similar age groups, provide an indication of the geographical distribution, scale and methods of mining activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the Paleolithic to Roman era.

Most important of these is the so-called area of “central Bosnian mountains” located between the rivers Vrbas, Lašva, Neretva, Rama and their tributaries. The second one is the area of western Bosnia, bordered by the Vrbas and Una rivers, with its main orebearing formations found in the river-valleys of Sana and Japra, and their tributaries. The third area is eastern Bosnia, around the river Drina between the towns of Foča and Zvornik, the principal mining activity centered around Srebrenica.

Ores of various metals, including iron, are found in these areas and exploitation has been going on for more than 5000 years – from the period of prehistoric human settlers, through Illyrian, Roman, Slavic, Turkish and Austrian rulers, into the present.

== Land use ==
*Arable land: 19.73%
*Permanent crops: 2.06%
*Other: 78.22% (2012 est.)

Irrigated land: (2003)

Total renewable water resources: (2011)

== Environment ==

Natural hazards:
*Destructive earthquakes

Current issues:
*Air pollution from metallurgical plants
*Sites for disposing of urban waste are limited
*Widespread casualties, water shortages, and destruction of infrastructure because of the 1992–95 war
*Deforestation

International agreements:
*Party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
*Signed, but not ratified: none

== Gallery ==
==See also==
*Environment of Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Geography of Europe
*List of cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina

==References==
==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="0" end="22" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="37" end="56" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="82" end="89" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="112" end="119" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="162" end="168" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="200" end="210" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="444" end="456" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="496" end="511" title="Pannonian plain" label="Pannonian basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="547" end="559" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="765" end="771" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="776" end="787" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="1039" end="1047" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="1049" end="1059" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q204434" start="1064" end="1069" title="Bihać" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779054" start="1103" end="1119" title="Bosanska Krajina" label="Bosanska Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="1121" end="1126" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q184046" start="1145" end="1151" title="Zenica" label="Zenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028933" start="1159" end="1181" title="Central Bosnia" label="central part of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="1186" end="1192" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="1211" end="1222" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q425929" start="1393" end="1399" title="Vlašić (Bosnian mountain)" label="Vlašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267542" start="1401" end="1409" title="Čvrsnica" label="Čvrsnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276211" start="1415" end="1420" title="Prenj" label="Prenj"/>
<link wikidata="Q612240" start="1466" end="1474" title="Trebević" label="Trebević"/>
<link wikidata="Q187944" start="1476" end="1484" title="Jahorina" label="Jahorina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110607" start="1486" end="1491" title="Igman" label="Igman"/>
<link wikidata="Q879414" start="1493" end="1503" title="Bjelašnica" label="Bjelašnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508343" start="1508" end="1518" title="Treskavica" label="Treskavica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9657" start="1541" end="1561" title="1984 Winter Olympics" label="1984 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="1600" end="1612" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="1818" end="1834" title="State ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="1843" end="1860" title="Private property" label="private ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q975995" start="2250" end="2258" title="Posavina" label="Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779054" start="2390" end="2406" title="Bosanska Krajina" label="Bosanska Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="2431" end="2441" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q323986" start="2443" end="2451" title="Prijedor" label="Prijedor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189505" start="2453" end="2464" title="Sanski Most" label="Sanski Most"/>
<link wikidata="Q258429" start="2466" end="2471" title="Jajce" label="Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q204434" start="2499" end="2504" title="Bihać" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418337" start="2506" end="2526" title="Kozara National Park" label="Kozara National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q320623" start="2645" end="2649" title="Neum" label="Neum"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="2803" end="2850" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q686268" start="2874" end="2890" title="innocent passage" label="innocent passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="3046" end="3049" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q904765" start="3240" end="3244" title="Sana (river)" label="Sana"/>
<link wikidata="Q126712" start="3351" end="3356" title="Vrbas (river)" label="Vrbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="3574" end="3579" title="Bosna (river)" label="Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q186901" start="3769" end="3774" title="Drina" label="Drina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="3952" end="3959" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="4112" end="4116" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q771220" start="4371" end="4390" title="Phytogeography" label="Phytogeographically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092732" start="4430" end="4444" title="Boreal Kingdom" label="Boreal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q968104" start="4496" end="4515" title="Circumboreal Region" label="Circumboreal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="4545" end="4565" title="Mediterranean Region" label="Mediterranean Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="4584" end="4587" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="4658" end="4667" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q771194" start="4674" end="4697" title="Pannonian mixed forests" label="Pannonian mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845967" start="4699" end="4730" title="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests" label="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269041" start="4735" end="4761" title="Illyrian deciduous forests" label="Illyrian deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="4846" end="4867" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5281" end="5292" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="5296" end="5305" title="Roman era" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q126712" start="5412" end="5417" title="Vrbas (river)" label="Vrbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094469" start="5419" end="5424" title="Lašva" label="Lašva"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="5426" end="5433" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418335" start="5435" end="5439" title="Rama (Neretva)" label="Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="5535" end="5538" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q904765" start="5613" end="5617" title="Sana River" label="Sana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5622" end="5627" title="Japra (river)" label="Japra"/>
<link wikidata="Q186901" start="5703" end="5708" title="Drina" label="Drina"/>
<link wikidata="Q180333" start="5730" end="5734" title="Foča" label="Foča"/>
<link wikidata="Q231517" start="5739" end="5746" title="Zvornik" label="Zvornik"/>
<link wikidata="Q156053" start="5794" end="5804" title="Srebrenica" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="5989" end="5997" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="6014" end="6021" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="6078" end="6089" title="Arable land" label="Arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="6150" end="6164" title="Irrigated land" label="Irrigated land"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="6480" end="6483" title="Bosnian War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="6582" end="6597" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="6677" end="6688" title="Ozone Layer" label="Ozone Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223831" start="6771" end="6808" title="Environment of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Environment of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q119716" start="6810" end="6829" title="Geography of Europe" label="Geography of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192985" start="6831" end="6871" title="List of cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="List of cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3605" wikidata="Q2039345" url="?curid=3605" title="Demographics of Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.
== Vital statistics ==

Source: Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina
*No data for the period 1992–1995

=== Current vital statistics ===


===Structure of the population===

===Vital statistics by entity===

====Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina====
Source: Institute for Statistics of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina

=====Current vital statistics=====


====Republika Srpska====
Source: Republika Srpska Institute of Statistics

=====Current vital statistics=====


====Brčko District====

Source: Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina - Statistics of the Brčko District BiH

=====Current vital statistics=====


===Marriages and divorces===

====Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina====

====Republika Srpska====

====Brčko District====

=== Life expectancy at birth in Bosnia and Herzegovina ===


== Ethnic groups ==

According to data from the 2013 census published by the Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosniaks constitute 50.11% of the population, Bosnian Serbs 30.78%, Bosnian Croats 15.43%, and others form 2.73%, with the remaining respondents not declaring their ethnicity or not answering.

The census results are contested by the Republika Srpska statistical office and by Bosnian Serb politicians, who oppose the inclusion of non-permanent Bosnian residents in the figures.

The European Union&#x27;s statistics office, Eurostat, determined that the methodology used by the Bosnian statistical agency was in line with international recommendations.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, religion is often linked to ethnicity, i.e. (with the exception of agnostics and atheists) most Bosniaks are Muslim, Serbs are Orthodox Christian, and Croats are Roman Catholic.

=== Languages ===
Bosnia&#x27;s constitution does not specify any official languages; however, academics Hilary Footitt and Michael Kelly note that the Dayton Agreement states that it is &quot;done in Bosnian, Croatian, English and Serbian&quot;, and they describe this as the &quot;de facto recognition of three official languages&quot; at the state level. The equal status of Bosnian, Serbian and Croatian was verified by the Constitutional Court in 2000. It ruled that the provisions of the Federation and Republika Srpska constitutions on language were incompatible with the state constitution, since they only recognised &quot;Bosniak&quot; and Croatian (in the case of the Federation) and Serbian (in the case of Republika Srpska) as official languages at the entity level.

As a result, the wording of the entity constitutions was changed and all three languages were made official in both entities. The three languages are mutually intelligible and are also known collectively as Serbo-Croatian. Use of one of the three varieties has become a marker of ethnic identity. Michael Kelly and Catherine Baker argue: &quot;The three official languages of today&#x27;s Bosnian state...represent the symbolic assertion of national identity over the pragmatism of mutual intelligibility&quot;.

All standard varieties are based on the Ijekavian varieties of the Shtokavian dialect (non-standard spoken varieties including, beside Ijekavian, also Ikavian Shtokavian). Serbian and Bosnian are written in both Latin and Cyrillic (the latter predominantly using the Latin script), whereas Croatian is written only in Latin alphabet. There are also some speakers of Italian, German, Turkish and Ladino. Yugoslav Sign Language is used with Croatian and Serbian variants.

According to the results of the 2013 census, 52.86% of the population consider their mother tongue to be Bosnian, 30.76% Serbian, 14.6% Croatian and 1.57% another language, with 0.21% not giving an answer.

=== Religion ===
According to the 2013 census, 50.7% of the population identify religiously as Muslim, 30.75% as Serbian Orthodox Christian, 15.19% as Roman Catholic, 1.15% as other, 1.1% as agnostic or atheist, with the remainder not declaring their religion or not answering. A 2012 survey found that 47% of Bosnia&#x27;s Muslims are non-denominational Muslims, while 45% follow Sunnism.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, religion is strongly linked to ethnicity.

== Demographic statistics ==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

===Population===
:3,378,821

===Age structure===
:0-14 years: 13.18% (male 261,430/female 244,242)
:15-24 years: 10.83% (male 214,319/female 201,214)
:25-54 years: 44.52% (male 859,509/female 848,071)
:55-64 years: 15.24% (male 284,415/female 300,168)
:65 years and over: 16.22% (male 249,624/female 372,594) (2020 est.)

===Median age===
:Total: 43.3 years
:Male: 41.6 years
:Female: 44.8 years (2020 est.)

===Sex ratio===
:At birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
:0-14 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
:15-24 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
:25-54 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
:55-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
:65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
:Total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (2020 est.)

===Infant mortality rate===
:Total: 5.32 deaths/1,000 live births
:Male: 5.44 deaths/1,000 live births
:Female: 5.19 deaths/1,000 live births (2021 est.)

===Life expectancy at birth===
:Total population: 77.74 years
:Male: 74.76 years
:Female: 80.93 years (2021 est.)

===HIV/AIDS===
:Adult prevalence rate: less than 0.1% (2018)
:People living with HIV/AIDS: Less than 500 (2018)
:Deaths: less than 100 (2018)

===Literacy===
:Definition: age 15 and over can read and write
:Total population: 98.5%
:Male: 99.5%
:Female: 97.5% (2015 est.)

==See also==
* Demographic history of Bosnia and Herzegovina
** Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia
** Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
* Demographics of Croatia
* Demographics of Montenegro
* Demographics of Serbia
* Exodus of Muslims from Serbia
* Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Republika Srpska
* Brčko District
* List of Bosnians and Herzegovinians

Religion:
* Islam in Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Serbian Orthodox Church
* Roman Catholicism in Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Jews in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Groups:
* Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Roma in Bosnia and Herzegovina

==References==


==External links==

*Living standard measurement survey 2001</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="42" end="64" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="73" end="91" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="93" end="102" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604050" start="162" end="184" title="Religion in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="religious affiliations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="254" end="301" title="Statistical system of Bosnia and Herzegovina#The Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BHAS)" label="Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="494" end="562" title="Statistical system of Bosnia and Herzegovina#The Federal Office of Statistics (FiS)" label="Institute for Statistics of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="634" end="674" title="Statistical system of Bosnia and Herzegovina#Republika Srpska Institute of Statistics (RSIS)" label="Republika Srpska Institute of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630162" start="1105" end="1116" title="2013 population census in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="1183" end="1191" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="1229" end="1242" title="Bosnian Serbs" label="Bosnian Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="1251" end="1265" title="Bosnian Croats" label="Bosnian Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="1417" end="1433" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1567" end="1581" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="1608" end="1616" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="1874" end="1880" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="1892" end="1910" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1927" end="1941" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="2096" end="2112" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="2145" end="2152" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="2154" end="2162" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="2176" end="2183" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="2875" end="2896" title="Mutual intelligibility" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="2932" end="2946" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="3278" end="3287" title="Ijekavian" label="Ijekavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="3305" end="3323" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="3460" end="3468" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="3556" end="3570" title="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060373" start="3641" end="3663" title="Yugoslav Sign Language" label="Yugoslav Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="4011" end="4017" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063492" start="4029" end="4045" title="Eastern Orthodoxy in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Serbian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572396" start="4067" end="4081" title="Catholic Church in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731064" start="4252" end="4277" title="non-denominational Muslim" label="non-denominational Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="4297" end="4304" title="Sunnism" label="Sunnism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255942" start="5745" end="5790" title="Demographic history of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Demographic history of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q116470996" start="5794" end="5835" title="Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q851965" start="5839" end="5899" title="Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="5902" end="5925" title="Demographics of Croatia" label="Demographics of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346276" start="5928" end="5954" title="Demographics of Montenegro" label="Demographics of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987099" start="5957" end="5979" title="Demographics of Serbia" label="Demographics of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12957594" start="5982" end="6011" title="Exodus of Muslims from Serbia (1862)" label="Exodus of Muslims from Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="6014" end="6036" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="6039" end="6075" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="6078" end="6094" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q194483" start="6097" end="6111" title="Brčko District" label="Brčko District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019129" start="6114" end="6149" title="List of Bosnians and Herzegovinians" label="List of Bosnians and Herzegovinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276739" start="6163" end="6194" title="Islam in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Islam in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="6197" end="6220" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572396" start="6223" end="6266" title="Roman Catholicism in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Roman Catholicism in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q662535" start="6269" end="6299" title="History of the Jews in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Jews in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788249" start="6311" end="6350" title="Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980602" start="6353" end="6383" title="Roma in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Roma in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3606" wikidata="Q1154049" url="?curid=3606" title="Politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>The politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina are defined by a parliamentary, representative democratic framework, where the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, named by the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, is the head of government. Executive power is exercised by the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Legislative power is vested in both the Council of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Members of the Parliamentary Assembly are chosen according to a proportional representation system. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

The system of government established by the Dayton Agreement that ended the Bosnian war in 1995 is an example of consociationalism, as representation is by elites who represent the country&#x27;s three major ethnic groups termed &quot;constituent peoples&quot;, with each having a guaranteed share of power.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is divided into two &quot;Entities&quot; – the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska, which are politically autonomous to an extent, as well as the Brčko District, which is jointly administered by both. The Entities have their own constitutions. 

==Dayton Agreement==

Due to the Dayton Agreement, signed on 14 December 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina forms an undeclared protectorate, where highest power is given to the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, named by the Peace Implementation Council. The intention of the Agreement was to retain Bosnia&#x27;s exterior border, while creating a joint multi-ethnic and democratic government based on proportional representation, and charged with conducting foreign, economic, and fiscal policy.

The Dayton Agreement established the Office of the High Representative (OHR) to oversee the implementation of the civilian aspects of the agreement. About 250 international and 450 local staff members are employed by the OHR.

==High Representative==

The highest political authority in the country is the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the chief executive officer for the international civilian presence in the country. The High Representative has power to remove government officials, including court justices, local government members, members of parliament, etc. From its establishment, the Office of the High Representative has sacked 192 Bosnian officials. The mandate of the High Representatives derives from the Dayton Agreement, as confirmed by the Peace Implementation Council (PIC), a body with a Steering Board composed of representatives of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom, the United States, the presidency of the European Union, the European Commission, and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. The Peace Implementation Council has established several criteria for the OHR to be closed, two of which have been completed but must be sustained until all five are completed.

Due to the vast powers of the High Representative over Bosnian politics and essential veto powers, the position has also been compared to that of a viceroy.

==Executive branch==
The Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina rotates amongst three members (a Bosniak, a Serb, and a Croat) every 8 months within their 4-year term. The three members of the Presidency are elected directly by the people, with Federation voters electing both the Bosniak and the Croat member, and Republika Srpska voters electing the Serb member. The Presidency serves as a collective head of state. The Presidency is mainly responsible for the foreign policy and proposing the budget.

The Prime Minister, formally titled Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, is nominated by the Presidency and approved by the House of Representatives. They appoint the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Foreign Trade and other ministers as may be appropriate (no more than two thirds of the ministers may be appointed from the territory of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina), who assume the office upon the approval by the House of Representatives; also, the Chair appoints deputy ministers (who may not be from the same constituent people as their ministers), who assume the office upon the approval by the House of Representatives.

The Council is responsible for carrying out policies and decisions in the fields of diplomacy, economy, inter-entity relations and other matters as agreed by the entities.

The two Entities have Governments that deal with internal matters not dealt with by the Council of Ministers.

==Legislative branch==
The Parliamentary Assembly or &quot;Parliamentarna skupština&quot; is the main legislative body in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It consists of two chambers:
*the House of Peoples or &quot;Dom naroda&quot;
*the House of Representatives or &quot;Predstavnički dom/Zastupnički dom&quot;

The Parliamentary Assembly is responsible for:
*enacting legislation as necessary to implement decisions of the Presidency or to carry out the responsibilities of the Assembly under the Constitution.
*deciding upon the sources and amounts of revenues for the operations of the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina and international obligations of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
*approving the budget for the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
*deciding ratify treaties and agreements.
*other matters as are necessary to carry out its duties of as are assigned to it by mutual agreement of the Entities.

Bosnia and Herzegovina did not have a permanent election law until 2001, during which time a draft law specified four-year terms for the state and first-order administrative division entity legislatures. The final election law was passed and publicized on 9 September 2001.

===House of Peoples===
The House of Peoples includes 15 delegates who serve two-year terms. Two-thirds of delegates come from the Federation (5 Croats and 5 Bosniaks) and one-third from the Republika Srpska (5 Serbs). Nine constitutes a quorum in the House of Peoples, provided that at least three delegates from each group are present. Federation representatives are selected by the House of Peoples of the Federation, which has 58 seats (17 Bosniaks, 17 Croats, 17 Serbs, 7 others), and whose members are delegated by cantonal assemblies to serve four-year terms. Republika Srpska representatives are selected by the 28-member Republika Srpska Council of Peoples, which was established in the National Assembly of Republika Srpska; each constituent people has eight delegates, while four delegates are representatives of &quot;others&quot;.

===House of Representatives===
The House of Representatives comprises 42 members elected under a system of proportional representation (PR) for a four-year term. Two thirds of the members are elected from the Federation (14 Croats; 14 Bosniaks) and one third from the Republika Srpska (14 Serbs).

For the 2010 general election, voters in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina elected twenty-one members in five multi-member constituencies by PR, while the remaining seven seats were allocated by compensatory PR. Voters in the Republika Srpska elected nine members in three multi-member constituencies by PR, while the five other seats were allocated by compensatory PR.

==Political parties and elections==

===House of Representatives===
===Election history===
National House of Representatives:
*elections held 12–13 September 1998:
**seats by party/coalition – KCD 17, HDZ-BiH 6, SDP-BiH 6, Sloga 4, SDS 4, SRS-RS 2, DNZ 1, NHI 1, RSRS 1
*elections held 5 October 2002:
**percent of vote by party/coalition - SDA 21.9%, SDS 14.0%, SBiH 10.5%, SDP 10.4%, SNSD 9.8%, HDZ 9.5%, PDP 4.6%, others 19.3%
**seats by party/coalition – SDA 10, SDS 5, SBiH 6, SDP 4, SNSD 3, HDZ 5, PDP 2, others 7

House of Peoples:
*constituted 4 December 1998
*constituted in fall 2000
*constituted in January 2003
*next to be constituted in 2007

Federal House of Representatives:
*elections held fall 1998:
**seats by party/coalition – KCD 68, HDZ-BiH 28, SDP-BiH 25, NHI 4, DNZ 3, DSP 2, BPS 2, HSP 2, SPRS 2, BSP 1, KC 1, BOSS 1, HSS 1
*elections held 5 October 2002:
**seats by party/coalition – SDA 32, HDZ-BiH 16, SDP 15, SBiH 15, other 20

Federal House of Peoples:
*constituted November 1998
*constituted December 2002

Republika Srpska National Assembly:
*elections held fall 1998
**seats by party/coalition – SDS 19, KCD 15, SNS 12, SRS-RS 11, SPRS 10, SNSD 6, RSRS 3, SKRS 2, SDP 2, KKO 1, HDZ-BiH 1, NHI 1
*elections held fall 2000
*elections held 5 October 2002
**seats by party/coalition – SDS 26, SNSD 19, PDP 9, SDA 6, SRS 4, SPRS 3, DNZ 3, SBiH 4, SDP 3, others 6

==Judicial branch==
===Constitutional Court===

The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the supreme, final arbiter of constitutional matters. The court is composed of nine members: four selected by the House of Representatives of the Federation, two by the National Assembly of Republika Srpska, and three are foreign citizens appointed by the President of the European Court of Human Rights after courtesy-consultation with the Presidency.

The initial term of appointee is 5 years, unless they resign or are removed by consensus of other judges. Appointed judges are not eligible for reappointment. Judges subsequently appointed will serve until the age of 70, unless they resign sooner or are removed. Appointments made 5 years into the initial appointments may be governed by a different regulation for selection, to be determined by the Parliamentary Assembly.

Proceedings of the Court are public, and decisions are published. Court rules are adopted by a majority in the Court. Court decisions are final and supposedly binding though this is not always the case, as noted.

The Constitutional Court has jurisdiction over deciding in constitutional disputes that arise between the Entities or amongst Bosnia and Herzegovina and an Entity or Entities. Such disputes may be referred only by a member of the Presidency, the Chair of the Council of Ministers, the Chair or Deputy Chair of either of the chambers of the Parliamentary Assembly, or by one-fourth of the legislature of either Entity.

The Court also has appellate jurisdiction within the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

===State Court===
The Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of three divisions – Administrative, Appellate and Criminal – having jurisdiction over cases related to the state-level law and executive, as well as appellate jurisdiction over cases initiated in the entities.

A War Crimes Chamber was introduced in January 2005, and has adopted two cases transferred from the ICTY, as well as dozens of war crimes cases originally initiated in cantonal courts.

The State Court also deals with organized crime, and economic crime including corruption cases. For example, the former member of the Presidency Dragan Čović was on trial for alleged involvement in organized crime.

===Human Rights Chamber===
The Human Rights Chamber for Bosnia and Herzegovina (&quot;Dom za ljudska prava za Bosnu i Hercegovinu&quot;) existed between March 1996 and 31 December 2003. It was a judicial body established under the Annex 6 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Dayton Agreement).

===Entities===
The two Entities have Supreme Courts. Each entity also has a number of lower courts. There are 10 cantonal courts in the Federation, along with a number of municipal courts. The Republika Srpska has seven district (&quot;okrug&quot;) courts.

===High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council===
The High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council (JHPC / VSTV) is the self-regulatory body of the judiciary in the country, tasked with guaranteeing its independence. It is based on the continental tradition of self-management of the judiciary. It was formed in 2004.

==See also==
*Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina

==References==
==External links==

*Office of the High Representative
*Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Government of the Republic of Srpska
*Government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Bosnia: a single country or an apple of discord?, Bosnian Institute, 12 May 2006
*Bertelsmann Stiftung – Bosnia and Herzegovina Country Report
*Balkaninsight – The future of Bosnia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154049" start="4" end="38" title="Politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="56" end="69" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="71" end="96" title="Representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16020744" start="118" end="180" title="Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q844944" start="195" end="231" title="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="240" end="258" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="260" end="275" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176455" start="296" end="342" title="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="389" end="406" title="Legislature" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604031" start="458" end="506" title="Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="572" end="599" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="612" end="621" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="720" end="736" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="752" end="763" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414948" start="789" end="806" title="consociationalism" label="consociationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="884" end="896" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="1055" end="1091" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="1100" end="1116" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q194483" start="1180" end="1194" title="Brčko District" label="Brčko District"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="1313" end="1329" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620826" start="1391" end="1401" title="Declaration (law)" label="undeclared"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="1402" end="1414" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q470446" start="1452" end="1498" title="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157377" start="1513" end="1541" title="Peace Implementation Council" label="Peace Implementation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q470446" start="2092" end="2138" title="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157377" start="2561" end="2589" title="Peace Implementation Council" label="Peace Implementation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2657" end="2663" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2665" end="2671" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2673" end="2680" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2682" end="2687" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2689" end="2694" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2696" end="2702" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2708" end="2722" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2728" end="2741" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q784304" start="2747" end="2779" title="President of the European Union" label="presidency of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="2785" end="2804" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="2814" end="2849" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="3115" end="3119" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="3177" end="3184" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q848335" start="3212" end="3217" title="Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q844944" start="3225" end="3261" title="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="3295" end="3302" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="3306" end="3310" title="Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="3318" end="3323" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="3601" end="3614" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="3661" end="3675" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41263" start="3694" end="3700" title="budget" label="budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q16020744" start="3739" end="3801" title="Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q320268" start="3854" end="3878" title="House of Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294895" start="3897" end="3924" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25555204" start="3930" end="3955" title="Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Minister of Foreign Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176455" start="4385" end="4392" title="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604031" start="4692" end="4714" title="Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="4826" end="4838" title="bicameralism" label="two chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718547" start="4845" end="4861" title="House of Peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q320268" start="4893" end="4917" title="House of Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810004" start="5620" end="5632" title="election law" label="election law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718547" start="5874" end="5890" title="House of Peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995822" start="6231" end="6265" title="House of Peoples of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Peoples of the Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q63685" start="6542" end="6579" title="National Assembly (Republika Srpska)" label="National Assembly of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q320268" start="6726" end="6750" title="House of Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="6798" end="6825" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475328" start="6997" end="7018" title="2010 Bosnian general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989753" start="8810" end="8856" title="Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651269" start="8974" end="9016" title="House of Representatives of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Representatives of the Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="9133" end="9163" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q113567" start="10385" end="10416" title="Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="10738" end="10742" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="ICTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q559756" start="10969" end="10981" title="Dragan Čović" label="Dragan Čović"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937423" start="11071" end="11118" title="Human Rights Chamber for Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Human Rights Chamber for Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="11286" end="11349" title="Dayton Agreement" label="General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="11351" end="11367" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12749811" start="11679" end="11718" title="High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council" label="High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291601" start="11953" end="11991" title="Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947404" start="12255" end="12272" title="Bosnian Institute" label="Bosnian Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3607" wikidata="Q1778260" url="?curid=3607" title="Economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>The economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a transitional, upper middle income economy. Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence from socialist Yugoslavia on 1 March 1992. The main trading partners are Germany, Italy, Austria, Turkey and other neighboring Balkan countries.

==Overview==
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an upper middle-income country which has accomplished a great deal since the mid-1990s. Today, it is an EU candidate country and is now embarking on a new growth model amid a period of slow growth and the global financial crisis.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a small, open economy, dominated by services, which accounted for 55% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2016, with a moderately developed industrial and manufacturing sector (23% and 12%, respectively), and a limited agricultural base (about 6% of GDP).

The konvertibilna marka (convertible mark or BAM) - the national currency introduced in 1998 - is pegged to the euro, and confidence in the currency and the banking sector has increased. Implementation of privatization, however, has been slow, and local entities only reluctantly support national-level institutions. Banking reform accelerated in 2001 as all ; foreign banks, primarily from Western Europe, now control most of the banking sector. A sizable current account deficit and a very high unemployment rate remain the two most serious economic problems. The country receives substantial amounts of reconstruction assistance and humanitarian aid from the international community but will have to prepare for an era of declining assistance.

The United States Embassy in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina produces the Country Commercial Guide – an annual report that delivers a comprehensive look at Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s commercial and economic environment, using economic, political, and market analysis.

According to Serbian American economist, Branko Milanović, Bosnia and Herzegovina did the best job in the transition from socialism to capitalism when compared to the other republics of the former Yugoslavia. From 1985 until 2021, Bosnia and Herzegovina performed the best on the annual average GDP growth per capita (1.6%), Slovenia (1.4%), Croatia (1%), Serbia without Kosovo (0.9%) and North Macedonia (0.5%).

At the time of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY), Bosnia and Herzegovina was an important mineral processing centre and provided the other republics with basic mineral commodities in exchange for current consumption goods. While large amounts of public capital investments poured in during the 1970s, productivity levels remained low, often due to the limited capacity of public managers. Under former republican premier Džemal Bijedić, and Yugoslav president Tito, metal-product industries were promoted in the republic, resulting in the development of a large share of Yugoslavia&#x27;s metal products plants.

Merging small firms into larger agglomerates was a common practice in the SFRY to preserve employment levels. As a result, four large conglomerates emerged in Bosnia and Herzegovina over time: Energoinvest (energy sector), Unis (automotive and defence industry, which partnered with Volkswagen in the early 1970s), Šipad (wood processing) and RMK Zenica (steel industry, later acquired by ArcelorMittal). Construction and defence were important industries in the Bosnian economy, despite their low efficiency and, ultimately, excess supply. The defence industry was particularly developed in the southern districts and around Mostar, which was also a relevant metallurgical centre (Aluminij Mostar). Machinery production was concentrated in the north, particularly around Banja Luka. The Tuzla district was renowned for its chemical industry. The automotive industry, which developed in the 1950s with the production of vehicle components, extended later on to passenger and commercial vehicles, with plants in Sarajevo, Mostar and Banja Luka. Agriculture was not highly developed, despite its importance for employment and the presence of the large Agrokomerc conglomerate based at the north-west border with Croatia.

Tito had pushed the development of metal industries, and electro-energetic sector, in the republic with the result that Bosnia and Herzegovina were a host of large numbers of industrial firms. Some of them were worked with World brand names, companies like Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Marlboro, Volkswagen and SKF. Big Companies like Energoinvest, UNIS, Hidrogradnja, Vranica, RMK Zenica, TAS Sarajevo, FAMOS Sarajevo and BNT Novi Travnik, have yearly income in billions of USD$ at that time. Building sector companies bringing large amounts of income in USD$. Unemployment at that time is very low. Work force is highly skilled, with highly professional, educated managers, engineers, science experts, which use western world&#x27;s newest technologies in large scale areas. Before the war, Yugoslav premier Ante Marković, made some preparations for privatization, in economy, finance, and industry sectors, but the war ceased development in these actions.

The economy suffered heavily from the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with over €200 billion in material damages and GDP (excluding services) reduced by 90% between 1990 and 1995. Today, most of the above-mentioned companies have been privatised. The economy remains fragile, primarily consumption driven and vulnerable to external fluctuations. This was seen with the global economic crisis, which pushed Bosnia and Herzegovina into recession in 2009 and 2012 (with GDP growth of -3% and -0.8%, respectively) and severe floods in 2014, which caused damage of approximately 15% of GDP. Since 2015, annual GDP growth has increased to more than 3%. Still, the country registered a current account deficit of 4.7% of GDP in 2017, decreasing from 5.3% in 2015, resulting from a reduction in its trade deficit, which nevertheless remains large (17.4% of GDP in 2017).

A Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina was established in late 1997, debt negotiations were held with the London Club in December 1997 and with the Paris Club in October 1998, and a new currency, the Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark, was introduced in mid-1998. In 1999, the Convertible Mark gained wider acceptance, and the Central Bank dramatically increased its reserve holdings. Due to Bosnia&#x27;s strict currency board regime attaching the Bosnian mark to the Euro, inflation has remained low in the entire country.

With an uneasy peace in place, output recovered in 1996–99 at high percentage rates from a low base; but output growth slowed in 2000–02. The country receives substantial amounts of reconstruction assistance and humanitarian aid from the international community. Support for East European Democracy (SEED) assistance accounts for 20%-25% of economic growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, growth has been uneven throughout the post-war period, with the Federation outpacing the RS. According to World Bank estimates, GDP growth was 62% in the Federation and 25% in the RS in 1996, 35% in the Federation and flat in the RS in 1997, and continued growth in the Federation in 1998.

The movement has been slow, but considerable progress has been made in economic reform since peace was re-established. Banking reform lagged, as did the implementation of privatization. Many companies (mainly factories) that were privatized faced massive problems, causing the owners to reduce salaries and deny the workers their salaries, and some of the new owners and tycoons destroyed those factories.

===Macro-Economic===
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1997–2025.
==Present==
Overall value of foreign direct investment (1999–2011):
*1999: €166 million
*2000: €159 million
*2001: €133 million
*2002: €282 million
*2003: €338 million
*2004: €534 million
*2005: €421 million
*2006: €556 million
*2007: €1.628 billion
*2008: €1.083 billion
*2009: €434 million
*2010: €359 million
*2011: €313 million
*2022: €730 million 
From 1994 to 2011, €6.4 billion were invested in the country.

The top investor countries (1994–2007):
*Austria (€1,294 million)
*Serbia (€773 million)
*Croatia (€434 million)
*Slovenia (€427 million)
*Switzerland (€337 million)
*Germany (€270 million)
*Italy (€94.29 million)
*Netherlands (€63.52 million)
*United Arab Emirates (€56.70 million)
*Turkey (€54.81 million)
*All Other Countries (€892.54 million)

Foreign investments by sector for (1994–2007):
*37.7% Manufacturing
*21% Banking
*4.9% Services
*9.6% Trade
*0.30% Transport
*1% Tourism
By some estimates, grey economy is 25.5% of GDP.

===Recent years===
====2017====
In 2017, exports grew by 17% when compared to the previous year, totaling €5.65 billion. The total volume of foreign trade in 2017 amounted to €14.97 billion and increased by 14% compared to the previous year. Imports of goods increased by 12% and amounted to €9.32 billion. The coverage of imports by exports has increased by 3% compared to the previous year and now it is 61 percent. In 2017, Bosnia and Herzegovina mostly exported car seats, electricity, processed wood, aluminium and furniture. In the same year, it mostly imported crude oil, automobiles, motor oil, coal and briquettes.

The unemployment rate in 2017 was 20.5%, but The Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies is predicting falling unemployment rate for the next few years. In 2018, the unemployment should be 19.4% and it should further fall to 18.8% in 2019. In 2020, the unemployment rate should go down to 18.3%.

On 31 December 2017, the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina issued the report on public debt of Bosnia and Herzegovina, stating that the public debt was reduced by €389.97 million, or by more than 6% when compared to December 31, 2016. By the end of 2017, public debt was €5.92 billion, which amounted to 35.6 percent of GDP.

As of 31 December 2017, there were 32,292 registered companies in the country, which together had revenues of €33.572 billion that same year.

In 2017, the country received €397.35 million in foreign direct investment, which equals to 2.5% of the GDP.

In 2017, Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked 3rd in the world in terms of the number of new jobs created by foreign investment, relative to the number of inhabitants.

In 2017, 1,307,319 tourists visited Bosnia-Herzegovina, an increase of 13.7%, and had 2,677,125 overnight hotel stays, a 12.3% increase from the previous year. Also, 71.5% of the tourists came from foreign countries.

====2018====
In 2018, Bosnia and Herzegovina exported goods worth 11.9 billion KM (€6.07 billion), which is 7.43% higher than in the same period in 2017, while imports amounted to 19.27 billion KM (€9.83 billion), which is 5.47% higher.

The average price of new apartments sold in the country in the first six months of 2018 is 1,639 km (€886.31) per square meter. This represents a jump of 3.5% from the previous year.

On June 30, 2018, public debt of Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted to about €6.04 billion, of which external debt is 70.56 percent, while the internal debt is 29.4 percent of total public indebtedness. The share of public debt in gross domestic product was 34.92 percent.

In 2018, 1,465,412 tourists visited Bosnia-Herzegovina, an increase of 12.1%, and had 3,040,190 overnight hotel stays, a 13.5% increase from the previous year. Also, 71.2% of the tourists came from foreign countries.

In 2018, the total value of mergers and acquisitions in Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted to €404.6 million.

In 2018, 99.5 percent of enterprises in Bosnia and Herzegovina used computers in their business, while 99.3 percent had internet connections, according to a survey conducted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Statistics Agency.

In 2018, Bosnia and Herzegovina received 783.4 million KM (€400.64 million) in direct foreign investment, which was equivalent to 2.3% of GDP.

In 2018, the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina made a profit of 8,430,875 km (€4,306,347).

====2019====
The World Bank estimates that the economy grew by 2.8% in 2019.

Bosnia and Herzegovina was placed 83rd on the Index of Economic Freedom for 2019. The total rating for Bosnia and Herzegovina is 61.9. This position represents some progress relative to the 91st place in 2018. This result is below the regional level, but still above the global average, making Bosnia and Herzegovina a &quot;moderately free&quot; country.

On 31 January 2019, total deposits in Bosnian banks were KM 21.9 billion (€11.20 billion), which represents 61.15% of nominal GDP.

In the second quarter of 2019, the average price of new apartments sold in Bosnia and Herzegovina was 1,606 km (€821.47) per square meter.

In the first six months of 2019, exports amounted to 5.829 billion KM (€2.98 billion), which is 0.1% less than in the same period of 2018, while imports amounted to 9.779 billion KM (€5.00 billion), which is by 4.5% more than in the same period of the previous year.

In the first seven months of 2019, 906,788 tourists visited the country, an 11.7% jump from the previous year.

In the first six months of 2019, foreign direct investment amounted to 650.1 million KM (€332.34 million).

====2020–2022====
2020 saw a contraction in the economy of around 4.7%, caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, with increased costs by the government, before bouncing back in 2021. Employment rates have been climbing, however youth unemployment in 2022 was still over 33%.

====2023====
As of 30 November 2023, Bosnia and Herzegovina had 1.3 million registered motor vehicles.

===Sarajevo===

Sarajevo industries now include tobacco products, furniture, hosiery, automobiles, and communication equipment. Companies based in Sarajevo include BH Telecom, Bosnalijek, Energopetrol, FlyBosnia, Sarajevo Tobacco Factory, and Sarajevska Pivara (Sarajevo Brewery).

Sarajevo has a strong tourist industry and was named by Lonely Planet one of the top 50 &quot;Best Cities in the World&quot; in 2006. Sports-related tourism uses the legacy facilities of the 1984 Winter Olympics, especially the skiing facilities on the nearby mountains of Bjelašnica, Igman, Jahorina, Trebević, and Treskavica. Sarajevo&#x27;s 600 years of history, influenced by both Western and Eastern empires, is also a strong tourist attraction. Sarajevo has hosted travellers for centuries, because it was an important trading center during the Ottoman and Austria-Hungarian empires.

Today, Sarajevo is one of the fastest developing cities in the region. Various new modern buildings have been built, most significantly the Bosmal City Center, ARIA Centar and the Avaz Twist Tower, which is one of the tallest skyscraper in the Balkans. A new highway was recently (2006–2011) completed between Sarajevo and the city of Kakanj. Due to growth in population, tourism and airport traffic the service sector in the city is developing fast and welcoming new investors from various businesses.

Sarajevo has one of the most representable commercial infrastructures in South-East Europe. The Sarajevo City Center is one of the biggest shopping centres in South-East Europe, after its completion in 2014. Airport Center Sarajevo which will be connected directly to the new airport terminal will offer a great variety of brands, products and services.

In 1981, Sarajevo&#x27;s GDP per capita was 133% of the Yugoslav average.

In 2011, Sarajevo&#x27;s GDP was estimated to be 16.76 billion US$ by the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, comprising 37% of the total GDP of the country.
===Mostar===
Mostar&#x27;s economy relies heavily on tourism, aluminium and metal industry, banking services and telecommunication sector. The city is the seat of some of the country&#x27;s largest corporations.

Along with Sarajevo, it is the largest financial center in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with two out of three largest banks in the country having their headquarters in Mostar. Bosnia-Herzegovina has three national electric, postal and telecommunication service corporations; These three companies banks and the aluminium factory make a vast portion of overall economic activity in the city.

Aluminij is one of the most influential companies in the city, region, but also country. In relation to the current manufacturing capacity it generates an annual export of more than €150 million. The partners with which the Aluminij does business are renowned global companies, from which the most important are: Venture Coke Company L.L.C. (Venco-Conoco joint Venture) from the US, Glencore International AG from Switzerland, Debis International trading GmbH, Daimler-Chrysler and VAW Aluminium Technologie GmbH from Germany, Hydro ASA from Norway, Fiat from Italy, and TLM-Šibenik from Croatia[5].
Mostar area alone receives an income of €40 million annually from Aluminij.

===Prijedor===
Prijedor is the sixth largest city in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is an economically prosperous municipality hosting a wide range of industries, services and educational institutions. The city&#x27;s geographical location close to major European capitals has made it an important industrial and commercial hub nationally.
It has a developed financial sector, 11 international banks are represented, 5 microcredit organizations and a foundation for development.
The city&#x27;s huge economic potential is in the strategic geographical location being close to Zagreb, Belgrade, Budapest and Vienna. Giving it one of the best climates for economic expansion in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The agricultural land around the city, raw minerals in the municipality and growth of high educated population in the city proper gives it a unique combination of both being able to produce sophisticated industrial products, food and service branches.

; Companies
Zenica host today the Bosnian part of ArcelorMittal Steel Company, former RMK Zenica, which employ about 3000 workers, steel company from Luxembourg with over 320,000 employees in more than 60 countries. It also has companies specialized in the chemical industry such as Ferrox a.d., producing iron oxides-pigments. BosnaMontaza AD., one of Bosnias most specialized steel manufacturers, manufacturing: steel construction, pipelines, reservoirs, technological equipment, cranes and energy plants.
Other companies such as the Croatian food company Kraš has one of its biggest facilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in Prijedor, producing confectionery products under the brand names MIRA and Kraš.
Brand names such as &quot;Prijedorčanka&quot; is one of the leading producers of the alcoholic beverage Rakija in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Prijedor is also a big enterprise producing cellulose and paper for export.

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Bosnia and Herzegovina is Services with 39,707 companies followed by Retail Trade and Wholesale Trade with 12,060 and 11,970 companies respectively.

; Agricultural sector
Among this Prijedor has a fruit growing production, gardening production, crop farming production, mill and bakery industries, stock farming production, processing industries and a milk industry.

Lake Saničani, near Prijedor, is one of the biggest commercial fish-farming lakes in the southern Europe.

Prijedor municipality takes up 8340.6 hectares (5845.0 private property and 2495.6 state property).
Plowed fields and gardens take up 340.26 hectares, orchards 23.86 hectares and vineyards 5 hectares.
All cultivated soil takes up 402.06 hectares.

; Service sector
The service sector in Prijedor is growing rapidly and this reflects in the growth of hotels, stores, roads, educational facilities and shoppings centers that are being built in the city. Making it a growing commercial hub in Bosnia and Hercegovina.

===Banja Luka===
Although the city itself was not directly affected by the Bosnian War in the early 1990s, its economy was. For four years, Banja Luka fell behind the world in key areas such as technology, resulting in a rather stagnant economy. However, in recent years, the financial services sector has gained in importance in the city. In 2002, the trading began on the newly established Banja Luka Stock Exchange. The number of companies listed, the trading volume and the number of investors have increased significantly. A number of big companies such as Telekom Srpske, Rafinerija ulja Modriča, Banjalučka Pivara and Vitaminka are all listed on the exchange and are traded regularly. Investors, apart from those from Slovenia, Croatia and Serbia, now include a number of investment funds from the European Union, Norway, the United States, Japan and China.

A number of financial services regulators, such as the Indirect Taxation Authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Republika Srpska Securities Commission and the RS Banking Agency are headquartered in Banja Luka. This, along with the fact that some of the major banks in Bosnia, the Deposit Insurance Agency and the Value-added tax (VAT) Authority are all based in the city, has helped Banja Luka establish itself as a major financial centre of the country.

In 1981 Banja Luka&#x27;s GDP per capita was 97% of the Yugoslav average.

==Energy==
The country has been a heavy user of energy compared with the EU, with artificially low prices providing a disincentive to make savings. Heavily reliant on lignite coal for power generation, in 2021 Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of very few countries still making plans to expand coal energy generation.

; Statistics
===Renewable power===
; Wind and Solar
The first wind farm was built in 2018.

The 2030 plan envisages 1.5 GW of solar power and 0.5 GW of wind power capacity being built.

; Hydro power
In 2021 the country had around 2076 MW of installed hydropower capacity larger than 10 MW, with 180 MW of small hydropower units.

===Fossil fuels===
; Coal
In 2021, electricity production came from five main lignite coal power plants generating up to 2065 MW.

Tuzla Thermal Power Plant was supposed to close unit 4 in 2022 however the government has extended this lignite coal generators life. Kakanj Power Station was also supposed to have closed unit 5 in 2022 under the 2006 Energy Community Treaty.

Under the 2030 plan a number of coal power stations will close or convert to biomass.
*Breza coal mine
*Gacko coal mine
*Kakanj coal mine

*Kamengrad coal mine
*Kongora coal mine
*Stanari coal mine

*Tušnica coal mine
*Ugljevik coal mine
*Zenica coal mine
==Tourism==

The tourism sector has been recovering and helping the economy altogether in the process, with popular winter skiing destinations as well as summer countryside tourism.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been a top performer in recent years in terms of tourism development; tourist arrivals have grown by an average of 24% annually from 1995 to 2000. The European region&#x27;s solid growth in arrivals in 2007 was due in significant part to Southern and Mediterranean Europe&#x27;s strong performance (+7%).
In particular, Bosnia and Herzegovina were among the stronger players with a growth of 20%.

In 2012, Bosnia and Herzegovina had 747,827 tourists an increase of 9% and 1,645,521 overnight stays which is a 9,4% increase from 2012.
58.6% of the tourists came from foreign countries.

According to an estimate of the World Tourism Organization, Bosnia and Herzegovina will have the third highest tourism growth rate in the world between 1995 and 2020.

Of particular note is the diaspora population which often returns home during the summer months, bringing in an increase in retail sales and food service industry.

In 2017, 1,307,319 tourists visited Bosnia and Herzegovina, an increase of 13.7%, and had 2,677,125 overnight hotel stays, a 12.3% increase from the previous year. Also, 71.5% of the tourists came from foreign countries.

==Challenges of doing business==
While business regulations are of comparable strictness as in most countries in Central Europe, many problems persist. Post-war high percentage of unemployment (16.85%) remains high, and the economical progress is very slow. Complicated bureaucracy system, complex procedures and often misconducted audition and regulation by public officers also make for volatile and insecure business environment, which is considered major hindrance to foreign investment into the country&#x27;s industrial and manufacturing potential.

The workforce is comparably cheap, with average net salary being €580, and average gross salary being €891, () and good skilled, especially in sectors present in pre-war economy. However, with slow but persistent know-how obsolescence, workforce exodus, high unemployment and long average time outside labor market for the unemployed, need a foreign-owned business investing in industry sectors where the country could be competitive.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is also lacking a good e-governance structure, as well as good methods to enforce administrative accountability, both of which are considered necessary for more conductive business climate. Today it takes between 3–5 weeks to register a company in the country (and in some business sectors it can still take months to acquire all required permits, mostly due to administrative inefficiency), and many other business related administrative procedures are similarly convoluted and time-consuming.

Political corruption is one of the more acute problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and along with size of administration and its inefficiency, the biggest detriment to tax money being spent where it should be spent – on services to the population and the economy.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has been preparing for an era of declining international assistance. Country&#x27;s most immediate task remains economic revitalization to create jobs and income. After the 2014 riots, both administrations have shyly started the reform, dealing with some of the many pressing issues to local economy, but the overall process is still considered slow and tenuous by the populace and local as well as foreign economic analysts.

==Infrastructure==
The Bosnian government has issued an international tender for the construction of the 350 km long Pan-European Corridor Vc in Bosnia and Herzegovina which will passes along the route Budapest-Osijek-Sarajevo-Ploče. The highway along this corridor is the most significant roadway in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the shortest communication route between Central Europe and the Southern Adriatic. The routing of the road passes through the central part of the country in the north–south direction from Donji Svilaj to the border of B&amp;H, north from the Croatian port of Ploče, following the rivers Bosna and Neretva. More than 50% of the total population and the economic activity of Bosnia and Herzegovina lies within the zone of influence along this route.

As of August 2018, 200 km of the motorway has been completed.

Due to annual growth of nearly 10% the Sarajevo International Airport extension of the passenger terminal, together with upgrading and expanding the taxiway and apron is planned to start in Fall 2012. The existing terminal will be expanded with 7.000 square metres.
The upgraded airport will also be directly connected to the commercial retail center Sarajevo Airport Center
making it easy for tourist and travellers to use the time before the flight for some last minute shopping.

==International rankings==

*74th in Human Development Index (2021)
*60th in inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (2021)
*97th in Democracy Index (2022)
*48th in Henley Passport Index (2023)
*81st in Human Capital Index (2020)
*88th in Quality of Nationality Index (2018)
*72nd in Legatum Prosperity Index (2023)
*63rd in Social Progress Index (2022)
*90th in Ease of Doing Business (2020)
*39th in Economic Complexity Index (2021)
*92nd in Global Competitiveness Report (2019)
*68th in Index of Economic Freedom (2023)
*61st in Global Peace Index (2023)
*110th in Corruption Perceptions Index (2022)

==See also==
*Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina
*List of banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark
*Bosnia and Herzegovina
*2014 unrest in Bosnia and Herzegovina

==References==

==External links==

*Tariffs applied by Bosnia and Herzegovina as provided by ITC&#x27;s ITCMarket Access Map , an online database of customs tariffs and market requirements.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1778260" start="4" end="37" title="Economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="86" end="108" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947346" start="118" end="130" title="1992 Bosnian independence referendum" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="146" end="156" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015972" start="160" end="172" title="Independence Day (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="1 March 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="645" end="667" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q179620" start="832" end="851" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark" label="konvertibilna marka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261777" start="1862" end="1878" title="Serbian American" label="Serbian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566338" start="1890" end="1906" title="Branko Milanović" label="Branko Milanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1971" end="1980" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="1984" end="1994" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="2039" end="2056" title="former Yugoslavia" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="2174" end="2182" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="2191" end="2198" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="2205" end="2211" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="2220" end="2226" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="2238" end="2253" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="2282" end="2322" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208545" start="2331" end="2353" title="Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q965595" start="2702" end="2716" title="Džemal Bijedić" label="Džemal Bijedić"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="2741" end="2745" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341530" start="3087" end="3099" title="Energoinvest" label="Energoinvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="3177" end="3187" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22986483" start="3209" end="3214" title="Šipad" label="Šipad"/>
<link wikidata="Q27893" start="3283" end="3296" title="ArcelorMittal" label="ArcelorMittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="3520" end="3526" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737361" start="3576" end="3591" title="Aluminij Mostar" label="Aluminij Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="3666" end="3676" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="3682" end="3687" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="3905" end="3913" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="3915" end="3921" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="3926" end="3936" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486633" start="4044" end="4054" title="Agrokomerc" label="Agrokomerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="4104" end="4111" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q317547" start="4913" end="4926" title="Ante Marković" label="Ante Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="5101" end="5130" title="war in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="war in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q736171" start="6034" end="6045" title="London Club" label="London Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q461736" start="6076" end="6086" title="Paris Club" label="Paris Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q179620" start="6128" end="6167" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="6408" end="6417" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="6671" end="6687" title="humanitarian aid" label="humanitarian aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27680489" start="6722" end="6757" title="Support for East European Democracy (SEED) Act of 1989" label="Support for East European Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="6800" end="6815" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="6958" end="6968" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="7262" end="7269" title="Banking" label="Banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="7314" end="7327" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="7669" end="7694" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="8560" end="8572" title="grey economy" label="grey economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="8732" end="8745" title="foreign trade" label="foreign trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="8902" end="8932" title="balance of trade" label="coverage of imports by exports"/>
<link wikidata="Q220223" start="9057" end="9065" title="car seat" label="car seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="9068" end="9079" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609891" start="9081" end="9095" title="wood processing" label="processed wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="9097" end="9106" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="9111" end="9120" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="9159" end="9168" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="9170" end="9180" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q193784" start="9183" end="9192" title="motor oil" label="motor oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="9194" end="9198" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153022" start="9203" end="9213" title="briquettes" label="briquettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176455" start="9550" end="9596" title="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="10056" end="10081" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="11436" end="11460" title="mergers and acquisitions" label="mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="11819" end="11844" title="direct foreign investment" label="direct foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184535" start="11897" end="11935" title="Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="11998" end="12008" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="12105" end="12130" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250770" start="13262" end="13279" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="13564" end="13572" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835618" start="13712" end="13722" title="BH Telecom" label="BH Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947316" start="13724" end="13734" title="Bosnalijek" label="Bosnalijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q120433" start="13736" end="13748" title="Energopetrol" label="Energopetrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q60614280" start="13750" end="13759" title="FlyBosnia" label="FlyBosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993905" start="13761" end="13785" title="Sarajevo Tobacco Factory" label="Sarajevo Tobacco Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471508" start="13791" end="13808" title="Sarajevska Pivara" label="Sarajevska Pivara"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="13886" end="13899" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q879414" start="14103" end="14113" title="Bjelašnica Mountain" label="Bjelašnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110607" start="14115" end="14120" title="Igman" label="Igman"/>
<link wikidata="Q187944" start="14122" end="14130" title="Jahorina" label="Jahorina"/>
<link wikidata="Q612240" start="14132" end="14140" title="Trebević" label="Trebević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508343" start="14146" end="14156" title="Treskavica" label="Treskavica"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="14261" end="14279" title="tourist attraction" label="tourist attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="14381" end="14388" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="14393" end="14410" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q894445" start="14561" end="14579" title="Bosmal City Center" label="Bosmal City Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835047" start="14581" end="14592" title="ARIA Centar" label="ARIA Centar"/>
<link wikidata="Q790278" start="14601" end="14617" title="Avaz Twist Tower" label="Avaz Twist Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q963038" start="14756" end="14762" title="Kakanj" label="Kakanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422981" start="15021" end="15041" title="Sarajevo City Center" label="Sarajevo City Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184535" start="15429" end="15467" title="Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="15530" end="15536" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737361" start="16117" end="16125" title="Aluminij" label="Aluminij"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="16299" end="16300" title="Euro" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q169339" start="16500" end="16522" title="Glencore International" label="Glencore International"/>
<link wikidata="Q323986" start="16809" end="16817" title="Prijedor" label="Prijedor"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="16847" end="16869" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q184046" start="17756" end="17762" title="Zenica" label="Zenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q27893" start="17794" end="17807" title="ArcelorMittal" label="ArcelorMittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="17894" end="17904" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q339789" start="18302" end="18306" title="Kraš" label="Kraš"/>
<link wikidata="Q339789" start="18444" end="18448" title="Kraš" label="Kraš"/>
<link wikidata="Q931946" start="18554" end="18560" title="Rakija" label="Rakija"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="19802" end="19813" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384000" start="20119" end="20144" title="Banja Luka Stock Exchange" label="Banja Luka Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q12754716" start="20289" end="20303" title="Telekom Srpske" label="Telekom Srpske"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882546" start="20330" end="20347" title="Banjalučka Pivara" label="Banjalučka Pivara"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="20452" end="20460" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="20462" end="20469" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="20474" end="20480" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="20532" end="20546" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="20548" end="20554" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="20560" end="20573" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="20575" end="20580" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="20585" end="20590" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q97255606" start="20648" end="20701" title="Indirect Taxation Authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Indirect Taxation Authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314737" start="20703" end="20741" title="Republika Srpska Securities Commission" label="Republika Srpska Securities Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="20904" end="20919" title="Value-added tax" label="Value-added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857286" start="21900" end="21925" title="Tuzla Thermal Power Plant" label="Tuzla Thermal Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786135" start="22034" end="22054" title="Kakanj Power Station" label="Kakanj Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989312" start="22118" end="22134" title="Energy Community" label="Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255422" start="22231" end="22246" title="Breza coal mine" label="Breza coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975878" start="22248" end="22263" title="Gacko coal mine" label="Gacko coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976141" start="22265" end="22281" title="Kakanj coal mine" label="Kakanj coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976045" start="22284" end="22303" title="Kamengrad coal mine" label="Kamengrad coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975820" start="22305" end="22322" title="Kongora coal mine" label="Kongora coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976114" start="22324" end="22341" title="Stanari coal mine" label="Stanari coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975848" start="22344" end="22361" title="Tušnica coal mine" label="Tušnica coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976213" start="22363" end="22381" title="Ugljevik coal mine" label="Ugljevik coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976182" start="22383" end="22399" title="Zenica coal mine" label="Zenica coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="22417" end="22424" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="22658" end="22665" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="23228" end="23254" title="World Tourism Organization" label="World Tourism Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="23256" end="23278" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="23390" end="23398" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q219186" start="23790" end="23810" title="Commercial law" label="business regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139055" start="24110" end="24125" title="Tax inspector" label="public officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="24223" end="24241" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813993" start="24520" end="24528" title="know-how" label="know-how"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="24543" end="24559" title="Brain-drain" label="workforce exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="24566" end="24578" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976602" start="24685" end="24700" title="industry sector" label="industry sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q15118772" start="24789" end="24801" title="e-governance" label="e-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798912" start="24848" end="24877" title="administrative accountability" label="administrative accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761743" start="25128" end="25155" title="Red tape" label="administrative inefficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="25262" end="25282" title="Political corruption" label="Political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="25359" end="25381" title="Public administration" label="size of administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="25704" end="25710" title="income" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712344" start="25722" end="25732" title="2014 unrest in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="2014 riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475328" start="25734" end="25738" title="2010 Bosnian general election" label="both"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820889" start="25739" end="25754" title="2014 Bosnian general election" label="administrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176455" start="25999" end="26017" title="Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375987" start="26093" end="26117" title="European route E73" label="Pan-European Corridor Vc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="26178" end="26186" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="26187" end="26193" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="26194" end="26202" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115117" start="26203" end="26208" title="Ploče" label="Ploče"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231229" start="26555" end="26568" title="port of Ploče" label="port of Ploče"/>
<link wikidata="Q740392" start="26855" end="26885" title="Sarajevo International Airport" label="Sarajevo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="27336" end="27359" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809938" start="27376" end="27419" title="List of countries by inequality-adjusted Human Development Index" label="inequality-adjusted Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="27436" end="27451" title="Democracy Index" label="Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245510" start="27468" end="27489" title="Henley Passport Index" label="Henley Passport Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q85767695" start="27506" end="27525" title="Human Capital Index" label="Human Capital Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278819" start="27542" end="27570" title="The Quality of Nationality Index" label="Quality of Nationality Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q384805" start="27587" end="27611" title="Legatum Prosperity Index" label="Legatum Prosperity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q10396425" start="27628" end="27649" title="Social Progress Index" label="Social Progress Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="27666" end="27688" title="Ease of doing business index" label="Ease of Doing Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333445" start="27705" end="27730" title="Economic Complexity Index" label="Economic Complexity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067257" start="27747" end="27776" title="Global Competitiveness Report" label="Global Competitiveness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="27793" end="27818" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="27835" end="27853" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="27871" end="27899" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184535" start="27922" end="27960" title="Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607118" start="27962" end="28001" title="List of banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="List of banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q179620" start="28003" end="28042" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="28044" end="28066" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712344" start="28068" end="28105" title="2014 unrest in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="2014 unrest in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3609" wikidata="Q1288486" url="?curid=3609" title="Transport in Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>Bosnia and Herzegovina has facilities for road, rail and air transport. There are five international road routes and 20 state highways, with bus connections to many countries. Railways total just over 1,000 km with links to Croatia and Serbia. There are 25 airports, seven of them with paved runways. The Sava River is navigable, but its use is limited.

==Roadways==
*&quot;total&quot;: 21,846 km
**&quot;paved&quot;: 11,425 km (4,686 km of interurban roads)
**&quot;unpaved&quot;: 10,421 km (2006)

===Roads===
====International====
*E65
*E73 (Pan-European corridor Vc), A1 highway
*E661
*E761
*E762

====State highways====

* M-1.8
* M-2
* M-4
* M-4.2
* M-5
* M-6
* M-6.1
* M-8
* M-11
* M-14
* M-14.1
* M-14.2
* M-15
* M-16
* M-16.1
* M-16.2
* M-16.3
* M-16.4
* M-17
* M-17.2
* M-17.3
* M-18
* M-19
* M-19.2
* M-19.3
* M-20

===National and international bus services===
Bosnia &amp; Herzegovina is well connected to other countries in Europe. The main bus station of Sarajevo has its own website. The main provider of international bus connection in Bosnia &amp; Herzegovina is Eurolines. There are routes to Croatia, Germany, Austria, France, Netherlands, Montenegro, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden and Serbia. Despite Bosnia &amp; Herzegovina&#x27;s geographical closeness to Serbia, there is only one bus a day, which takes more than 8 hours due to the lack of proper roads.

==Railways==

*Total: 1,032 km standard gauge: (2006)

===Rail links with adjacent countries===
* Same gauge: 
** Croatia - yes
** Serbia - yes
** Montenegro - no

==Waterways==
Sava River (northern border) open to shipping but use is limited (2008)

===Ports and harbours===
Gradiška, Brod, Šamac, and Brčko (all inland waterway ports on the Sava none of which are fully operational), Orašje, Bosnia

==Merchant marine==
none (1999 est.)

==Airports==
Air transport begin in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the period of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia when the flag-carrier Aeroput inaugurated a regular flight linking the national capital Belgrade with Podgorica in 1930, with a stop in Sarajevo. A year later Aeroput inaugurated another regular flight starting in Belgrade and then stopping in Sarajevo and continuing towards Split, Sušak and Zagreb. By mid-1930s Aeroput inaugurated two routes linking Belgrade and Zagreb with Dubrovnik through Sarajevo, and, in 1938, it inaugurated an international route linking Dubrovnik, which was becoming a major holiday destination, through Sarajevo, to Zagreb, Vienna, Brno and Prague.

25 (2008)
===Airports - with paved runways===
&quot;total:&quot;
7
&quot;2,438 to 3,047 m:&quot;
4
&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot;
1
&quot;under 914 m:&quot;
2 (2008)
===Airports - with unpaved runways===
&quot;total:&quot;
18
&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot;
1
&quot;914 to 1,523 m:&quot;
7
&quot;under 914 m:&quot;
10 (2008)
===Heliports===
6 (2013)
==See also==
* Bosnia and Herzegovina

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="0" end="22" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q516739" start="42" end="46" title="Road transport" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="48" end="52" title="Rail transport" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="57" end="70" title="Aviation" label="air transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="224" end="231" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="236" end="242" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="305" end="315" title="Sava" label="Sava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q911135" start="536" end="539" title="European route E65" label="E65"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375987" start="541" end="544" title="European route E73" label="E73"/>
<link wikidata="Q279643" start="573" end="583" title="A1 (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="A1 highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q676174" start="585" end="589" title="European route E661" label="E661"/>
<link wikidata="Q745873" start="591" end="595" title="European route E761" label="E761"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425402" start="597" end="601" title="European route E762" label="E762"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="629" end="634" title="M-1.8 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-1.8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="637" end="640" title="M-2 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="643" end="646" title="M-4 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="649" end="654" title="M-4.2 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-4.2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="657" end="660" title="M-5 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-5"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="663" end="666" title="M-6 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="669" end="674" title="M-6.1 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-6.1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="677" end="680" title="M-8 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="683" end="687" title="M-11 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="690" end="694" title="M-14 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-14"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="697" end="703" title="M-14.1 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-14.1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="706" end="712" title="M-14.2 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-14.2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="715" end="719" title="M-15 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-15"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="722" end="726" title="M-16 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-16"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="729" end="735" title="M-16.1 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-16.1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="738" end="744" title="M-16.2 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-16.2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="747" end="753" title="M-16.3 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-16.3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="756" end="762" title="M-16.4 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-16.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880849" start="765" end="769" title="M-17 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-17"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="772" end="778" title="M-17.2 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-17.2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="781" end="787" title="M-17.3 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-17.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880858" start="790" end="794" title="M-18 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-18"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="797" end="801" title="M-19 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-19"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="804" end="810" title="M-19.2 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-19.2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="813" end="819" title="M-19.3 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-19.3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="822" end="826" title="M-20 road (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="M-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="971" end="979" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="1408" end="1422" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662678" start="1491" end="1498" title="Transport in Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526623" start="1508" end="1514" title="Transport in Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192008" start="1524" end="1534" title="Transport in Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="1555" end="1565" title="Sava" label="Sava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q180731" start="1653" end="1661" title="Gradiška, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Gradiška"/>
<link wikidata="Q194482" start="1663" end="1667" title="Brod, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q391033" start="1669" end="1674" title="Šamac, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Šamac"/>
<link wikidata="Q322828" start="1680" end="1685" title="Brčko (town)" label="Brčko"/>
<link wikidata="Q994255" start="1763" end="1777" title="Orašje, Bosnia" label="Orašje, Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="1901" end="1922" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q381684" start="1945" end="1952" title="Aeroput" label="Aeroput"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="2011" end="2019" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q23564" start="2025" end="2034" title="Podgorica" label="Podgorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="2199" end="2204" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294457" start="2206" end="2211" title="Sušak, Rijeka" label="Sušak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="2216" end="2222" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="2301" end="2310" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="2477" end="2483" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="2485" end="2489" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="2494" end="2500" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="2865" end="2887" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3610" wikidata="Q276294" url="?curid=3610" title="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>The Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( or OSBiH) is the official military force of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The BiH armed forces were officially unified in 2005 and are composed of two founding armies: the Bosniak and Bosnian Croat Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (VFBiH) and the Bosnian Serbs&#x27; Army of Republika Srpska (VRS).

The Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, founded in 2004, is in charge of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

== Chain of command ==
In accordance with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Article 5.5a), Bosnian Law of defense and Bosnian Law of service, the supreme civilian commander of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the collective Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The collective Presidency directs the Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Armed Forces. Former Bosnia and Herzegovina ministers of defence include Nikola Radovanović, Selmo Cikotić, Muhamed Ibrahimović, Zekerijah Osmić, Marina Pendeš and Sifet Podžić. , the minister is Zukan Helez. Former Chiefs of Joint Staff of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina include Lieutenant colonel general Sifet Podžić, Lieutenant colonel general Miladin Milojčić, Lieutenant colonel general Anto Jeleč and Colonel general Senad Mašović. The current Chief of Joint Staff is General Gojko Knežević. Conscription was completely abolished in Bosnia and Herzegovina effective 1 January 2006.

==Defence law==
The Bosnia and Herzegovina Defence Law addresses the following areas: the Military of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Government Institutions, Entity Jurisdictions and Structure, Budget and Financing, Composition of Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, War Declaration, natural disasters, conflict of interests and professionalism, Oath to Bosnia-Herzegovina, flags, anthem and military insignia, and transitional and end orders.

==History==
The AFBiH was formed from three armies of the Bosnian War period: the Bosniak Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Bosnian Serb Army of Republika Srpska, and the Croat Defence Council.

The Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was created on 15 April 1992 during the early days of the Bosnian War. Before the ARBiH was formally created, there existed Territorial Defence, an official military force of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and several paramilitary groups such as the Green Berets, Patriotic League, and civil defence groups, as well as many criminal gangs and collections of police and military professionals. The army was formed under poor circumstances, with a very low number of tanks, APCs and no military aviation assets. The army was divided into Corps, each Corps was stationed in a territory. The first commander was Sefer Halilović.

The Army of Republika Srpska was created on 12 May 1992. Before the VRS was formally created, there were several paramilitary groups such as the Srpska dobrovoljačka garda, Beli Orlovi, as well as some Russian, Greek and other volunteers. The army was equipped with ex-JNA inventory. It had about 200 tanks, mostly T-55s and 85 M-84s, and 150 APCs with several heavy artillery pieces. The Air Defense of VRS shot down several aircraft, like F-16, Mirage 2000, F-18 and one Croatian Air Force MiG-21. The VRS received support from the Yugoslav Army and FR Yugoslavia.

The Croatian Defence Council was the main military formation of the Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia during the Bosnian War. It was the first organized military force to control the Croat-populated areas, created on 8 April 1992. They ranged from men armed with shotguns assigned to village defence tasks to organized, uniformed, and well-equipped brigade-sized formations that nevertheless employed part-time soldiers. As time went on, the HVO forces became increasingly better organized and more &quot;professional&quot;, but it was not until early 1994, that the HVO began to form guards brigades, mobile units manned by full-time professional soldiers.

In 1995–96, a NATO-led international peacekeeping force (IFOR) of 60,000 troops served in Bosnia and Herzegovina, beginning on December 21, 1995, to implement and monitor the military aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement. IFOR was succeeded by a smaller, NATO-led Stabilization Force or SFOR. The number of SFOR troops was reduced first to 12,000 and then to 7,000. SFOR was in turn succeeded by an even smaller, European Union-led European Union Force, EUFOR Althea. , EUFOR Althea numbered around 7,000 troops.

===The Bosnian Train and Equip Program===
The program to train and equip the Bosnian Federation Army after the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement in 1995 was a key element of the U.S. strategy to bring stable peace to Bosnia. The Train and Equip Program also calmed the concerns of some Congressmen about committing U.S. troops to peacekeeping duty in Bosnia. Creating a stable and functioning Federation Army that could deter Serb aggression had the prospect of allowing NATO and U.S. troops to withdraw from Bosnia within the original 12-month mandate, which the administration assured Congress was all it would take to stabilize the country.

The program conducted an “international program review” in April 1998 to demonstrate to U.S. partners that it had been well managed and successful and to solicit additional contributions. The event was attended by 20 current and potential donor countries and an air of satisfaction prevailed.

The Dayton Peace Agreement left the country with three armies under two commands: the Bosniak and Bosnian Croat armies within the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, facing their recent adversaries the Army of the Republika Srpska. These three forces together had around 419,000 personnel in regulars and reserves. This force size and orientation was totally at odds with the international peacemakers&#x27; vision. Slow reductions did take place. By 2004, the two warring factions had reduced their forces to 12,000 regulars and 240,000 reserves but had made virtually no progress in integrating the two into one new force, though the basis of a state defence ministry had been put in place via the Standing Committee on Military Matters (SCMM). Conscription for periods of around four months continued, the costs of which were weighing down both entities.

The restructuring of the three armies into the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina represents part of a wider process of &#x27;thickening&#x27; the central state institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. To mitigate some of the potential controversy around restructuring, the Office of the High Representative (OHR) made use of evidence of malpractice in Republika Srpska military institutions. Firstly, from 2002 onwards, OHR utilised a scandal around the provision of parts and assistance to Iraq in breach of a UN embargo (the so-called Orao affair) to support the cause for bringing governance of the armies under the level of central institutions. Following this, in 2004, the process was accelerated, drawing its justification from new evidence of material and other forms of support flowing from Republika Srpska armed forces to ICTY indictee Ratko Mladić. OHR condemned the ‘systematic connivance of high-ranking members of the RS military’ and noted that measures to tackle such systematic deficiencies were under consideration. This was quickly followed by the expansion of the mandate for a Defence Reform Commission, which ultimately resulted in the consolidation of three armed forces into one, governed at the level of the central state.

As the joint AFBiH began to develop, troops began to be sent abroad. Bosnia and Herzegovina deployed a unit of 37 men to destroy munitions and clear mines, in addition to 6 command personnel as part of the Multinational force in Iraq. The unit was first deployed to Fallujah, then Talil Air Base, and is now located at Camp Echo. In December 2006, the Bosnian government formally extended its mandate through June 2007. Bosnia and Herzegovina planned to send another 49 soldiers from the 6th Infantry Division to Iraq in August 2008, their mission being to protect/guard Camp Victory in Baghdad.

== Structure ==

The Military units are commanded by the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina Joint Staff in Sarajevo. There are two major commands under the Joint Staff: Operational Command and Support Command.

There are three regiments that are each formed by soldiers from the three ethnic groups of Bosnia and Herzegovina: Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs and trace their roots to the armies that were created during the war in BiH. These regiments have their distinct ethnic insignias and consist of three active battalions each. Headquarters of regiments have no operational authority. On the basis of the Law on Service in the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the regimental headquarters have the following tasks: to manage the regimental museum, monitor financial fund, prepare, investigate and cherish the history of the regiment, the regiment publish newsletters, maintain cultural and historical heritage, give guidance on holding special ceremonies, give guidance on customs, dress and deportment Regiment, conduct officer, NCO and military clubs. Each regiments&#x27; three battalions are divided evenly between the three active brigades of the Army.

===Joint Staff of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina===
=== Operational Command ===

Overall the brigades are multinational with 45.9% Bosniaks, 33.6% Serbs, 19.8% Croats and about 0.7% of other ethnic groups (as for 2016).

* Operational Command, in Sarajevo
** 4th Infantry Brigade, in Čapljina
*** 1st Infantry Battalion, in Livno (Croat troops)
*** 2nd Infantry Battalion, in Bileća (Serb troops)
*** 3rd Infantry Battalion, in Goražde (Bosniak troops)
*** Artillery Battalion, in Mostar
*** Reconnaissance Company, in Čapljina
*** Signals Platoon, in Čapljina
*** Military Police Platoon, in Čapljina
** 5th Infantry Brigade, in Tuzla
*** 1st Infantry Battalion, in Zenica (Bosniak troops)
*** 2nd Infantry Battalion, in Kiseljak (Croat troops)
*** 3rd Infantry Battalion, in Bijeljina (Serb troops)
*** Artillery Battalion, in Žepče
*** Reconnaissance Company, in Tuzla
*** Signals Platoon, in Tuzla
*** Military Police Platoon, in Tuzla
** 6th Infantry Brigade, in Banja Luka
*** 1st Infantry Battalion, in Banja Luka (Serb troops)
*** 2nd Infantry Battalion, in Bihać (Bosniak troops)
*** 3rd Infantry Battalion, in Orašje (Croat troops)
*** Artillery Battalion, in Doboj
*** Reconnaissance Company, in Banja Luka
*** Signals Platoon, in Banja Luka
*** Military Police Platoon, in Banja Luka
** Tactical Support Brigade, in Sarajevo
*** Armored Battalion, in Tuzla
*** Engineer Battalion, in Derventa
*** Military Intelligence Battalion, in Sarajevo
*** Military Police Battalion, in Sarajevo
*** Demining Battalion, in Sarajevo
*** Signal Battalion, in Pale
*** CBRN Defense Company, in Tuzla
** Air Force and Air Defense Brigade, at Sarajevo Air Base and Banja Luka Air Base
*** 1st Helicopter Squadron, at Banja Luka Airport
*** 2nd Helicopter Squadron, at Sarajevo Airport
*** Air Defense Battalion, at Sarajevo Airport
*** Surveillance and Early Warning Battalion, at Banja Luka Airport
*** Flight Support Battalion, at Sarajevo Airport and Banja Luka Airport

===Brigades under the Support Command control===
Within the armed forces, there are a number of services. These include a Technical Service, Air Technology service, Military Police service, Communications service, Sanitary service, a Veterans service, Civilian service, Financial service, Information service, Legal service, Religious service, and a Musical service.
== Uniform and insignia ==

Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina were unified in 2005 and at that time they needed a uniform for the newly founded Armed Forces. MARPAT was designated as the future camouflage pattern to be used on combat uniforms of the AFBiH.

Insignia is found on military hats or berets, on the right and left shoulder on the uniform of all soldiers of the Armed Forces. All, except for generals, wear badges on their hats or berets with either the land force badge or air force badge. Generals wear badges with the coat of arms of Bosnia surrounded with branches and two swords. All soldiers of the armed forces have on their right shoulder a flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina. All members of the three regiments wear their regiment insignia on the left shoulder. There are other insignias, brigades or other institution are worn under the regiment insignia. The name of the soldiers is worn on the left part of the chest while the name &quot;Armed Forces of BiH&quot; is worn on the right part of the chest.

In 2023, members of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina began to wear a new field uniform of high-quality cloth and original camouflage schemes with the characteristics of the Bosnian environment. 

==Equipment==

==References==
==Further reading==
*Dorschner, Jim (18 April 2007), &quot;Endgame in Bosnia&quot;, &quot;Jane&#x27;s Defence Weekly&quot;, pp. 24–29

==External links==
* Ministry of Defense of Bosnia and Herzegovina
* MILITARY INDUSTRY – Bosnia and Herzegovina
* European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina – EUFOR 
* OSCE Mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina 
* NATO Headquarters Sarajevo Security Sector Reform information
* U.S Donation of Specialized Vehicles To AFBiH
* Communication-intelligence Support Norway
* Financial Support From Germany
* European Union Donations For Demining Activities</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q276294" start="4" end="42" title="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q276294" start="48" end="53" title="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="OSBiH"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="71" end="79" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="89" end="111" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q37726" start="199" end="205" title="army" label="armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="211" end="218" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="223" end="236" title="Bosnian Croat" label="Bosnian Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q593467" start="237" end="285" title="Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="302" end="314" title="Bosnian Serb" label="Bosnian Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="322" end="346" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294493" start="359" end="404" title="Ministry of Defence (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291601" start="530" end="568" title="Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q844944" start="731" end="767" title="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294493" start="807" end="852" title="Ministry of Defence (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443267" start="954" end="967" title="Selmo Cikotić" label="Selmo Cikotić"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671805" start="1007" end="1020" title="Marina Pendeš" label="Marina Pendeš"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511838" start="1025" end="1037" title="Sifet Podžić" label="Sifet Podžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q16114845" start="1057" end="1068" title="Zukan Helez" label="Zukan Helez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097121" start="1077" end="1144" title="Chiefs of Joint Staff of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Chiefs of Joint Staff of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511838" start="1180" end="1192" title="Sifet Podžić" label="Sifet Podžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="1372" end="1384" title="Conscription" label="Conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="1963" end="1974" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q687076" start="1995" end="2041" title="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="2060" end="2084" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q35895" start="2094" end="2115" title="Croat Defence Council" label="Croat Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="2227" end="2238" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358643" start="2293" end="2312" title="Territorial Defence Force of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Territorial Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="2396" end="2408" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283353" start="2428" end="2440" title="Zelene beretke" label="Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435180" start="2442" end="2458" title="Patriotic League (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Patriotic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="2464" end="2477" title="civil defence" label="civil defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="2643" end="2647" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="2650" end="2653" title="Armored Personnel Carrier" label="APC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285208" start="2786" end="2801" title="Sefer Halilović" label="Sefer Halilović"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="2917" end="2929" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130041" start="2949" end="2975" title="Srpska dobrovoljačka garda" label="Srpska dobrovoljačka garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q815581" start="2977" end="2988" title="White Eagles (paramilitary)" label="Beli Orlovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="3006" end="3013" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148739" start="3015" end="3020" title="Greek Volunteer Guard" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="3073" end="3076" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="JNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="3119" end="3123" title="T-55" label="T-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q746774" start="3132" end="3136" title="M-84" label="M-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="3245" end="3249" title="F-16" label="F-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q200038" start="3251" end="3262" title="Mirage 2000" label="Mirage 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="3264" end="3268" title="F-18" label="F-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q220970" start="3277" end="3295" title="Croatian Air Force" label="Croatian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="3296" end="3302" title="MiG-21" label="MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q32526" start="3338" end="3351" title="Armed Forces of Serbia and Montenegro" label="Yugoslav Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="3356" end="3369" title="FR Yugoslavia" label="FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35895" start="3376" end="3400" title="Croatian Defence Council" label="Croatian Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q334731" start="3440" end="3474" title="Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia" label="Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3657" end="3678" title="Croatian Defence Council#Village Guards" label="village defence tasks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3722" end="3746" title="Croatian Defence Council#Guard brigades" label="brigade-sized formations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3774" end="3792" title="Croatian Defence Council#Home Guard" label="part-time soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3958" end="3973" title="Croatian Defence Council#Guard brigades" label="guards brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="4046" end="4050" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="4089" end="4093" title="Implementation Force" label="IFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="4231" end="4253" title="Dayton Peace Agreement" label="Dayton Peace Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="4320" end="4324" title="SFOR" label="SFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4446" end="4460" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q691042" start="4487" end="4499" title="EUFOR Althea" label="EUFOR Althea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="5620" end="5656" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="5694" end="5722" title="Army of the Republika Srpska" label="Army of the Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6192" end="6230" title="Standing Committee on Military Matters" label="Standing Committee on Military Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q470446" start="6628" end="6661" title="Office of the High Representative" label="Office of the High Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="7188" end="7192" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="ICTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q93167" start="7202" end="7214" title="Ratko Mladić" label="Ratko Mladić"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="7811" end="7838" title="Multinational force in Iraq" label="Multinational force in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q191170" start="7871" end="7879" title="Fallujah" label="Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062227" start="7886" end="7900" title="Talil Air Base" label="Talil Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210089" start="7924" end="7933" title="Camp Echo (Iraq)" label="Camp Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027657" start="8176" end="8188" title="Camp Victory" label="Camp Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="8192" end="8199" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="8750" end="8758" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="9630" end="9638" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q337683" start="9667" end="9675" title="Čapljina" label="Čapljina"/>
<link wikidata="Q746073" start="9707" end="9712" title="Livno" label="Livno"/>
<link wikidata="Q861772" start="9759" end="9765" title="Bileća" label="Bileća"/>
<link wikidata="Q504058" start="9811" end="9818" title="Goražde" label="Goražde"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="9864" end="9870" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="10013" end="10018" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q184046" start="10050" end="10056" title="Zenica" label="Zenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018000" start="10105" end="10113" title="Kiseljak" label="Kiseljak"/>
<link wikidata="Q207801" start="10160" end="10169" title="Bijeljina" label="Bijeljina"/>
<link wikidata="Q393860" start="10212" end="10217" title="Žepče" label="Žepče"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="10351" end="10361" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q204434" start="10449" end="10454" title="Bihać" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q994255" start="10503" end="10509" title="Orašje" label="Orašje"/>
<link wikidata="Q169247" start="10553" end="10558" title="Doboj" label="Doboj"/>
<link wikidata="Q768439" start="10779" end="10787" title="Derventa" label="Derventa"/>
<link wikidata="Q222084" start="10941" end="10945" title="Pale, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Pale"/>
<link wikidata="Q569328" start="10984" end="11017" title="Air Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Air Force and Air Defense Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q740392" start="11022" end="11039" title="Sarajevo Airport" label="Sarajevo Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430945" start="11044" end="11063" title="Banja Luka Airport" label="Banja Luka Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q740392" start="11147" end="11163" title="Sarajevo International Airport" label="Sarajevo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570019" start="11883" end="11889" title="MARPAT" label="MARPAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446733" start="13075" end="13101" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Defence Weekly" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Defence Weekly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3611" wikidata="Q5468462" url="?curid=3611" title="Foreign relations of Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>The implementation of the Dayton Accords of 1995 has focused the efforts of policymakers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the international community, on regional stabilization in the countries-successors of the former Yugoslavia. Relations with its neighbors of Croatia and Serbia have been fairly stable since the signing of the Dayton Agreement in 1995.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Bosnia and Herzegovina maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
==EU accession== 

The accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union is one of the main political objectives of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Stabilisation and Association Process (SAP) is the EU&#x27;s policy framework. Countries participating in the SAP have been offered the possibility to become, once they fulfill the necessary conditions, member states of the EU. Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore a potential candidate country for EU accession.

==International organizations==
Bank for International Settlements, Council of Europe, Central European Initiative, EBRD,
Energy Community United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, FAO, Group of 77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, International Criminal Court, International Development Association, IFAD, International Finance Corporation, IFRCS, ILO, International Monetary Fund, International Maritime Organization, Interpol, IOC, International Organization for Migration (observer), ISO, ITU, Non-Aligned Movement (guest), Organization of American States (observer), OIC (observer), OPCW, Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, Southeast European Cooperative Initiative, United Nations, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMEE, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

==See also==
* Bosnia and Herzegovina and the International Monetary Fund
* List of diplomatic missions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Visa requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens
* Foreign relations of Yugoslavia

==References==
==External links==
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs - policy priorities</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="26" end="40" title="Dayton Accords" label="Dayton Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="92" end="114" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774161" start="131" end="154" title="international community" label="international community"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="217" end="234" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="268" end="275" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="280" end="286" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="336" end="352" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q894452" start="521" end="578" title="accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union" label="accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259507" start="650" end="687" title="Stabilisation and Association Process" label="Stabilisation and Association Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="995" end="1029" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="Bank for International Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="1031" end="1048" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q392805" start="1050" end="1077" title="Central European Initiative" label="Central European Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="1079" end="1083" title="EBRD" label="EBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989312" start="1085" end="1101" title="Energy Community" label="Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q659012" start="1102" end="1147" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Europe" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="1149" end="1152" title="FAO" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="1154" end="1165" title="Group of 77" label="Group of 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="1167" end="1171" title="IAEA" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="1173" end="1177" title="IBRD" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="1179" end="1183" title="ICAO" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="1185" end="1213" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="1215" end="1252" title="International Development Association" label="International Development Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="1254" end="1258" title="IFAD" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="1260" end="1293" title="International Finance Corporation" label="International Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="1295" end="1300" title="IFRCS" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="1302" end="1305" title="ILO" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1307" end="1334" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="1336" end="1371" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="1373" end="1381" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="1383" end="1386" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="1388" end="1428" title="International Organization for Migration" label="International Organization for Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="1441" end="1444" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="1446" end="1449" title="ITU" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="1451" end="1471" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="1481" end="1512" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="1525" end="1528" title="OIC" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="1541" end="1545" title="OPCW" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="1547" end="1599" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q835841" start="1601" end="1642" title="Southeast European Cooperative Initiative" label="Southeast European Cooperative Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1644" end="1658" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="1660" end="1666" title="UNCTAD" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1668" end="1674" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="1676" end="1681" title="UNIDO" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q487381" start="1683" end="1688" title="UNMEE" label="UNMEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="1690" end="1693" title="UPU" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="1695" end="1698" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="1700" end="1704" title="WIPO" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="1706" end="1709" title="WMO" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="1711" end="1715" title="WToO" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="1717" end="1721" title="WTrO" label="WTrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q85748348" start="1749" end="1807" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina and the International Monetary Fund" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina and the International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602117" start="1810" end="1863" title="List of diplomatic missions of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="List of diplomatic missions of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935417" start="1866" end="1919" title="Visa requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens" label="Visa requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q98834063" start="1922" end="1953" title="Foreign relations of Yugoslavia" label="Foreign relations of Yugoslavia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3612" wikidata="Q1148292" url="?curid=3612" title="History of Botswana">
<text>The history of Botswana encompasses the region&#x27;s ancient and tribal history, its colonisation as the Bechuanaland Protectorate, and the present-day Republic of Botswana. The first modern humans to inhabit Botswana were the San people, and agriculture first developed approximately 2,300 years ago. The first Bantu peoples arrived , and the first Tswana people arrived about 200 years later. The Tswana people split into various tribes over the following thousand years as migrations within the region continued, culminating in the &quot;Difaqane&quot; in the late 18th century. European contact first occurred in 1816, which led to the Christianization of the region.

Facing threats from German South West Africa and the Afrikaners, the most influential Tswana chiefs negotiated the creation of a protectorate under the United Kingdom in 1885. The British divided the territory into tribal reserves for each of the major chiefs to rule, giving the chiefs more power than they had previously, but it otherwise exercised only limited direct control over the protectorate. The British government took a more active role beginning in the 1930s. Botswana supported British involvement in World War II and many fought as part of the African Auxiliary Pioneer Corps.

A power struggle took place in the 1950s between the Ngwato chief Seretse Khama and his regent Tshekedi Khama. Seretse&#x27;s marriage to a white woman, Ruth Williams Khama, led the British to ban him from the protectorate. He returned in 1956 with popular support, and tribes moved toward elected government as an independence movement formed. A national legislature was created in 1961, and political parties were formed. Seretse became the leader of the Bechuanaland Democratic Party, which was endorsed by the British government to lead post-independence, and it saw overwhelming support in the first election in 1965. The Republic of Botswana was granted full independence in 1966.

With a strong mandate, Seretse and his party implemented liberal democracy and began developing infrastructure in what was one of the world&#x27;s poorest nations. Extensive diamond deposits were discovered in 1969, causing a massive reorganisation of Botswana&#x27;s economy. The Debswana mining company was created in 1978, and Botswana became the world&#x27;s fastest growing economy. The HIV/AIDS pandemic became a crisis in Botswana in the 1980s, and the 1990s came with the introduction of political factionalism after the political scandal of the Kgabo Commission. Political conflict within the Botswana Democratic Party continued over the following decades with a split occurring in 2010 and the exile of former president Ian Khama at the behest of his protege Mokgweetsi Masisi in 2021.

== Pre-colonial history ==
=== Prehistory ===

Stone tools in present-day Botswana date back to two million years ago. These include Acheulean axes, which may have been used by &quot;Homo erectus&quot; or early modern humans. Hominin migration to the Kalahari Desert is estimated to have happened prior to Marine Isotope Stage 6, 186,000 years ago. Hunter-gatherers inhabited the areas around a paleolake, Lake Makgadikgadi, as well as Tsodilo and ≠Gi by approximately 40,000 years ago. Rock art dates back to approximately 30,000 years ago, and virtually all permanent water supplies were associated with early humans 20,000 years ago. More detailed study of southern Africa in the Stone Age has been limited. By 5,000 years ago, the ancestors of the Khoisan peoples were the only people living in present-day Botswana.

=== Ancient history ===
The San people were joined by the Khoe people approximately 2,300 years ago when the Khoe migrated to the region from eastern Africa. Agriculture and ceramics first appeared in the region at this time, and the domestication of animals first took place approximately 2,000–2,200 years ago. Among the earliest crops were pearl millet, finger millet, sorghum, Bambara groundnuts, cowpeas, and cucurbits. The earliest livestock included sheep, goats, and cattle.

The Kgalagadi people were the first of the Bantu peoples to settle in present-day Botswana, arriving . The first Tswana people (singular &quot;Motswana&quot;, plural &quot;Batswana&quot;) are estimated to have arrived c. 400 CE. These Bantu peoples brought iron and copper tools to the region and settled along permanent waterways.

=== Post-classical period ===
The Taukome people arrived in present-day Botswana by the 7th century, and their possession of glass beads indicates early connection to Indian Ocean trade. The number of livestock kept in the area increased significantly between the 8th century and the 10th century. The Tswana people organised themselves into a tribal government, called a &quot;morafe&quot; (plural &quot;merafe&quot;), each led by a chief called a &quot;kgosi&quot; (plural &quot;dikgosi&quot;). This system produced a more hierarchical government relative to others in the region. Cattle became a central part of society in the region, and ownership of cattle denoted one&#x27;s status. The early history of the Tswana people remains largely unknown because little archaeological evidence has been left.

Trade routes connected tribes throughout the Kalahari Desert by 900 CE, and access to the Indian Ocean trade expanded in the region over the 10th century. The Toutswe people became the predominant group in present-day Botswana during the 11th and 12th centuries as they became wealthier through ownership of cattle. Specularite mining became widespread during this period. The value of products fluctuated during this period as expanding trade with foreign nations and the discovery of gold took interest away from specularite and animal products like ivory. One tribe in Tsodilo was particularly influential in the trade of specularite until it fell at the end of the 12th century. The tribes in southeastern Botswana were far removed from these developments and remained largely unaffected.

Neighbouring present-day Botswana during the 11th and 12th centuries were the people of Leopard&#x27;s Kopje, who formed the Kingdom of Mapungubwe and projected influence throughout the region. Their influence declined by the 13th century, and they were replaced as the regional power by Great Zimbabwe as the gold trade became a driving factor in the region&#x27;s economy. It controlled many of the tribes that existed in what is now northeastern Botswana. After the fall of Great Zimbabwe in the 15th century, several other states developed. The Kingdom of Butua, formed by the Kalanga peoples, was established on the present-day Botswana–Zimbabwe border.

Migration of Tswana peoples through present-day Botswana occurred over the following centuries as they were displaced by native and colonial populations from the south. Large migrations of Kalanga and Sotho–Tswana peoples into present-day Botswana occurred during the 15th and 16th centuries, and the Kalanga peoples controlled the land between the Motloutse River and the Makgadikgadi Pan until the 18th century. The Hurutshe, Kgatla, and Kwena peoples split from the Phofu dynasty in the Transvaal region amid drought and hereditary conflicts, eventually migrating north to present-day Botswana.

=== Early modern period ===

The Tswana people had a presence throughout present-day Botswana by 1600. According to oral tradition, the pastoralist Herero and Mbanderu peoples split from the Mbunda people in the 17th century as Tswana cattle raids scattered the groups. Oral tradition also holds that the Yeyi people migrated from the upper Chobe River into the Okavango Delta in the 18th century, though contact between the Yeyi and the Khoe may have existed much longer. Different Tswana tribes were able to separate and form independently from one another as the region&#x27;s primary asset, cattle, is easily transported. The western tribes were especially prone to separation because of the large distances between towns and farmlands. They were often the targets of raids by the Griqua people.

The first Tswana state was formed by the Ngwaketse people in the mid-18th century. Subsequent states were formed by the Kwena people, the Ngwato people, and the Tawana people over the following decades. With these came the development of the &quot;mophato&quot; (plural &quot;mephato&quot;), a militia regiment organised by age group, among the eastern Tswana peoples in the 1750s. Two Kgatla peoples, the Kgafela people and the Tlokwa people, joined together at this time and seized control over the area surrounding Pilanesberg in present-day South Africa. They subjugated several peoples in the region and twice won conflicts against the Fokeng people. The use of &quot;mephato&quot; spread to the western Tswana peoples by the end of the century. It was never widely adopted in the south.

=== The Difaqane ===
The &quot;Difaqane&quot;, a period of conflict and displacement in southern Africa, took place during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. During this time, the Tswana people were subject to raids by many groups, including the Ndebele, the Kololo, the Ngoni, the Pedi, and the Voortrekkers. Most Tswana groups opted to retreat instead of fight. This triggered extensive migration across the region, causing the Tswana tribes to more thoroughly spread and establish a stronger presence throughout the territory of present-day Botswana. They settled primarily in the &quot;hardveld&quot; that makes up the eastern region of present-day Botswana. The Kwena and Ngwaketse peoples migrated from Transvaal to the &quot;sandveld&quot;. The first of the Kgatla peoples to settle in present-day Botswana, the Mmanaana people, migrated from South Africa in the early 19th century before settling in Moshupa and Thamaga. Only some of the northwestern Tswana peoples were spared displacement or interruption.

The Kololo people attacked the northwestern Tswana peoples in 1826, forcing the Kwena and Ngwaketse from their respective territories. Sebogo, the regent of the Ngwaketse tribe, raised 4,000 men in their &quot;mephato&quot; and surrounded Dithubaruba where the Kololo were residing. Killing the warriors and the civilians, they permanently expelled the Kololo from the region.

The tribes reestablished their states in the 1840s, founding several towns and villages of varying sizes. Governance was based around the &quot;kgotla&quot;, a deliberative forum in which the chief or a regional leader heard the concerns of most male citizens before making decisions.

=== European missionaries ===
European missionaries first arrived in present-day Botswana in 1816 through the London Missionary Society. This and other missionary groups worked to convert the chiefs to Christianity and to build missionary schools. The missionary Robert Moffat set his mission station on the border of present-day Botswana as a barrier against the Boers so they could not move further inward. Moffat published the first Setswana language text with a uniform orthography when he began translating Christian texts and wrote a Setswana dictionary. Both the Old and New Testaments could be read in Setswana by 1857.

The 19th century Tswana people used several economic ideas that were rare in southern Africa, including credit, service contracts, and the &quot;mafisa&quot; system of the rich loaning cattle to the poor in exchange for labour. They also had a conception of private property by the mid-19th century, and both married men and married women were entitled to land rights. The men typically herded cattle while the women grew crops. Sorghum was the region&#x27;s most commonly grown crop in the 19th century. Land was widely available, but droughts meant that farming was inconsistent.

British traders arrived in the 1830s and engaged in transactions with the chiefs. The influx of European settlers nearby allowed the Tswana tribes to incorporate themselves into the global economy. Chief Sechele I of the Kwena people took advantage of the new trading routes, securing control of British trade for his tribe. The Scottish missionary David Livingstone arrived in Botswana in 1845, where he established the Kolobeng Mission. This was the beginning of heavier European involvement in the Tswana tribes as they established intercontinental trade routes. Westernised fashion was adopted in urban areas through the rest of the century and combined with traditional clothing. In another effort to thwart the Boers, Livingstone provided firearms to the Kwena people. Sechele was the first person who Livingstone converted to Christianity, and the chief subsequently offered to convert his head men using rhinoceros-hide whips.

The Tswana peoples faced conflict from other groups in the region, peaking in the 1850s. Many Batswana, particularly the Kwena and Ngwato tribes, fought against Afrikaners and Zulu tribes in the eastern Kalahari Desert. The Kwena and the Mmanaana fought against Boers from Transvaal in 1852, defending their territory and ending the nation&#x27;s westward expansion. The Batswana saw missionary groups as a means of refuge from invaders, incentivising conversion to Christianity. Sechele requested a British protectorate in 1853 to end regional conflicts, but he was denied.

European visitors became more common in the mid-19th century as hunters, explorers, and traders sought profit and adventure in the region. Many wrote travel books about the area, which were some of the only non-academic publications about present-day Botswana at the time. By the 1860s, migration out of the region increased as Batswana men travelled to work in South African mines. The discovery of the Tati Goldfields triggered the first European gold rush of Southern Africa in 1868. An early mining camp established in the 1870s expanded greatly as it became a major railway hub between Cape Province and Bulawayo, becoming Botswana&#x27;s first major city, Francistown. At this point in Botswana&#x27;s history, the major chiefs were all Christian. A war between the Kwena and the Kgafela in 1875. By the end of the decade, chief Khama III of the Ngwato people seized control of British trade from the Kwena people.

== Bechuanaland Protectorate ==
=== Formation of the protectorate ===
The United Kingdom feared increasing German influence in the region, and it agreed to form the Bechuanaland Protectorate. The British wished to preserve its influence over the Tswana tribes, as they provided a connection between southern and central Africa. Tswana chiefs feared encroachment by German South West Africa and the Afrikaners, and they believed that the alternative to British control was settler colonialism by Germany. They also wished to avoid falling under the control of South Africa or mining magnate Cecil Rhodes, though the protectorate still found itself dependent on South Africa economically.

The region was divided into tribal land ruled by the chiefs and crown land controlled by the United Kingdom. Eight tribes were recognised by the British upon the creation of the protectorate. The largest four were given tribal reserves: the Kwena, the Ngwaketse, the Ngwato, and the Tawana. Three smaller ones were also recognised: the Kgatla, the Tlokwa, and the Malete. The eighth, the Tshidi, were given a reserve crossing the border between the protectorate and South Africa. While members of non-Tswana minorities were allowed to participate in Tswana society and governance, they were given no tribal reserves of their own. The introduction of tribal reserves altered the nature of Tswana governance, as tribes had previously been less defined and subject to expansion or shifting. With territories divided into tribal jurisdictions, residents were no longer able to easily leave a tribe. The protectorate initially extended to the Ngwato, reaching from 22 degrees south to the Molopo River, but it was extended to 18 degrees south to reach the Chobe River in 1890. This provided the British more labourers under its jurisdiction and created a larger barrier to limit German colonisation. Other Tswana peoples lived to the south of the protectorate and were later absorbed into South Africa.

The Kgafela people settled in Mochudi in 1887. This Kgatla group quickly became influential in the region and its name became synonymous with Kgatla. British soldiers led by Charles Warren arrived in 1891 to formally establish the protectorate. Its government was defined, and a commissioner was appointed as its head. The commissioner was given broad powers over the protectorate, so long as he respected previously established tribal law. Its capital was the South African city of Vryburg, meaning that the colonial rulers did not reside in the protectorate and had little direct involvement in its affairs. Instead, the high commissioner operated through two assistant commissioners, and a district commissioner facilitated contact with the various tribes. The centralisation of British rule in South Africa meant that the Bechuanaland Protectorate was economically dependent on it.

The British government believed the Bechuanaland Protectorate to be only a temporary entity and expected that it would soon be absorbed by a British colony. In the meantime, it believed that a self-sufficient protectorate would cost less to maintain. For these reasons, the colonial administration imposed very little direct control of the Bechuanaland Protectorate. The chiefs benefited from these affairs and were able to empower and enrich themselves; they retained broad autonomy, but colonial backing meant that they no longer needed the consent of the tribes to maintain rule. Tribal rule became autocratic, which led to human rights abuses and discrimination against women and ethnic minorities.

=== Early years of the protectorate ===

The British planned to eventually incorporate the Bechuanaland Protectorate into the Union of South Africa. In the years after the protectorate&#x27;s creation, the United Kingdom entered talks with Cecil Rhodes to absorb it into the British South Africa Company. In response, three of the most influential chiefs—Khama III of the Ngwato, Sebele I of the Kwena, and Bathoen I of the Ngwaketse—made a diplomatic trip to the United Kingdom in 1895 and convinced the government not to complete the deal. This set a precedent of chiefs interacting with the British as a unified group and enshrined these three figures as early figures in Botswana&#x27;s history as a single nation. Rhodes&#x27;s handling of the failed Jameson Raid discouraged the British and negotiations were postponed indefinitely. The celebration of these chiefs resulted in the publication of &quot;Three Great African Chiefs: Khamé, Sebéle and Bathoeng&quot; by the London Missionary Society the same year. This text introduced a founding myth that their three respective tribes were created by three brothers.

Also in 1895, the capital was moved from Vryburg to another South African city, Mafeking, and the Ancient Ruins Company was registered to dig up prehistoric ruins in Bechuanaland and Rhodesia in search for gold. The protectorate was heavily affected by the 1890s African rinderpest epizootic, losing large portions of its livestock and wild game. The protectorate&#x27;s railroad was built in 1897 as the main north–south transit line.

When the United Kingdom raised the Pioneer Column to go to war with the Ndebele people, Khama III of the Ngwato assisted by sending soldiers. Botswana became a staging ground for the Jameson Raid in 1896. The Kgatla tribe was later part of the Boer War, fighting alongside the British Army.

The early colonial economy of the Bechuanaland Protectorate remained much the same as the pre-colonial economy. The United Kingdom primarily used the protectorate as a supply of labour, offering high wages to Batswana who migrated south to work in mines. Taxes were also imposed, beginning with a hut tax in 1899, which was then replaced by a poll tax in 1909. A native tax was later imposed in 1919. Colonial taxes in the Bechuanaland Protectorate were higher than those in neighbouring colonies, causing mass exodus to the south, and the chiefs allowed more generous power sharing with citizens to incentivise them to stay. The United Kingdom considered integrating the protectorate into South Africa as it unified its southern African colonies, but it ultimately grouped them economically by creating the South African Customs Union, joining in 1910. Membership entitled the protectorate to only 2% of the union&#x27;s revenue. 

By 1910, all Tswana tribes had adopted Christianity. Bechuanaland sent several hundred soldiers to assist the British Army during World War I. The London Missionary Society found itself in decline at this time, and it gradually lost influence over the protectorate.

Sebele II became chief of the Kwena in 1918, succeeding his father, Sechele II. Sechele II had conflicted with the dominant London Missionary Society, permitting an Anglican presence and reinstating many traditional practices such as polygyny, rainmaking, and &quot;bogwera&quot;. Sebele II continued his father&#x27;s challenge to the London Missionary Society, to the grievance of the British government.

The dual government of the chiefs and the colonial administration made administration difficult, so the administration created two advisory councils to standardise these authorities. The Native Advisory Council (later the African Advisory Council) was established in 1919. This annual meeting of the chiefs and other influential people in the protectorate allowed the British government to hear from and manage the tribes collectively instead of individually. Khama III of the Ngwato refused to participate, citing weak enforcement of alcohol prohibition in southern tribe. Khama III died in 1923 and was succeeded by Sekgoma II, who served until his own death in 1926. Sekgoma&#x27;s son Seretse Khama was still an infant, so Tshekedi Khama became regent. Tshekedi came to be recognised as a representative for all of the Tswana tribes. As Seretse grew, Tshekedi insisted that he be given a liberal education rather than be sent to a Rhodesian industrial school.

=== Development and increased British influence ===
In the 1920s, chief Isang Pilane of the Kgatla people oversaw the Bechuanaland Protectorate&#x27;s first major water development scheme, having sixteen boreholes drilled, seven of which became successful water supplies. These became more common over the following decades as the British government took interest in expanding the protectorate&#x27;s economy. By the 1930s, Isang Pilane and the Native Advisory Council privatised the boreholes, as they were not maintained under collective ownership. A severe drought occurred in the early 1930s, killing over 60% of the protectorate&#x27;s cattle.

The British government took a more active role in the protectorate&#x27;s governance beginning in 1930. That year, it began providing direct funding to the protectorate. Charles Rey was appointed Resident Commissioner of the Bechuanaland Protectorate, and he was responsible for reorganising the economy around cattle exports. An initiative to reform the protectorate toward mining and commercial agricultural development was attempted but saw push back from the chiefs.

Resident Commissioner Rey came into conflict with chief Sebele II, having him exiled in 1931. Sebele II was replaced by his younger brother, Kgari. Further initiatives were attempted by the British government in 1934 to constrain the unchecked power of the chiefs following the overthrow of Sebele II. These initiatives mandated advisory councils that chiefs had to consult and required that the British government be given access to court records. Chief Bathoen II of Ngwaketse and regent Tshekedi Khama of Ngwato issued a legal challenge to these initiatives. Although the British court ruled against the challenge, the new policies were never fully implemented. Other restrictions were adopted through colonial proclamation to limit the ability of the chiefs to levy taxes and seize stray cattle. A new resident commissioner, Charles Arden-Clarke, was appointed in 1936 and worked more closely with the chiefs.

=== Early years of World War II ===
Fears of German attack in Bechuanaland grew in the lead up to World War II due to its strategic position between Britain&#x27;s central and southern colonies in Africa. 11 days before war was declared, the British government warned the protectorate to be on standby, and military forces were organised. Four days after Britain declared war on Germany, Resident Commissioner Arden-Clarke held a meeting with the chiefs where they pledged full support for the war effort. The next day, the high commission issued a proclamation of emergency powers that gave it total control over public activity in the protectorate, but the chiefs were informed that they would be responsible for most enforcement and peacekeeping.

The earliest years of World War II had almost no effect on the people of Bechuanaland, and many only had a vague idea that the war existed. The colonial administration shrank as large numbers of white residents enlisted in the British Army. Those who remained were focused on security planning in case southern Africa became another front in the war. Against the wishes of the chiefs, the colonial administration encouraged Batswana who wished to serve with the British Army to enlist with the South African Native Military Corps. About 700 Batswana men enlisted with the group.

Maintaining the Bechuanaland Protectorate became a low priority for the United Kingdom during the Great Depression and World War II, and the protectorate received no funding from the United Kingdom during the war. The British Empire had relatively little control over Bechuanaland compared to its other territories, and British efforts to control wartime production in the protectorate were unsuccessful. The war drastically altered the protectorate&#x27;s economy as it went on, introducing shortages, rationing, and higher prices. Profiteering and price gouging were common, and the colonial administration, unable to enforce price controls, resorted to gentlemen&#x27;s agreements with traders. Taxes were raised and Colonial Development Fund projects were curtailed at the onset of World War II to establish financial independence from the empire. The Control of Livestock Industry Proclamation No. 1 of 1940 was passed to tax cattle, the protectorate&#x27;s main industry, but it met overwhelming resistance from Batswana and the European Advisory Council. A war fund operated in Bechuanaland, and although the United Kingdom expected that donations be voluntary, chiefs invoked their authority over their tribes to enforce donations. It was replaced by a levy in 1941, but this was less popular and proved difficult to enforce.

=== Batswana participation in World War II ===

Military recruitment began in Bechuanaland in 1941. About 5,500 men were trained and sent to war within the first six months. Another 5,000 Batswana men joined the war in 1942. In total, approximately 11,000 soldiers from Bechuanaland fought alongside the British Army during the war. Over 10,000 of these served in the British Army&#x27;s African Auxiliary Pioneer Corps. The chiefs traditionally had the right to conscript soldiers, and they ignored the colonial government&#x27;s wishes that military service should be entirely voluntary. Regent Tshekedi Khama of Ngwato made himself unpopular by using military conscription as a tool for control, weaponising it to silence critics and political opponents. Men who wished to avoid conscription sometimes fled to South Africa or to remote areas like the Okavango Delta swamps and the Kgalagadi bush. Others used more immediate precautions, such as digging holes when recruiters visited.

The chiefs wished to leverage their participation in the war for additional rights within the British Empire, and they feared that British defeat would make them subjects of Germany or South Africa, a fate they wished to avoid. The war effort was also an opportunity to reclaim Tswana men who had migrated to South Africa for mining jobs; the chiefs wished to end this practice and felt they could do so by offering military jobs. Some military pay was deferred to the families of soldiers, and limitations on exports were lifted during the war, causing an influx of money into Bechuanaland.

Relative to other nations in the British Empire, the people of Beschuanaland approved of the war. Many Batswana held a sense of loyalty to the empire or felt that their interests were aligned. Some chiefs, such as Kgari Sechele II of the Kwena and Molefi Pilane of the Kgatla, personally enlisted. They served as regimental sergeant majors, the highest rank available to Batswana.

Toward the end of World War II, the colonial government allowed Batswana to have business licenses and operate within the protectorate. This had previously been restricted to whites and Indians.

The High Commissions Territories Corps was stationed in the Middle East from 1946 to 1949.

=== Independence movement ===

The end of World War II came with drastic social change. The chiefs came to be seen as less essential to social structure, and many gave up their universal claims over tribal cattle. Other public resources, such as land and labour, were privatised and commodified. Access to education created a class of liberal intellectuals who opposed the rule of the chiefs and began forming their own centres of power in workers&#x27; associations and civic groups. By 1946, only 2% of the population had employment outside of agriculture and services. The protectorate saw a major increase in birth rates as part of the mid-20th century baby boom in the years after World War II, accompanied by an increase in life expectancy. The colonial administration began its first development project in the protectorate, a slaughterhouse, in the 1950s. The British, still expecting to merge the protectorate into South Africa, finally scrapped this plan after the beginning of Apartheid. As efforts began to develop a new path for the protectorate&#x27;s future, the protectorate was placed in a state of limbo, and no path forward was clear. One proposal was to incorporate it into the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, which the United Kingdom formed under a policy of &quot;multi-racial partnership&quot;.

When the Ngwato heir Seretse Khama came of age, regent Tshekedi Khama attempted to hold on to power. Seretse married a white woman, Ruth Williams, while studying in the United Kingdom, causing scandal in the Ngwato royal family. Though the public initially opposed the marriage, Tshekedi&#x27;s unpopularity shifted opinion in Seretse&#x27;s favour. The issue was raised in the &quot;kgotla&quot; in 1949, and Tshekedi&#x27;s rule was overwhelmingly rejected by thousands in attendance. Tshekedi and his supporters fled to the Kwena in exile.

The British government was less tolerant of Seretse&#x27;s marriage to a white woman. In an attempt to appease the Apartheid government of South Africa, it banished the couple from the protectorate in 1950. This provoked a burgeoning nationalist movement among Seretse&#x27;s supporters in the protectorate, which fully emerged in 1952. During Seretse&#x27;s absence, the United Kingdom placed the district commissioner in charge for four years before appointing Rasebolai Kgamane, a supporter of Tshekedi, as regent.

The Ngwato tribe rebelled against Seretse&#x27;s banishment. His supporters petitioned for his return, and riots broke out when they were denied. Seretse was eventually allowed to return in 1956. By this time, the stricter racial segregation in Apartheid South Africa dissuaded the United Kingdom from appeasing it. Throughout the ordeal of Seretse&#x27;s banishment, power shifted away from the chiefdomship and toward electoral bodies. Tshekedi and Seretse made peace upon Seretse&#x27;s return, and Seretse became the &quot;de facto&quot; leader of the Ngwato, though the United Kingdom forbade him from being the official chief. With British support, the Ngwato tribe developed a tribal council, of which both Seretse and Tshekedi were members. Other tribes then established similar tribal councils, which served as checks on the power of the chiefs. Some animosity remained between the two men: Tshekedi wished to retain the tribal government and the power of the chiefs, while Seretse envisioned a representative democracy and weaker chiefs. The amount of power invested in the chiefs became the most contentious issue in the burgeoning independence movement, especially among the Ngwato people and the Khama family.

The Bechuanaland Protectorate Federal Party was the first political party formed in the protectorate when it was created by the Ngwato union leader Leetile Disang Raditladi in 1959. Composed primarily of elites and intellectuals, it advocated a unification of the Tswana tribes. The party failed to gain support and was short-lived. The following year, the Bechuanaland People&#x27;s Party (BPP, later the Botswana People&#x27;s Party) was created as a more radical party, objecting to traditional tribal government and gaining appeal among migrant workers. It was led by Motsamai Mpho, Philip Matante, and Kgalemang Morsete. The BPP, created as a Tswana counterpart to the African National Congress party of South Africa, supported immediate independence and the total abolition of chiefdom. Fearing that the BPP would undermine the existing government and ignite tensions with the Apartheid government of South Africa, the chiefs and the British government restricted its ability to meet.

The protectorate&#x27;s tribes collectively formed a legislative council in 1961. The Kwena people found themselves under a regent, Neale Sechele, in 1963, meaning that they had little political influence as the independence movement developed. The &quot;Bechuanaland Protectorate Development Plan 1963/1968&quot; was drafted through a deliberative process in 1963, creating an outline for the nation&#x27;s independence.

As the population was politically inactive overall, the United Kingdom came to be one of the leading forces toward independence. Worrying that the BPP was too radical, the United Kingdom encouraged its preferred leader, Seretse Khama, to form a political party. Though Khama agreed with the BPP&#x27;s antiracist and republican values, he opposed its dogmatic approach to politics and its acceptance of socialism. He agreed to give up his claim over the Ngwato people to serve as a politician, forming the Bechuanaland Democratic Party (BDP, later the Botswana Democratic Party) in 1962. The BDP established itself as the &quot;party of chiefs&quot;, and it adopted ideas associated with pre-colonial tribal rule. The United Kingdom supported the BDP, understanding that it would maintain the colonial era livestock trade. By 1963, the Kgatla chief Linchwe was the only chief who opposed the BDP and had political influence, but the Kgatla people were in favour of the BDP, so he remained apolitical. A transition process began with BDP expected to rule an independent Botswana, and the colonial government worked with BDP leadership to prepare them for running a nation.

A conference was held in 1963 to oversee the creation of a new constitution. Internal strife within the BPP meant that the BDP had the most influence over the process. Tshekedi Khama had died by this time, so Bathoen II became the leader of the pro-federalisation faction, believing it would keep power in the hands of the chiefs. The United Kingdom and the Batswana politicians endorsed a unitary national government because Botswana was too poor to divide its resources and because a lack of centralisation would make it vulnerable to attacks from other nations. Federalisation proved politically unviable, so a compromise was made that the chiefs would form the House of Chiefs, an advisory body within the Parliament of Botswana. The chiefs still opposed this arrangement, and in a movement led by Bathoen, the House of Chiefs passed a vote of no confidence in the new government, but its lack of political power prevented it from leveraging meaningful reform. The District Council&#x27;s Act was passed as another means of limiting chiefs power by creating councils to preside over each district and town, making these elected bodies the primary local authorities.

Gaborone was built in 1965 and declared the new capital. It was built on British crown land, which provided a neutral location not controlled by any one tribe. The constitution was implemented the same year. With this in effect, the United Kingdom granted the protectorate self-governance. 1965 also saw the passing of the District Councils Act that adapted the colonial role of district commissioner by tying it to newly created district councils, and it saw the establishment of the state-owned National Development Bank.

Mpho split from the BPP to create the Bechuanaland Independence Party (BIP) in 1965. Led by Seretse Khama and Quett Masire, the BDP campaigned in almost every village in the protectorate leading up to the first general election. Unlike other political figures in Bechuanaland, Seretse Khama had appeal across the different tribes. The BDP was subsequently elected to lead the first government. The BPP won only three seats in the legislature, and the BIP failed to win any. After the election, the Botswana National Front (BNF) was created as a unified opposition to the BDP. Founded by Kenneth Koma, the BNF became the BDP&#x27;s largest rival.

The BDP chose Khama as the nation&#x27;s prime minister. Unlike most inaugural political parties in Africa, the BDP was a moderate conservative party instead of a radical anti-colonial party. After its formation, the House of Chiefs delivered a vote of no confidence in the constitution in 1966, leading to a national campaign in support of the constitution that garnered enough support for the chiefs to end their efforts to challenge it. The protectorate was granted independence as the Republic of Botswana in 1966.

== Republic of Botswana ==
=== Botswana in 1966 ===

Independence for Botswana meant the implementation of liberal democracy, bringing about elections, human rights protections, and civil service. This allowed for a merit-based system of promotion and the creation of a technocratic bureaucracy. The nation formed a government adapted from the Westminster system, and Prime Minister Seretse Khama became President Seretse Khama. A national identity was crafted, bringing together disparate ethnic groups in a single Tswana label, with a culture based on that of the Tswana tribes.

Botswana retained much of its pre-colonial tribal institutions after independence. This was an effect of both the strong centralised government associated with the Tswana tribes and the relatively limited intervention of the British government in colonial times. The deliberative nature of the nation&#x27;s politics before and after independence was an exception to many other African nations that became authoritarian after independence. Instead of abolishing the chiefdom, the new government incorporated it into the legal system, giving the chiefs judicial powers through the &quot;kgotla&quot;, subject to appellate courts. A tradition of subservience to leadership, once given to the chiefs, shifted to the presidency. The government reinforced its stability by staffing its civil service with foreign experts, as opposed to other new African countries that often expelled foreign experts. This preserved a Western-style bureaucratic government with an emphasis on development.

The United Kingdom continued funding Botswana for the first five years of its existence. Its peaceful, democratic status relative to other African nations meant that it received more aid from Western organisations. At the time of independence, Botswana was an extremely poor nation, more so than most others in Africa. It did not have an educated workforce, with only 40 citizens having university degrees, and there were no known natural resource supplies to support the nation. Botswana was dependent on the Apartheid regime in South Africa for access to the global community, and the majority of Botswana&#x27;s labourers were migrant workers in South Africa. Botswana came into more direct conflict with Rhodesia, which caused military skirmishes until 1978.

Limited British involvement meant that little development had taken place since colonisation. Literacy was at 25%, and only 10 kilometres of paved road existed. Approximately 90% of the population was in abject poverty, and most of the population were cattle farmers or subsistence farmers. As the nation achieved independence, a severe drought eliminated 30–50% of the cattle population. Approximately half of Batswana were dependent on the World Food Programme to avoid starvation. Other nations had low expectations for Botswana, and throughout Africa it was seen as an Apartheid Bantustan. This relationship with Apartheid was also a factor in Botswana&#x27;s success as an independent nation: the Batswana leadership wished to avoid the same fate as South Africa should the nation fail, and the diplomatic connections formed with the West to prevent subsumption by South Africa meant that Botswana was more trusting of Western powers and willing to accept their assistance.

The early leadership of Botswana was dominated by the ruling tribal families as well as a small number of highly educated public servants. Their economic and ideological similarities meant that the government remained stable without political infighting. Though Bathoen left his position as chief to pursue politics, most other chiefs accepted their reduced political power in the new government. Further activity of the chiefs was regulated by the Chieftainship Act of 1966.

A lack of corruption gave the state more legitimacy and won the favour of Western allies. Unlike most newly formed African nations, much of the leadership came from the agricultural community, meaning that their interests aligned with the majority. This encouraged the new government to retain colonial-era policies that benefited cattle farmers. The Botswana Meat Commission was created to regulate the beef industry. The BDP&#x27;s pan-tribal appeal and the mutual interest in establishing independence further incentivised the new government to act in the interest of the majority. Small groups of white settlers remained in the country and objected to its independence. Though they would later be crucial in Botswana&#x27;s development, mineral rights were given low priority upon independence, and the tribes transferred them to the central government in 1967.

=== Presidency of Seretse Khama ===
Khama was widely popular and seen as the natural leader of all the Tswana peoples. His administration implemented policies geared toward the creation of infrastructure and public goods, particularly the paving of roads. He began the construction of schools, slaughterhouses, and boreholes that continued over the following decades. Inhabited land of both the Tswana and the San was used to construct the boreholes. Development came at the expense of commerce and production, which was limited to the funding of livestock. Considerable focus was placed on nourishing cattle and constructing slaughterhouses to stimulate the beef industry amid a draught. Public welfare programs were also established. The discovery of diamonds ensured that these programs received sufficient funding. These investments and a conservative approach to government spending prevented the Dutch disease scenario that crippled other resource-laden African countries. Education was expanded throughout the nation, and the Tswana language was standardised alongside English at the expense of other languages. Khama justified this as a means to achieve unity.

Quett Masire served as Vice-President under Seretse Khama as well as Minister of Finance. He exercised control over the nation&#x27;s budgeting and spending by creating a series of National Development Plans, subject to the approval of the National Assembly and the Economic Committee of the Cabinet. Iterations of these plans remained a central facet of government policy well after Khama and Masire&#x27;s successors took office.

In 1967, diamonds were discovered in Botswana by the South African diamond company De Beers, and operations began shortly after. Copper deposits were found in Selebi-Phikwe that year, further revealing the nation&#x27;s mineral wealth. The government partnered with De Beers in 1969 to carry out larger diamond mining operations, and it was involved with a renegotiation of the Southern African Customs Union the same year to greatly improve its economic leverage in the region. A mine in Morupule began producing coal in 1973, providing the nation with a large share of its power supply. The Orapa diamond mine was opened in Orapa in 1971, and a revenue sharing agreement was finalised between the government and De Beers in 1974. Masire later confirmed that De Beers had funded his private ventures, causing speculation that the company may have received an advantageous deal in the matter.

The Water Act and the Tribal Land Act were enacted in 1968, creating the Water Apportionment Board and twelve land boards, respectively. These oversaw the apportionment of water and land rights by the state rather than through the ownership of each tribe. Through this, they effectively subsumed the traditional powers of the chiefs. The Tribal Grazing Lands Policy was implemented in 1975 to prevent overgrazing, but it proved unsuccessful. In effect, it allowed wealthy citizens to claim large plots of land for cattle at the expense of less wealthy citizens.

The first election after independence took place in 1969. The BDP did slightly worse relative to its 1965 performance, and Vice-President Masire lost his seat to Bathoen, requiring him to take a specially elected seat. The BPP faded in relevance as the politics of Botswana developed.

The state-owned Botswana Development Corporation was founded in 1970, and the Orapa diamond mine opened in 1971. By 1973, diamonds made up 10% of Botswana&#x27;s GDP, and by the end of the 1970s, mining was the largest industry in the country. The government of Botswana renegotiated its mining agreement with De Beers between 1971 and 1975, shifting the majority of earnings to the nation. As the diamond economy developed and investments were made back into the country, Botswana escaped poverty and came to be seen as a success among the other nations in post-colonial sub-Saharan Africa. These developments made Botswana the fastest growing economy in the world. The upper and middle classes saw the most benefit, increasing wealth inequality, but it also meant taxes could be lowered, which earned the support of peasants.

Botswana&#x27;s development and its use of foreign civil service was successful enough that the government convinced the United States to send the Peace Corps without traditional limitations on what roles the organisation can perform. With the 1970s came an increase in young locally educated Batswana, who became more influential in government. As these newcomers received similar education and began working in the same administrative culture, there was no major operational difference between the foreigner-led civil service and that run by the Batswana.

The Ministry of Development Planning had briefly existed following a schism in the Ministry of Finance between traditional caretakers who had been associated with the protectorate against Masire&#x27;s supporters who wished to see more aggressive development. The latter took control, and the ministries were reunified as the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning in 1970. Because of the limited number of qualified people to manage the economy, this ministry took almost full control of the government&#x27;s spending and initiated the Shashe Project that called for extensive development exceeding the country&#x27;s GDP. This included the establishment of a copper and nickel mining complex, which became the government&#x27;s highest priority.

In 1973, Seepapitso IV became the first chief to be suspended from his position in the post-colonial era. The BDP was again highly successful in the 1974 election. Minimum wages were introduced the same year.

Botswana began issuing its own currency, the Botswana pula, in 1976. Bank of Botswana governor Quill Hermans pushed for financial disentanglement from South Africa and its South African rand. Despite international concerns that Botswana might not be able to maintain its own currency, Khama felt that his economic advisors were capable and trusted their decision. Within a decade of independence, Botswana was one of the wealthiest nations in the Third World. The economic transformation is referred to as Botswana&#x27;s &quot;miracle&quot;.

Linchwe II, chief of the Kgatla people, reinstated the &quot;bogwera&quot; initiation rite for his tribe in 1975, aggravating the national government. Khama took a universalist approach in his administration, avoiding ethnic politics and rejecting the influence of tribal leaders in favour of civil servants. He at times asked individuals to resign if one ethnic group became too influential in the civil service. The Tswana peoples feared that dissent from the Kalanga minority could be destabilising. To addresses this, Khama incorporated educated members of the Kalanga tribe into the government, appointing many to high-ranking positions. The decision was controversial, and it spawned conspiracy theories about malevolent influence of the Kalanga. These sometimes centred on the Bakalanga Students Association, which became the Society for the Promotion of Ikalanga Language in 1980.

Fear of neighbouring white-led governments in Namibia, Rhodesia, and South Africa, as well as the danger of the Angolan Civil War, led Botswana to create a national military in 1977. Prior to this, the Botswana Police Service was responsible for national security. The lack of military meant that Botswana was not susceptible to leading causes of instability in other African nations: military coups and corruption through military spending. The military saw combat the following year when Rhodesian militants attacked Leshoma, killing fifteen soldiers.

In its partnership with De Beers, the government of Botswana formed the Debswana mining company in 1978, acquiring significant income for the state. Mining became the predominant industry of the nation&#x27;s economy over the following decades, and Botswana became the world&#x27;s fastest growing economy. Foreign involvement in the economy became a political issue at this time as outsiders collected on the nation&#x27;s growth while domestic jobs developed slowly. Cattle farming, which had already been affected by a major outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in 1977, lost the significance that it had previously held.

=== Presidency of Quett Masire ===
After Seretse Khama&#x27;s death in 1980, Vice-President Quett Masire became the president of Botswana. Despite concerns about Khama&#x27;s succession, Masire maintained the government infrastructure he helped build and preserved faith in the government. To appease Khama&#x27;s Ngwato tribe and the other northern tribes, Masire appointed Khama&#x27;s cousin, Lenyeletse Seretse, as vice-president. Popular opinion among the Ngwato was that Khama&#x27;s son, Ian Khama, was entitled to the presidency. Upon Lenyeletse&#x27;s death in 1983, Masire selected Peter Mmusi to replace him. This time he selected someone from a southern tribe, so as not to set a precedent that the president and vice-president must always be from opposite regions.

Botswana was part of the Southern African Development Coordination Conference established in 1980 to create a southern African market. The nation was affected by the early 1980s recession. The Jwaneng diamond mine began operation 1982, becoming the most lucrative diamond mine in the world. The University of Botswana was created the same year when it split from the University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland. Legal developments in 1982, the Financial Assistance Policy and the legalisation of commercial activity by civil servants, spurred the nation&#x27;s economy but also loosened regulations that would prevent corruption. As democracy and economic growth proved to be long-term trends, Botswana garnered a reputation as an &quot;African miracle&quot;.

Strong opposition to the BDP-controlled government first arose in the 1980s. Opposition parties began winning local elections, interest groups began forming, and five major anti-BDP newspapers began publication. Previously dependent on support by specific ethnic groups, the BNF gained support among the working class. By the 1984 general election, it was a competitive opposition party.

A severe drought affected Botswana from 1982 to 1987, necessitating government food assistance for about 65% of rural Batswana. Masire&#x27;s critics associated him with this drought as it coincided with the beginning of his presidency, suggesting that Khama had a divine mandate that Masire did not. Mid-way through the 1980s, the diamond industry reached its peak at 53% of the national GDP. By this time, the nation&#x27;s economy became strong enough that citizens were no longer incentivised to opt for subsistence agriculture or migration for work in South Africa. Entrepreneurship became more widespread, particularly among former government workers who moved from the public sector to the private sector. Free secondary education was established in 1989. Trade unions and other special interest groups developed in the 1980s to influence public policy, although the government was often unwilling to acknowledge them. It responded to the burgeoning labour movement by passing heavy restrictions on unions in 1983. The decade also introduced movements for the recognition of minority ethnicities, rejecting the national Tswana identity.

During the 1980s, South Africa began military incursions into Botswana to seek out South African rebels. In response to the civilian casualties, the government of Botswana increased military spending. It also tasked the military with wildlife protection and anti-poaching enforcement in response to the danger posed by armed poachers.

The first case of HIV/AIDS in Botswana was diagnosed in 1985, and over the following decade the country became the most severely affected in the world. Life expectancy in Botswana would drop from 67 to 50 by 1997. A dramatic shift in Botswana&#x27;s health system followed through the 1980s and 1990s; Western medicine grew more widely respected alongside traditional healing, and private hospitals were established to coexist with the government-run facilities.

The early 1990s recession affected Botswana. A landmark constitutional court case brought by Unity Dow ended with a ruling in 1991 that children could inherit citizenship from their mothers as well as their fathers, which was adopted into law with the Citizenship Act of 1995.

The Kgabo Commission was held in 1991 to investigate governmental land boards, and it found that ethical violations had been committed by Vice-President Peter Mmusi and BDP Secretary General Daniel Kwelagobe, both of whom were also members of the Cabinet of Botswana. Facing outrage within the government and among the public, both resigned. The fallout created two polarised factions within the party, one led by the two former cabinet members (the Big Two), and one led by their opponents (the Big Five): Festus Mogae, Bihiti Temane, Chapson Butale, Gaositwe Chiepe, and their leader Mompati Merafhe. This built on tensions that had grown between the southern leadership of the BLP and the new generation of politicians from the north. Masire chose Mogae as the new vice-president.

Worried about the possibility of normalising corruption, Masire hired the deputy head of the Hong Kong Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong) to create a similar organisation in Botswana. The Directorate on Corruption and Economic Crime was created in 1994, and a land board tribunal was created to hear appeals of land board decisions in 1995.

The BDP&#x27;s position as the dominant party received its first serious challenge in light of the Kgabo Commission. The scandal and the resulting schism in the BDP allowed the BNF to become a more competitive opposition party after the 1994 general election. With the added complication of urbanisation reducing the BDP&#x27;s rural base, opposition parties held a significant minority in the National Assembly. Following Mmusi&#x27;s death, Kwelagobe aligned with Ponatshego Kedikilwe, and they formed the Barata-Phathi faction of the BDP. The Big Five developed into the A-Team faction.

Botswana benefited from the end of the South African Apartheid government in 1994, as the new African-led government did not restrict Botswana&#x27;s growth or engage in military operations across the border. As the region stabilised, economic developments like shopping malls, property speculation, and citizen-owned tourism expanded.

The Ngwaketse tribe came into conflict with the government in April 1994, when minister of local government and lands Patrick Balope accused chief Seepapitso IV of failure to fulfil his duties and ordered the chief&#x27;s suspension—the second suspension of Seepapitso&#x27;s rule. Seepapitso&#x27;s son Leema accepted an appointment to the role, against Seepapitso&#x27;s wishes. The tribe wrestled with the issue of Leema&#x27;s ambiguous legitimacy and the fear that tribal culture would not longer be recognised, and the removal became a national issue. Seepapitso filed a legal challenge, and the court ruled on 22 February 1995 that while Seepapitso&#x27;s removal was legal, Leema&#x27;s appointment was not. With the power of appointment returned to the tribe, they refused to choose a new leader as a form of protest. The government then relented and allowed Seepapitso to be reinstated.

The ritual murder of Segametsi Mogomotsi, a 14-year-old girl from Mochudi, took place in November 1994. Social unrest broke out when the suspects, who were wealthy businessmen and politicians, were released for lack of evidence. Over the following months, student-led protests and riots against the use of occult practices like ritual murder to gain wealth took place.

An outbreak of contagious bovine pleuropneumonia in 1995 caused the deaths of 320,000 cattle. The Agriculture Act of 1995 expanded the process of privatising communal land.

Minority tribes increasingly pushed for recognition beginning in the 1990s. The government began the removal of San people from the Central Kalahari Game Reserve in 1995. While it argued that the intention was to help integrate communities that were too remote, and it offered livestock to incentivise cooperation, international organisations accused the government of coercion and forced displacement to make room for mining. The first major legal effort to protect the rights of ethnic minorities came from a 1995 motion in parliament to define the constitution as tribally neutral, but it was tabled. The Kamanakao Association was formed the same year by the academic Lydia Nyati-Ramahobo to protect the rights of the Yeyi people.

A series of governmental and electoral reforms were implemented in the final years of Masire&#x27;s presidency. Election supervision was transferred to an independent body, the voting age was lowered from 21 to 18, postal voting was implemented, and policies were enacted to protect labour rights and gender equality. Masire wished to create a stable order of succession and to ensure that his chosen successor Vice-President Mogae became president, so he worked with the lawyer Parks Tafa to draft a constitutional amendment. This implemented automatic succession and term limits for the presidency. He then forced the amendment through on his own initiative. Reforming the nation&#x27;s economy, a tentative system of tripartism was implemented to bring together government, the private sector, and labour representatives. When the party was selecting its central committee membership in 1997, the risk of factionalism grew severe enough that Masire cancelled its internal election and had the factions give him lists of names.

=== Presidency of Festus Mogae ===

Masire stepped down as president on 1 April 1998, and he was succeeded by Vice-President Festus Mogae. Mogae made the controversial decision to appoint Ian Khama, commander of the army and the son of Seretse Khama, as the next vice-president, passing his choice through by threatening to dissolve parliament. Although they were officially neutral between the factions of the BDP, Mogae and Khama were both understood to be major figures among the A-Team.

1998 saw one of many splits within the BNF opposition party. It had divided into two factions: the conservatives who held socialist beliefs and the progressives who held social democratic beliefs. Violence at the party&#x27;s congress saw progressives split off into their own party, the Botswana Congress Party (BCP), which became the main opposition party until they lost most of their seats in the 1999 election. This division of the opposition, as well as the civil reforms of the previous years, allowed the BDP to regain some of the seats that it lost in 1994. Several southern members of the BCP&#x27;s leadership returned to the BNF after all of the top positions were taken by northerners.

To raise themselves to the level of the Tswana tribes, the Yeyi people named a paramount chief in 1999, but this went unrecognised by the Chieftainship Act. They brought the issue to the Supreme Court, which struck the relevant provision of the law as discriminatory. Mogae established a commission in 2000 to review minority tribes&#x27; representation in the House of Chiefs, which in turn caused protest from those who felt Mogae sought to undermine the power of the chiefs. The commission determined that the House of Chiefs should be retained, and it was renamed to the Setswana &quot;Ntlo ya Dikgosi&quot;. Other proposed changes were not accepted following pushback from the major Tswana tribes, particularly the Ngwato. The following year, the Kgatla-baga-Mmanaana people saw their chief Gobuamang Gobuamang II formally recognised as a minor &quot;kgosi&quot; within the Kwena territory where they reside.

The Botswana–Namibia border came under dispute in 1999 when both countries claimed a territory in the Caprivi Strip. In the 2000s, Botswana invested heavily in the development of an air force. Botswana Television was established in 2000. The Tsodilo Hills became a World Heritage Site in 2001. The San people issued a legal challenge in 2002 to contest their expulsion from the Central Kalahari Game Reserve, but the case was dismissed. Mosadi Seboko of the Lete people became the first female leader of a tribe in 2003. Mogae had one of the government&#x27;s most prominent critics, Kenneth Good, deported in February 2005. The Three Dikgosi Monument was unveiled in 2005.

Mogae considered the nation&#x27;s HIV/AIDS pandemic to be the most important issue during his presidency. To combat it, he made antiretroviral treatments for HIV/AIDS freely available.

=== Presidency of Ian Khama ===
Ian Khama succeeded to the presidency at the end of Mogae&#x27;s term on 1 April 2008. His style of leadership was advertised as following the &quot;four Ds&quot;: democracy, development, dignity, and discipline. After taking office, he restructured the nation&#x27;s executive in a more hierarchical manner, centralising power around the presidency.

Khama placed emphasis on national security in his administration. During his tenure, the Directorate of Intelligence and Security came to be known for politically motivated espionage and arrests against his political opponents. He also appointed several former military figures in his government Botswana was less involved in the African Union during Khama&#x27;s presidency, instead presenting a more Western-orientated foreign policy.

The global financial crisis placed pressure on Botswana&#x27;s economy, which remained dependent on diamond mines despite the government&#x27;s efforts. The diamond industry ended a steady decline when it stabilised at about 39% of the nation&#x27;s GDP in 2009.

Regulation of chiefs was reformed in 2008 with the Bogosi Act. Khama supported devolving power to the chiefs in the name of restoring discipline and traditional morality. He issued a directive that increased the legal drinking age to 21, empowered minor tribal leaders to order floggings, created &quot;mephato&quot; groups to be vigilantes, and reintroduced corporal punishment in schools. Several newly installed chiefs endorsed this policy and implemented stricter punishments for wrongdoers. Among these was Kgafela II, chief of the Kgatla people. To enforce traditional morality among his people, he significantly increased the use of flogging for those who violated the law. Kgafela and others involved were criminally charged for misusing the punishment in 2010, and the court dismissed his claim of immunity, determining that chiefs lack sovereignty and are subject to the constitution.

As the BDP chose its party leadership in 2009, Khama appointed numerous A-Team figures to party sub-committees despite the victory of the Barata-Phathi during the party&#x27;s congress. When the party&#x27;s secretary general Gomolemo Motswaledi consulted with lawyers to question the legality of Khama&#x27;s actions, Khama had him suspended from the committee. After taking the issue to court, it was found that the incumbent president is immune from legal prosecution, and Khama suspended Motswaledi from the BDP entirely. In early 2010, Khama suspended and then expelled several other members of the Barata-Phathi faction from the BDP. This led to the BDP&#x27;s first major split in March when the Barata-Phathi faction left the party to form the Botswana Movement of Democracy.

The Public Service Act took effect in 2010, legalising strikes for civil servants under some circumstances. The following year, the Botswana Federation of Public Sector Unions (BOFEPUSU) led a two-month strike among the nation&#x27;s civil service to demand a 16% pay, and the government responded by removing thousands of employees from their positions. The removals were overseen by Mokgweetsi Masisi, the Minister for Presidential Affairs. To oppose the government&#x27;s position, BOFEPUSU facilitated a merger of major opposition parties into the Umbrella for Democratic Change (UDC). This new group was led by Duma Boko, who had taken charge of the BNF in 2010 and moderated its rhetoric.

Khama implemented strong conservation reforms during his presidency, especially regarding hunting. While applauded internationally and forming the reputation of Botswana as a &quot;green miracle&quot;, they were met with frustration domestically because of the unilateral top-down means they were implemented, especially from those living in the designated conservation areas. These policies included an escalation of military anti-poaching practices; anti-poaching units were equipped with automatic firearms to complement a shoot-to-kill policy against suspected poachers.

The BDP retained its majority in the legislature after the following election, but for the first time it did so with only a plurality of the popular vote. Ian Khama then appointed Masisi as his vice-president. The decision was controversial because of Masisi&#x27;s inexperience relative to other possible choices. According to Mogae, Masisi was chosen with the understanding that he would appoint Tshekedi Khama II as vice-president after taking the presidency himself. Botsalo Ntuane was elected Secretary General of the BDP in 2015 on a platform of anti-corruption and electoral reform. This threatened the entrenched nature of the BDP, and Ntuane found a political rival in Masisi. Khama was hostile to the press, especially toward outlets that disagreed with his administration&#x27;s actions. He had two journalists charged with sedition in 2017, but the chargers were later dropped.

=== Presidency of Mokgweetsi Masisi ===

Masisi became president at the end of Khama&#x27;s term on 1 April 2018. As the 2019 general election approached, Masisi developed an image to contrast himself from Khama, presenting himself as an anti-corruption figure while supporting the media and BOFEPUSU. His anti-corruption drive resulted in the arrest of Isaac Kgosi, who had led the Directorate of Intelligence and Security in Khama&#x27;s administration.

Masisi proceeded to reverse many of Khama&#x27;s policies. Among these were the repeal of conservation policies, including a controversial hunting ban that targeted the ivory trade. He also oversaw the decriminalisation of homosexuality. As this developed, Masisi and Khama became rivals instead of allies. Khama attempted to recruit Pelonomi Venson-Moitoi as an alternative BDP candidate against Masisi, and when that failed, he founded his own party, the Botswana Patriotic Front (BPF).

The BDP reclaimed a majority of the popular vote in 2019, but the election was marred by government pressure and occasional raids against opposition figures. The UDC challenged the results, but they were unsuccessful. Regional trends shifted in 2019 as the BDP lost some of its support in the north while increasing its influence in the south. The election also saw the primary opposition party, the BNF, lose ground to the BCP.

Like most nations, Botswana saw major economic decline during the COVID-19 pandemic, and the country stayed in lockdown for much of 2020 and 2021. The SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant was discovered in Botswana later in 2021. Anti-Indian sentiment became widespread as the Indian community in Botswana was relatively wealthy.

Khama fled to South Africa in exile in November 2021, and the government of Botswana charged him with illegal ownership of weapons soon after.

=== Presidency of Duma Boko ===
The UDC became the first opposition party in Botswana to take power following its victory in the 2024 general election, ending 58 years of rule by the BDP.

==See also==

*Bibliography of Botswana
*Culture of Botswana
*Demographics of Botswana
*Economy of Botswana
*Geography of Botswana
*History of Africa
*History of Southern Africa
*History of Gaborone
*List of Botswana-related topics
*List of years in Botswana
*Outline of Botswana
*Timeline of Botswana
*Timeline of Gaborone
*Politics of Botswana
==Footnotes==
==References==
=== Books ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Journals ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Oxford Research Encyclopedia ===
* 

=== Web ===

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="15" end="23" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="106" end="131" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate" label="Bechuanaland Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="228" end="238" title="San people" label="San people"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="313" end="326" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="351" end="364" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana people"/>
<link wikidata="Q865081" start="542" end="550" title="Difaqane" label="Difaqane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344487" start="583" end="599" title="European exploration of Africa" label="European contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="641" end="657" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="694" end="718" title="German South West Africa" label="German South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="727" end="737" title="Afrikaners" label="Afrikaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="803" end="815" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969928" start="1166" end="1201" title="British Empire in World War II" label="British involvement in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603293" start="1233" end="1264" title="African Auxiliary Pioneer Corps" label="African Auxiliary Pioneer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628797" start="1320" end="1326" title="Ngwato" label="Ngwato"/>
<link wikidata="Q219962" start="1333" end="1346" title="Seretse Khama" label="Seretse Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849606" start="1362" end="1376" title="Tshekedi Khama" label="Tshekedi Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383270" start="1420" end="1439" title="Ruth Williams Khama" label="Ruth Williams Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="1724" end="1753" title="Bechuanaland Democratic Party" label="Bechuanaland Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878577" start="1866" end="1880" title="1965 Bechuanaland general election" label="first election"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="2012" end="2029" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q539206" start="2236" end="2244" title="Debswana" label="Debswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629825" start="2347" end="2364" title="HIV/AIDS in Botswana" label="HIV/AIDS pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="2451" end="2468" title="political faction" label="political faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447301" start="2509" end="2525" title="Kgabo Commission" label="Kgabo Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="2685" end="2694" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618891" start="2724" end="2741" title="Mokgweetsi Masisi" label="Mokgweetsi Masisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="2885" end="2894" title="Acheulean" label="Acheulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="2935" end="2947" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="2957" end="2975" title="early modern human" label="early modern human"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="3003" end="3018" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3058" end="3080" title="Marine Isotope Stage 6" label="Marine Isotope Stage 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3101" end="3116" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="Hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="3147" end="3156" title="paleolake" label="paleolake"/>
<link wikidata="Q649771" start="3158" end="3175" title="Lake Makgadikgadi" label="Lake Makgadikgadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q214007" start="3188" end="3195" title="Tsodilo" label="Tsodilo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3200" end="3203" title="≠Gi" label="≠Gi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="3239" end="3247" title="Rock art" label="Rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="3435" end="3444" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="3504" end="3519" title="Khoisan peoples" label="Khoisan peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="3602" end="3612" title="San people" label="San people"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="3632" end="3643" title="Khoe people" label="Khoe people"/>
<link wikidata="Q50840653" start="3917" end="3929" title="pearl millet" label="pearl millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q932258" start="3931" end="3944" title="finger millet" label="finger millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="3946" end="3953" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q338219" start="3955" end="3972" title="Bambara groundnut" label="Bambara groundnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q498940" start="3975" end="3981" title="cowpea" label="cowpea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8314" start="3988" end="3996" title="Cucurbitaceae" label="cucurbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166535" start="4062" end="4078" title="Kgalagadi people" label="Kgalagadi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="4101" end="4113" title="Bantu people" label="Bantu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="4171" end="4184" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4425" end="4439" title="Taukome people" label="Taukome people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435588" start="4516" end="4526" title="glass bead" label="glass bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021159" start="4558" end="4576" title="Indian Ocean trade" label="Indian Ocean trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4769" end="4775" title="morafe" label="morafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398734" start="4846" end="4851" title="kgosi" label="kgosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="5243" end="5258" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5357" end="5371" title="Toutswe people" label="Toutswe people"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="5514" end="5525" title="Specularite" label="Specularite"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223093" start="6080" end="6100" title="Leopard&amp;#x27;s Kopje" label="Leopard&amp;#x27;s Kopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q98085401" start="6117" end="6138" title="Kingdom of Mapungubwe" label="Kingdom of Mapungubwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q209217" start="6280" end="6294" title="Great Zimbabwe" label="Great Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q986881" start="6541" end="6557" title="Kingdom of Butua" label="Kingdom of Butua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193813" start="6573" end="6587" title="Kalanga people" label="Kalanga people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6625" end="6649" title="Botswana–Zimbabwe border" label="Botswana–Zimbabwe border"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782407" start="7001" end="7016" title="Motloutse River" label="Motloutse River"/>
<link wikidata="Q533041" start="7025" end="7041" title="Makgadikgadi Pan" label="Makgadikgadi Pan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7070" end="7078" title="Hurutshe people" label="Hurutshe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563990" start="7080" end="7086" title="Kgatla people" label="Kgatla"/>
<link wikidata="Q804468" start="7092" end="7097" title="Kwena people" label="Kwena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7121" end="7134" title="Phofu dynasty" label="Phofu dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q170088" start="7399" end="7405" title="Herero people" label="Herero"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072693" start="7410" end="7418" title="Mbanderu people" label="Mbanderu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077462" start="7442" end="7455" title="Mbunda people" label="Mbunda people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205797" start="7556" end="7567" title="Yeyi people" label="Yeyi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q182942" start="7592" end="7603" title="Chobe River" label="Chobe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q650872" start="7613" end="7627" title="Okavango Delta" label="Okavango Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547060" start="8036" end="8049" title="Griqua people" label="Griqua people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855641" start="8093" end="8109" title="Ngwaketse people" label="Ngwaketse people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628797" start="8190" end="8203" title="Ngwato people" label="Ngwato people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8213" end="8226" title="Tawana people" label="Tawana people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8300" end="8307" title="mophato" label="mophato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8458" end="8472" title="Kgafela people" label="Kgafela people"/>
<link wikidata="Q353971" start="8481" end="8494" title="Tlokwa people" label="Tlokwa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193753" start="8570" end="8581" title="Pilanesberg" label="Pilanesberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8693" end="8706" title="Fokeng people" label="Fokeng people"/>
<link wikidata="Q865081" start="8877" end="8885" title="Difaqane" label="Difaqane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211360" start="9097" end="9104" title="Northern Ndebele people" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779570" start="9110" end="9116" title="Kololo people" label="Kololo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109664" start="9122" end="9127" title="Ngoni people" label="Ngoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265850" start="9133" end="9137" title="Pedi people" label="Pedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q338949" start="9147" end="9158" title="Voortrekker" label="Voortrekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433901" start="9441" end="9449" title="hardveld" label="hardveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="9560" end="9569" title="South African Republic" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9670" end="9685" title="Mmanaana people" label="Mmanaana people"/>
<link wikidata="Q170660" start="9759" end="9766" title="Moshupa" label="Moshupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38902" start="9771" end="9778" title="Thamaga" label="Thamaga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10003" end="10009" title="Sebogo" label="Sebogo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10107" end="10118" title="Dithubaruba" label="Dithubaruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q859645" start="10390" end="10396" title="kgotla" label="kgotla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="10642" end="10667" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q384766" start="10795" end="10808" title="Robert Moffat (missionary)" label="Robert Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="10896" end="10901" title="Boers" label="Boers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="11102" end="11105" title="Old Testament" label="Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="11110" end="11123" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11306" end="11312" title="mafisa" label="mafisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="11419" end="11435" title="private property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475748" start="11948" end="11957" title="Sechele I" label="Sechele I"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="12093" end="12110" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13848095" start="12165" end="12181" title="Kolobeng Mission" label="Kolobeng Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072723" start="13406" end="13417" title="travel book" label="travel book"/>
<link wikidata="Q55887895" start="13660" end="13675" title="Tati Goldfields" label="Tati Goldfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="13847" end="13860" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q193250" start="13865" end="13873" title="Bulawayo" label="Bulawayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165422" start="13918" end="13929" title="Francistown" label="Francistown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078487" start="14091" end="14100" title="Khama III" label="Khama III"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="14343" end="14368" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate" label="Bechuanaland Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="14543" end="14567" title="German South West Africa" label="German South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="14576" end="14586" title="Afrikaners" label="Afrikaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q716815" start="14650" end="14669" title="settler colonialism" label="settler colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825" start="14768" end="14780" title="Cecil Rhodes" label="Cecil Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473816" start="14930" end="14940" title="crown land" label="crown land"/>
<link wikidata="Q353971" start="15214" end="15220" title="Tlokwa people" label="Tlokwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850731" start="15230" end="15236" title="Malete people" label="Malete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15254" end="15260" title="Tshidi people" label="Tshidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q546793" start="15850" end="15862" title="Molopo River" label="Molopo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q182942" start="15917" end="15928" title="Chobe River" label="Chobe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q615877" start="16195" end="16202" title="Mochudi" label="Mochudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q74338" start="16339" end="16353" title="Charles Warren" label="Charles Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027291" start="16648" end="16655" title="Vryburg" label="Vryburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q918320" start="18031" end="18059" title="British South Africa Company" label="British South Africa Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15431052" start="18136" end="18144" title="Sebele I" label="Sebele I"/>
<link wikidata="Q54859880" start="18163" end="18172" title="Bathoen I" label="Bathoen I"/>
<link wikidata="Q916340" start="18512" end="18524" title="Jameson Raid" label="Jameson Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q390248" start="18796" end="18809" title="founding myth" label="founding myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q211055" start="18958" end="18966" title="Mafeking" label="Mafeking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18976" end="18997" title="Ancient Ruins Company" label="Ancient Ruins Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q97163433" start="19135" end="19169" title="1890s African rinderpest epizootic" label="1890s African rinderpest epizootic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932845" start="19350" end="19364" title="Pioneer Column" label="Pioneer Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078487" start="19403" end="19412" title="Khama III" label="Khama III"/>
<link wikidata="Q916340" start="19498" end="19510" title="Jameson Raid" label="Jameson Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="19559" end="19567" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845798" start="19904" end="19911" title="hut tax" label="hut tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q721368" start="19950" end="19958" title="poll tax" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593116" start="20316" end="20353" title="South Africa Act 1909" label="unified its southern African colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344350" start="20415" end="20442" title="South African Customs Union" label="South African Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20670" end="20681" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q125213832" start="20807" end="20816" title="Sebele II" label="Sebele II"/>
<link wikidata="Q125130942" start="20875" end="20885" title="Sechele II" label="Sechele II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21073" end="21080" title="bogwera" label="bogwera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447152" start="21833" end="21843" title="Sekgoma II" label="Sekgoma II"/>
<link wikidata="Q219962" start="21904" end="21917" title="Seretse Khama" label="Seretse Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849606" start="21942" end="21956" title="Tshekedi Khama" label="Tshekedi Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258534" start="22107" end="22124" title="liberal education" label="liberal education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22252" end="22264" title="Isang Pilane" label="Isang Pilane"/>
<link wikidata="Q502102" start="22384" end="22392" title="borehole" label="borehole"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="22649" end="22659" title="privatised" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23000" end="23011" title="Charles Rey" label="Charles Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q116908137" start="23757" end="23767" title="Bathoen II" label="Bathoen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q326531" start="24131" end="24151" title="Charles Arden-Clarke" label="Charles Arden-Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="24782" end="24798" title="emergency powers" label="emergency powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q44812190" start="25476" end="25497" title="Native Military Corps" label="Native Military Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561101" start="26081" end="26093" title="Profiteering" label="Profiteering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253693" start="26098" end="26111" title="price gouging" label="price gouging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="26176" end="26189" title="price control" label="price control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046626" start="26204" end="26230" title="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement" label="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26268" end="26293" title="Colonial Development Fund" label="Colonial Development Fund"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26404" end="26460" title="Control of Livestock Industry Proclamation No. 1 of 1940" label="Control of Livestock Industry Proclamation No. 1 of 1940"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26583" end="26608" title="European Advisory Council" label="European Advisory Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603293" start="27271" end="27302" title="African Auxiliary Pioneer Corps" label="African Auxiliary Pioneer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="27346" end="27355" title="conscript" label="conscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q650872" start="27737" end="27751" title="Okavango Delta" label="Okavango Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q859385" start="27767" end="27781" title="Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park" label="Kgalagadi bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q125263709" start="28678" end="28694" title="Kgari Sechele II" label="Kgari Sechele II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28712" end="28725" title="Molefi Pilane" label="Molefi Pilane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479611" start="28777" end="28803" title="regimental sergeant majors" label="regimental sergeant majors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29046" end="29080" title="High Commissions Territories Corps" label="High Commissions Territories Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="29469" end="29476" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722724" start="29774" end="29800" title="mid-20th century baby boom" label="mid-20th century baby boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="29864" end="29879" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q385557" start="29968" end="29982" title="slaughterhouse" label="slaughterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="30122" end="30131" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q654342" start="30332" end="30368" title="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland" label="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383270" start="30591" end="30604" title="Ruth Williams Khama" label="Ruth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31466" end="31483" title="Rasebolai Kgamane" label="Rasebolai Kgamane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32750" end="32789" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate Federal Party" label="Bechuanaland Protectorate Federal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439484" start="32894" end="32918" title="Leetile Disang Raditladi" label="Leetile Disang Raditladi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893988" start="33103" end="33135" title="Bechuanaland People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Bechuanaland People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058310" start="33318" end="33331" title="Motsamai Mpho" label="Motsamai Mpho"/>
<link wikidata="Q56823570" start="33333" end="33347" title="Philip Matante" label="Philip Matante"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33353" end="33370" title="Kgalemang Morsete" label="Kgalemang Morsete"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="33420" end="33445" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q125343194" start="33870" end="33883" title="Neale Sechele" label="Neale Sechele"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33993" end="34045" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate Development Plan 1963/1968" label="Bechuanaland Protectorate Development Plan 1963/1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="34667" end="34696" title="Bechuanaland Democratic Party" label="Bechuanaland Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q859599" start="35999" end="36014" title="Ntlo ya Dikgosi" label="House of Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918998" start="36044" end="36066" title="Parliament of Botswana" label="Parliament of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="36182" end="36195" title="no confidence" label="no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919" start="36505" end="36513" title="Gaborone" label="Gaborone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592128" start="36665" end="36681" title="Constitution of Botswana" label="The constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36828" end="36849" title="District Councils Act of 1965" label="District Councils Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787879" start="37002" end="37027" title="National Development Bank of Botswana" label="National Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q390056" start="37068" end="37099" title="Bechuanaland Independence Party" label="Bechuanaland Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q310574" start="37140" end="37152" title="Quett Masire" label="Quett Masire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878577" start="37235" end="37257" title="1965 Bechuanaland general election" label="first general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310801" start="37528" end="37551" title="Botswana National Front" label="Botswana National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q47537349" start="37617" end="37629" title="Kenneth Koma" label="Kenneth Koma"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="38304" end="38321" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="38379" end="38392" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="38467" end="38479" title="technocratic" label="technocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="38541" end="38559" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714378" start="40732" end="40746" title="abject poverty" label="abject poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="40798" end="40817" title="subsistence farmers" label="subsistence farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="40970" end="40990" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q190354" start="41111" end="41120" title="Bantustan" label="Bantustan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41957" end="41982" title="Chieftainship Act of 1966" label="Chieftainship Act of 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948897" start="42336" end="42360" title="Botswana Meat Commission" label="Botswana Meat Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="43541" end="43555" title="Public welfare" label="Public welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q192523" start="43754" end="43767" title="Dutch disease" label="Dutch disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="43885" end="43900" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="43928" end="43935" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q859757" start="44045" end="44059" title="Vice-President of Botswana" label="Vice-President"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44203" end="44229" title="National Development Plan (Botswana)" label="National Development Plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="44538" end="44546" title="De Beers" label="De Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q141263" start="44614" end="44627" title="Selebi-Phikwe" label="Selebi-Phikwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344350" start="44833" end="44863" title="Southern African Customs Union" label="Southern African Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045624" start="44944" end="44952" title="Morupule" label="Morupule"/>
<link wikidata="Q859817" start="45048" end="45066" title="Orapa diamond mine" label="Orapa diamond mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q859708" start="45081" end="45086" title="Orapa" label="Orapa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45353" end="45362" title="Water Act (Botswana)" label="Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45371" end="45386" title="Tribal Land Act" label="Tribal Land Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45422" end="45447" title="Water Apportionment Board" label="Water Apportionment Board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45459" end="45470" title="Land board (Botswana)" label="land boards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45687" end="45714" title="Tribal Grazing Lands Policy" label="Tribal Grazing Lands Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="45750" end="45761" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948956" start="45916" end="45949" title="1969 Botswana general election" label="first election after independence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46214" end="46246" title="Botswana Development Corporation" label="Botswana Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q859817" start="46276" end="46294" title="Orapa diamond mine" label="Orapa diamond mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="46360" end="46363" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415386" start="46927" end="46944" title="wealth inequality" label="wealth inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="47174" end="47185" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48130" end="48144" title="Shashe Project" label="Shashe Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398742" start="48351" end="48364" title="Seepapitso IV" label="Seepapitso IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948959" start="48491" end="48504" title="1974 Botswana general election" label="1974 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="48506" end="48518" title="Minimum wage" label="Minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q186794" start="48597" end="48610" title="Botswana pula" label="Botswana pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q859830" start="48621" end="48637" title="Bank of Botswana" label="Bank of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48647" end="48660" title="Quill Hermans" label="Quill Hermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q181907" start="48724" end="48742" title="South African rand" label="South African rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="48999" end="49010" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49096" end="49106" title="Linchwe II" label="Linchwe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563990" start="49121" end="49134" title="Kgatla people" label="Kgatla people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49929" end="49975" title="Society for the Promotion of Ikalanga Language" label="Society for the Promotion of Ikalanga Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055176" start="50098" end="50115" title="Angolan Civil War" label="Angolan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q740258" start="50140" end="50159" title="Botswana Defence Force" label="a national military"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948909" start="50188" end="50211" title="Botswana Police Service" label="Botswana Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50505" end="50512" title="Leshoma" label="Leshoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q539206" start="50613" end="50621" title="Debswana" label="Debswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q152401" start="51081" end="51103" title="foot-and-mouth disease" label="foot-and-mouth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998650" start="51561" end="51579" title="Lenyeletse Seretse" label="Lenyeletse Seretse"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="51660" end="51669" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298758" start="51757" end="51768" title="Peter Mmusi" label="Peter Mmusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654456" start="51969" end="52021" title="Southern African Development Coordination Conference" label="Southern African Development Coordination Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326569" start="52110" end="52131" title="early 1980s recession" label="early 1980s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160014" start="52137" end="52157" title="Jwaneng diamond mine" label="Jwaneng diamond mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q493141" start="52239" end="52261" title="University of Botswana" label="University of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042603" start="52311" end="52356" title="University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland" label="University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630228" start="53033" end="53054" title="1984 Botswana general election" label="1984 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="53604" end="53627" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="53667" end="53683" title="Entrepreneurship" label="Entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="53772" end="53785" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="53793" end="53807" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="53814" end="53833" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="53859" end="53870" title="Trade union" label="Trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504350" start="53882" end="53904" title="special interest group" label="special interest group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629825" start="54595" end="54615" title="HIV/AIDS in Botswana" label="HIV/AIDS in Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="54729" end="54744" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394220" start="55045" end="55066" title="early 1990s recession" label="early 1990s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818627" start="55086" end="55122" title="Attorney General of Botswana v. Unity Dow" label="A landmark constitutional court case"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945158" start="55134" end="55143" title="Unity Dow" label="Unity Dow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55293" end="55316" title="Citizenship Act of 1995" label="Citizenship Act of 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447301" start="55323" end="55339" title="Kgabo Commission" label="Kgabo Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217839" start="55510" end="55526" title="Daniel Kwelagobe" label="Daniel Kwelagobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048312" start="55566" end="55585" title="Cabinet of Botswana" label="Cabinet of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q193238" start="55826" end="55838" title="Festus Mogae" label="Festus Mogae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55840" end="55853" title="Bihiti Temane" label="Bihiti Temane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55855" end="55869" title="Chapson Butale" label="Chapson Butale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493809" start="55871" end="55886" title="Gaositwe Chiepe" label="Gaositwe Chiepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436517" start="55905" end="55920" title="Mompati Merafhe" label="Mompati Merafhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30999" start="56207" end="56260" title="Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong)" label="Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123162020" start="56311" end="56355" title="Directorate on Corruption and Economic Crime" label="Directorate on Corruption and Economic Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722325" start="56702" end="56723" title="1994 Botswana general election" label="1994 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139832" start="56931" end="56951" title="Ponatshego Kedikilwe" label="Ponatshego Kedikilwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="57318" end="57331" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q186582" start="57334" end="57354" title="property speculation" label="property speculation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57511" end="57525" title="Patrick Balope" label="Patrick Balope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57697" end="57702" title="Leema" label="Leema"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="58295" end="58308" title="ritual murder" label="ritual murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938048" start="58312" end="58331" title="Segametsi Mogomotsi" label="Segametsi Mogomotsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q615877" start="58357" end="58364" title="Mochudi" label="Mochudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q574005" start="58676" end="58709" title="contagious bovine pleuropneumonia" label="contagious bovine pleuropneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58759" end="58782" title="Agriculture Act of 1995" label="Agriculture Act of 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q194732" start="58967" end="58996" title="Central Kalahari Game Reserve" label="Central Kalahari Game Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="59217" end="59236" title="forced displacement" label="forced displacement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59506" end="59526" title="Lydia Nyati-Ramahobo" label="Lydia Nyati-Ramahobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205797" start="59556" end="59567" title="Yeyi people" label="Yeyi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q15044040" start="59785" end="59798" title="postal voting" label="postal voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="59853" end="59866" title="labour rights" label="labour rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="59871" end="59886" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="59921" end="59940" title="order of succession" label="order of succession"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60049" end="60059" title="Parks Tafa" label="Parks Tafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="60139" end="60149" title="term limit" label="term limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547600" start="60290" end="60300" title="tripartism" label="tripartism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894021" start="61381" end="61404" title="Botswana Congress Party" label="Botswana Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722326" start="61490" end="61507" title="1999 Botswana general election" label="the 1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62589" end="62611" title="Gobuamang Gobuamang II" label="Gobuamang Gobuamang II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089002" start="62712" end="62735" title="Botswana–Namibia border" label="Botswana–Namibia border"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="62810" end="62823" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948927" start="62901" end="62920" title="Botswana Television" label="Botswana Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="62973" end="62992" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915286" start="63145" end="63158" title="Mosadi Seboko" label="Mosadi Seboko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850731" start="63166" end="63177" title="Lete people" label="Lete people"/>
<link wikidata="Q16093758" start="63292" end="63304" title="Kenneth Good (political scientist)" label="Kenneth Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797448" start="63337" end="63359" title="Three Dikgosi Monument" label="Three Dikgosi Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q583050" start="63512" end="63526" title="antiretroviral" label="antiretroviral"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320008" start="64043" end="64083" title="Directorate of Intelligence and Security" label="Directorate of Intelligence and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="64284" end="64297" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="64396" end="64419" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="global financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937735" start="64707" end="64717" title="Bogosi Act" label="Bogosi Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060630" start="65015" end="65045" title="corporal punishment in schools" label="corporal punishment in schools"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65168" end="65178" title="Kgafela II" label="Kgafela II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581224" start="65778" end="65797" title="Gomolemo Motswaledi" label="Gomolemo Motswaledi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66304" end="66334" title="Botswana Movement of Democracy" label="Botswana Movement of Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66469" end="66512" title="Botswana Federation of Public Sector Unions" label="Botswana Federation of Public Sector Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618891" start="66722" end="66739" title="Mokgweetsi Masisi" label="Mokgweetsi Masisi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66745" end="66778" title="Minister for Presidential Affairs (Botswana)" label="Minister for Presidential Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347306" start="66889" end="66919" title="Umbrella for Democratic Change" label="Umbrella for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618881" start="66953" end="66962" title="Duma Boko" label="Duma Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q17494283" start="67664" end="67686" title="2014 Botswana general election" label="the following election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849607" start="68007" end="68024" title="Tshekedi Khama II" label="Tshekedi Khama II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68080" end="68094" title="Botsalo Ntuane" label="Botsalo Ntuane"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="68444" end="68452" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q60713425" start="68621" end="68642" title="2019 Botswana general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741353" start="68738" end="68753" title="anti-corruption" label="anti-corruption"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68854" end="68865" title="Isaac Kgosi" label="Isaac Kgosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820248" start="69126" end="69137" title="ivory trade" label="ivory trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161670" start="69291" end="69313" title="Pelonomi Venson-Moitoi" label="Pelonomi Venson-Moitoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q72976241" start="69414" end="69438" title="Botswana Patriotic Front" label="Botswana Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q89164046" start="69896" end="69960" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Botswana" label="Botswana saw major economic decline during the COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87866152" start="69985" end="69996" title="COVID-19 lockdowns" label="in lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q109739412" start="70028" end="70054" title="SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant" label="SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845748" start="70097" end="70118" title="Anti-Indian sentiment" label="Anti-Indian sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449433" start="70471" end="70492" title="2024 Botswana general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128395428" start="70546" end="70570" title="Bibliography of Botswana" label="Bibliography of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q615952" start="70572" end="70591" title="Culture of Botswana" label="Culture of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595400" start="70593" end="70617" title="Demographics of Botswana" label="Demographics of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333386" start="70619" end="70638" title="Economy of Botswana" label="Economy of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777198" start="70640" end="70661" title="Geography of Botswana" label="Geography of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="70663" end="70680" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q116158749" start="70682" end="70708" title="History of Southern Africa" label="History of Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864638" start="70710" end="70729" title="History of Gaborone" label="History of Gaborone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564486" start="70731" end="70762" title="List of Botswana-related topics" label="List of Botswana-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181523" start="70764" end="70789" title="List of years in Botswana" label="List of years in Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112207" start="70791" end="70810" title="Outline of Botswana" label="Outline of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q122452312" start="70812" end="70832" title="Timeline of Botswana" label="Timeline of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160219" start="70834" end="70854" title="Timeline of Gaborone" label="Timeline of Gaborone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148224" start="70856" end="70876" title="Politics of Botswana" label="Politics of Botswana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3613" wikidata="Q1777198" url="?curid=3613" title="Geography of Botswana">
<text>[[Botswana]] is a landlocked country located in Southern Africa, north of South Africa. Botswana occupies an area of , of which are land. Botswana has land boundaries of combined length , of which the constituent boundaries are shared with Namibia, for ; South Africa ; Zimbabwe, and Zambia, . Much of the population of Botswana is concentrated in the eastern part of the country.

Sunshine totals are high all year round although winter is the sunniest period. The whole country is windy and dusty during the dry season.

==Area data==
; Area:
:* Total: 581,730 km²
:**&quot;country rank in the world:&quot; 48th
:* Land: 566,730 km²
:* Water: 15,000 km²

; Area comparative
:* Australia comparative: approximately the size of New South Wales
:* Canada comparative: approximately smaller than Saskatchewan
:* United Kingdom comparative: approximately 2 times the size of the United Kingdom
:* United States comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Arizona
:* EU comparative: slightly larger than Metropolitan France

==Geography==
The land is predominantly flat to gently undulating tableland, although there is some hilly country, where mining is carried out. The Kalahari Desert is in the central and the southwest. The Okavango Delta, one of the world&#x27;s largest inland deltas, is in the northwest and the Makgadikgadi Pans, a large salt pan lies in the north-central area. The Makgadikgadi has been established as an early habitation area for primitive man; This large seasonal wetland is composed of several large component pans, the largest being Nwetwe Pan, Sua Pan and Nxai Pan. Botswana&#x27;s lowest elevation point is at the junction of the Limpopo and Shashe Rivers, at a height of . The highest point is Monalanong Hill, at .
The country is divided into four drainage regions, which are sometimes indistinct due to the arid nature of the climate:
* the Chobe River on the border with the Caprivi Strip of Namibia together with a small adjacent swampy area is part of the Zambezi basin;
* most of the north and central region of the country is part of the Okavango inland drainage basin;
* the easternmost part of the country falls into the Limpopo drainage basin;
* the southern and southwestern regions, which are the driest of all, are drained by the Molopo river along the South African border and the Nossob river through the Kalahari Gemsbok National Park, and are technically part of the basin of the Orange River. None of these rivers normally flows as far as the Orange, however. (The last recorded confluence was in the 1880s.)
Except for the Chobe, Okavango, Boteti and Limpopo rivers, most of Botswana&#x27;s rivers cease to flow during the dry and early rainy seasons.

In Botswana forest cover is around 27% of the total land area, equivalent to 15,254,700 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 18,803,700 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 15,254,700 hectares, of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 11% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 24% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership and 76% private ownership.

==Climate==
Botswana is semi-arid, due to the short rain season. However, the relatively high altitude of the country and its continental situation gives it a subtropical climate. The country is remote from moisture-laden air flows for most of the year. The dry season lasts from April to October in the south and to November in the north where rainfall totals are higher. The south of the country is most exposed to cold winds during the winter period (early May to late August) when average temperatures are around . The whole country has hot summers with average temperatures around . Sunshine totals are high all year round although winter is the sunniest period. The whole country is windy and dusty during the dry season.

==Natural hazards==
Botswana is affected by periodic droughts, and seasonal August winds blow from the west, carrying sand and dust, which can obscure visibility.

==Environment==
Current environmental issues in Botswana are overgrazing, desertification and the existence of only limited fresh water resources.

Research from scientists has found that the common practice of overstocking cattle to cope with drought losses actually depletes scarce biomass, making ecosystems more vulnerable. The study of the district predicts that by 2050 the cycle of mild drought is likely to become shorter —18 months instead of two years—due to climate change.

==International agreements==
Botswana is a party to the following international agreements: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Organization, Ozone Layer Protection and Wetlands.

== Extreme points ==

This is a list of the extreme points of Botswana, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

* Northernmost point – the border with Zambia upon the Zambezi River at Chobe District
* Easternmost point – the tripoint with South Africa and Zimbabwe, Central District
* Southernmost point – Bokspits, Kgalagadi District
* Westernmost point – the western section of the border with Namibia*
** &quot;note: Botswana does not have a westernmost point as the western section is formed by the 22nd meridian of longitude east of Greenwich.&quot;

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1777198" start="0" end="12" title="Geography of Botswana" label="[[Botswana]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="57" end="63" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="74" end="86" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="88" end="96" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="240" end="247" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="270" end="278" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="284" end="290" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="728" end="743" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="794" end="806" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="958" end="965" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="969" end="971" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="1006" end="1025" title="Metropolitan France" label="Metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="1093" end="1102" title="Plateaus" label="tableland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099100" start="1148" end="1154" title="Mining industry of Botswana" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="1175" end="1190" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q650872" start="1232" end="1246" title="Okavango Delta" label="Okavango Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q533041" start="1323" end="1340" title="Makgadikgadi Pans" label="Makgadikgadi Pans"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="1350" end="1358" title="Salt pan (geology)" label="salt pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="1496" end="1503" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070742" start="1567" end="1577" title="Nwetwe Pan" label="Nwetwe Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630419" start="1579" end="1586" title="Sua Pan" label="Sua Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070747" start="1591" end="1599" title="Nxai Pan" label="Nxai Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="1666" end="1673" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897936" start="1731" end="1746" title="Monalanong Hill" label="Monalanong Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q182942" start="1880" end="1891" title="Chobe River" label="Chobe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="1915" end="1928" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="1998" end="2005" title="Zambezi" label="Zambezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103385" start="2082" end="2090" title="Okavango Basin" label="Okavango"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="2098" end="2112" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134907" start="2167" end="2174" title="Limpopo" label="Limpopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q546793" start="2280" end="2286" title="Molopo River" label="Molopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139868" start="2332" end="2344" title="Nossob River" label="Nossob river"/>
<link wikidata="Q859385" start="2357" end="2387" title="Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park" label="Kalahari Gemsbok National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="2434" end="2446" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q859594" start="2596" end="2602" title="Boteti" label="Boteti"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="2607" end="2620" title="Limpopo river" label="Limpopo river"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="2721" end="2733" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="3001" end="3015" title="primary forest" label="primary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="3241" end="3257" title="State ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="3266" end="3283" title="Private property" label="private ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="4240" end="4251" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="4253" end="4268" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4390" end="4409" title="Grazing#Disadvantages" label="overstocking cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="4463" end="4470" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="4648" end="4662" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="4985" end="4993" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="5115" end="5121" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="5131" end="5144" title="Zambezi River" label="Zambezi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q165536" start="5148" end="5162" title="Chobe District" label="Chobe District"/>
<link wikidata="Q316655" start="5189" end="5197" title="tripoint" label="tripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="5203" end="5215" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="5220" end="5228" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57525" start="5230" end="5246" title="Central District (Botswana)" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q170665" start="5270" end="5278" title="Bokspits" label="Bokspits"/>
<link wikidata="Q57581" start="5280" end="5298" title="Kgalagadi District" label="Kgalagadi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="5360" end="5367" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3614" wikidata="Q2595400" url="?curid=3614" title="Demographics of Botswana">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Botswana include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.

Botswana, like many nations in southern Africa, suffers from a high HIV infection rate, estimated among adults ages 15 to 49 to be 20.7%.

==Population==

===Census results===

====Bechuanaland Protectorate====
The seven censuses of Botswana before its independence happened irregularly. Due to the Anglo-Boer War, the first census of Bechuanaland Protectorate, originally set to occur in 1901, took place on 17 April 1904. The 1931 census was postponed to 1936 because of the Great Depression. The early censuses were unreliable and took several years to tabulate; the results were outdated by the time they were calculated.

====Post-independence====
There have been six censuses after the independence of Botswana, each occurring every ten years in the year ending in 1 (i.e. 1971, 1981, 1991, 2001, 2011 and 2022). The 1971 census was the first census in Botswana to use de facto enumeration; this method counts people based on how many people spent census night at a specific location. Previously, the citizens were counted based on their usual place of residence. The 2001 census was the first census in Botswana to comply with the SADC 2000 Census Project, the guidelines of which unify the demographic statistics in southern Africa. The 2011 Census was the fifth census after independence the 2011 Botswana Population and Housing Census, it occurred in August 2011. The most recent sixth and most recent census is the 2022 Population and Housing Census which was carried out in April 2022.

===UN estimates===
According to the total population was in , compared to only 413,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2020 was about 33.4%, 62.1% were between 15 and 65 years of age, while 4.5% of the population were 65 years or older.




==Vital statistics==

=== United Nations estimates ===
Registration of vital events in Botswana is not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates. Population estimates account for under numeration in population censuses.
=== Registered births and deaths===
Source: Vital Statistics Report 2012.

===Life expectancy at birth===
Life expectancy from 1950 to 2020 (&quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;):



==Ethnic groups==

:Tswana 79%, Kalanga 11%, Basarwa 3%, Other 7% (including Kgalagadi, Indians and Whites).

==Languages==

Setswana 77.3%, Kalanga 7.4%, Sekgalagadi 3.4%, English 2.8%, Shona 2.0%, Sesarwa 1.7%, Sehambukushu 1.6%, Ndebele 1.0%, Others 2.8%. (2011 est.)

==Religions==

: Christian 79.1%, Badimo 4.1%, Other 1.4% (includes the Baháʼí Faith, Hindu, Islam, Rastafari), None 15.2%, Unspecified 0.3% (2011 est.)

==Migrants==

According to the United Nations, there were 110,596 international migrants in Botswana in 2019. Their most common countries of origin were as follows:

==References==


*Botswana Demographics 2001 Central Statistics Office (Botswana), Census and Demographic Statistics for the year 2001.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="42" end="50" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="59" end="77" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="79" end="88" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="191" end="199" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="259" end="262" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="490" end="504" title="Second Boer War" label="Anglo-Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="526" end="551" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate" label="Bechuanaland Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="668" end="684" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="1329" end="1333" title="Southern African Development Community" label="SADC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620541" start="1492" end="1535" title="2011 Botswana Population and Housing Census" label="2011 Botswana Population and Housing Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2104" end="2118" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="2435" end="2441" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193813" start="2447" end="2454" title="BaKalanga" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="2460" end="2467" title="Basarwa" label="Basarwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166535" start="2492" end="2501" title="Kgalagadi people" label="Kgalagadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024070" start="2503" end="2510" title="Indians in Botswana" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151362" start="2515" end="2521" title="White people in Botswana" label="Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="2540" end="2548" title="Setswana" label="Setswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="2556" end="2563" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088743" start="2570" end="2581" title="Kgalagadi language" label="Sekgalagadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2588" end="2595" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="2602" end="2607" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="2614" end="2621" title="Tshwa language" label="Sesarwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691548" start="2628" end="2640" title="Mbukushu language" label="Sehambukushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="2647" end="2654" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2704" end="2713" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q859723" start="2721" end="2727" title="Badimo" label="Badimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="2759" end="2771" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="2773" end="2778" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="2780" end="2785" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="2787" end="2796" title="Rastafari" label="Rastafari"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3615" wikidata="Q1148224" url="?curid=3615" title="Politics of Botswana">
<text>Botswana is a parliamentary republic in which the President of Botswana is both head of state and head of government. The nation&#x27;s politics are based heavily on British parliamentary politics and on traditional Batswana chiefdom. The legislature is made up of the unicameral National Assembly and the advisory body of tribal chiefs, the &quot;Ntlo ya Dikgosi&quot;. The National Assembly chooses the president, but once in office the president has significant authority over the legislature with only limited separation of powers. 

The Botswana Democratic Party (BDP) ruled as the dominant party from 1966 to 2024; while elections are considered free and fair by observers, the BDP controlled the National Assembly since independence. 

Political opposition often existed between factions in the BDP rather than through separate parties, though several opposition parties existed and regularly held a small number of seats in the National Assembly. The Umbrella for Democratic Change is a coalition of opposition parties, and won power 1 November 2024.

Botswana achieved independence from the United Kingdom in 1966. The BDP led by Seretse Khama formed the first government, and continued winning elections every five years. Quett Masire became president following Khama&#x27;s death in 1980, and the BDP was enveloped by factionalism in the 1990s. This factionalism persisted through the presidencies of Festus Mogae from 1998 to 2008 and Ian Khama from 2008 to 2018. Khama&#x27;s successor, Mokgweetsi Masisi, became president in 2018 and developed a strong political rivalry with Khama, which came to define politics in Botswana over the following years.

Elections were held on 30 October 2024, in which the Umbrella for Democratic Change won and took power, ending the BDP&#x27;s rule since 1966, with Duma Boko being sworn in as President on 1 November 2024.

Botswana has an above average human rights record, and it is recognised by human rights groups as one of the strongest democracies in Africa. Economic policy in Botswana revolves around the nation&#x27;s lucrative diamond industry, which makes up a significant portion of the economy. The country has been praised as an economic success as it pursued free market policies in the 20th century, and it has since shifted to more redistributive economic policy. Wealth inequality remains high and welfare programs are limited, but public services and infrastructure receive strong funding. Foreign policy in Botswana has historically emphasised multilateralism and realpolitik. Apartheid-era South Africa was the nation&#x27;s primary foreign policy concern until 1994 and then instability in Zimbabwe thereafter.

== History ==

=== Pre-statehood ===
The location of present-day Botswana was historically controlled by Bantu peoples, primarily the Tswana people. Many legal traditions practiced by the Tswana people, such as respect for traditional authority and protection of property rights, have played a role in the development of post-colonial Botswana politics. Centralised political structures developed prior to colonisation have also been retained. Politics of the Tswana people prior to statehood was often led by chiefs, who continue to have a role in Botswana politics. In the early-19th century, these chiefdoms developed into nation states. These nation states incorporated limited government and ethnic pluralism.

The United Kingdom first began influencing the region in the 1820s, and the region became part of the British Empire in 1885 as the Bechuanaland Protectorate. The Tswana people were made subjects of the Crown and placed under British law. The first significant movement for independence was led by the radical Bechuanaland People&#x27;s Party. The Botswana Democratic Party (BDP) was formed by Seretse Khama in 1962 as part of a negotiated independence process. Botswana became self-governing in 1965, and it became an independent republic in 1966. The United Kingdom continued to invest in the country financially and pay some of its expenses through 1971. Institutions and traditions from both precolonial Tswana society and colonial British rule were retained following independence and continue to influence the politics of Botswana.

=== Presidency of Seretse Khama ===

Upon receiving self-governance, the nation held the 1965 Bechuanaland general election, in which the BDP won a large victory: of the 31 seats in the legislature, the BDP won 28. Three members of the Botswana People&#x27;s Party made up the opposition, all elected from relatively urbanised constituencies. The government under the first president, Seretse Khama, was based heavily on collaborative governance similar to that of the pre-colonial tribal governments. Policies were often considered by several ministries and a commission before being adopted. Khama also ensured that foreign involvement was welcome, opposed to a nationalism that restricted opportunity.

While Khama was president, his vice president, Quett Masire, held considerable power as well. In addition to being the vice president, he was the minister of finance, and he was the secretary general of the BDP. He oversaw a series of National Development Plans that dispensed much of the government&#x27;s policies. Regional instability prompted the creation of a military, the Botswana Defence Force, in 1977. Prior to this, the Botswana Police Service handled all of the nation&#x27;s security responsibilities. The Botswana National Front (BNF) was founded by Kenneth Koma as a left-wing party, and it became the opposition party in the 1969 general election.

=== Presidency of Quett Masire ===
Khama served as president until his death in 1980, at which point Vice President Masire became president. The opposition gained support in the 1980s and 1990s as the country urbanised and the BDP&#x27;s rural political base shrank.

The Kgabo Commission, part of a corruption controversy involving Vice President Peter Mmusi and BDP Secretary General Daniel Kwelagobe, dominated the politics of Botswana in 1991 and brought about an era of factionalism in the BDP. Mmusi&#x27;s resignation led to Festus Mogae being chosen as the next vice president. The incident firmly established a growing factional conflict within the BDP. Mmusi and Kwelagobe formed one faction, the Big Two. Mompati Merafhe and his supporters—namely David Magang, Bahiti Temane, Roy Blackbeard, and Chapson Butale—formed an opposing faction, the Big Five. Merafhe later took on Jacob Nkate as his closest ally, and they dubbed themselves the A-Team. The Big Two appealed the findings of the commission in court, but they were ultimately suspended from parliament. Their supporters then gained power after the 1994 general election. Amid this inter-party conflict, the BNF became a significantly stronger opposition, winning thirteen seats. Kwelagobe aligned with Ponatshego Kedikilwe following Mmusi&#x27;s death, and they renamed themselves the Barata-Phathi.

After the BDP&#x27;s poor performance in the 1994 election, South African academic Lawrence Schlemmer was brought in by the party to provide a political strategy. He recommended replacing the long-standing members of the BDP with newer, non-factional members, with a particular focus on the presidency. Multiple constitutional reforms were enacted in Botswana following a referendum in 1997: the vice president was designated the automatic successor of the president, the voting age was lowered to eighteen, and an independent electoral commission was established. These reforms were championed by Masire, as automatic succession allowed him to anoint a successor.

=== 1998–present ===
Masire stepped down as president in 1998, and Vice President Mogae became president. He chose Ian Khama as vice president, and while the two were nominally non-factional, they effectively supported the A-Team faction of Merafhe and Nkate. This caused the factional differences in the party to further escalate. A schism also formed in the oppositional BNF, which led to the creation of the Botswana Congress Party in 1998. Enough assemblymen defected that this new party became the primary opposition, but they were replaced by BNF candidates in the 1999 general election.

Mogae&#x27;s tenure as president ended in 2008, and Ian Khama, the son of President Seretse Khama, became president. The BDP underwent its first split in 2010 when Khama encouraged the Barata-Phathi faction to leave the party, and they formed the Botswana Movement for Democracy, led by Gomolemo Motswaledi. Freedom House lowered Botswana&#x27;s rating in the 2010s as a crackdown took place against journalists.

Khama stepped down in 2018, and Vice President Mokgweetsi Masisi became president. He immediately reversed Khama&#x27;s policies and replaced top officials who had been appointed by Khama. The two former allies quickly became political rivals, and Khama defected from the Botswana Democratic Party. He instead aligned with the newly formed Botswana Patriotic Front in addition to supporting the Umbrella for Democratic Change. This made the 2019 general election the first competitive election in the nation&#x27;s history, but the BDP remained in power with 52.7% of the total vote, winning 38 of the 57 seats in the assembly. The rivalry significantly escalated when Masisi&#x27;s pursued criminal charges against Khama for illegal ownership of firearms in 2022, causing Khama to seek asylum in South Africa.

===Opposition&#x27;s rise to power===

In the run-up to the 2024 Botswana general election, the opposition was splintered, therefore it was thought that BDP would cruise to a comfortable victory again. Despite this division, opposition UDC was able to gain an outright majority of seats in the parliament and Duma Boko was elected to the Presidency. BDP was relegated to fourth place. Masisi peacefully conceded defeat and handed over power to the opposition.

== National government ==
Botswana is a parliamentary republic governed by the Constitution of Botswana. The constitution has been in effect since Botswana became independent from the United Kingdom on 30 September 1966. This makes it the longest uninterrupted democracy in Africa. Botswana operates under a blend of Roman-Dutch law, customary law, and common law. Its seat of government is in Gaborone.

=== Legislative branch ===

The legislature of Botswana is derived from the Westminster system of the United Kingdom, though it has several aspects that distinguish it from this system. Unlike in the United Kingdom, the leader of the legislature has no executive powers, and it is subject to the Constitution of Botswana. Its official function under the constitution is to &quot;make laws for the peace, order and good government of Botswana&quot;. The legislature is intended to act as a check on the executive, but it has little direct power to limit the executive&#x27;s power.

The legislative body of Botswana is the National Assembly, a unicameral body consisting of 63 members. 57 of these members are directly elected by their constituents and six of these members are chosen by the National Assembly. The President of Botswana and the Speaker of the National Assembly are &quot;ex officio&quot; members. For a bill to become a law, it must be approved by the National Assembly and by the president. The assembly uses a question time procedure to obtain information.

The &quot;Ntlo ya Dikgosi&quot; is an advisory body established by the constitution. Its members include eight chiefs of the Tswana people, five members appointed by the president, and 22 members chosen by the eight chiefs. Any bill that affects the constitution or traditional tribal laws must be referred to the &quot;Ntlo ya Dikgosi&quot;, where it reads the bill and passes a resolution stating its position on the bill. It has no legislative powers of its own.

=== Executive branch ===
The executive branch of Botswana is headed by the President of Botswana, who serves as both the head of state and head of government. The president is indirectly elected by members of the National Assembly, and the position has historically been associated with a major tribe. The executive is the strongest branch of government in Botswana, and the president wields significant power, effectively heading the legislative branch of government as well. The judiciary is the only &quot;de facto&quot; check on the president&#x27;s power. The president has the power to veto legislation by refusing to sign it, which returns the legislation to the National Assembly. The president is also the commander-in-chief of the nation&#x27;s military. The Vice-President of Botswana and the Cabinet of Botswana operate underneath the President of Botswana. The president chooses the vice president and the members of the cabinet from the members of the National Assembly.

=== Judicial branch ===
The highest court of Botswana is the Court of Appeal, which is constituted under section 99 of the Constitution and consists of a president and such number of justices of appeal as may be prescribed by the National Assembly. There are eight judges of the Court of Appeal, who are all expatriates drawn from different parts of the Commonwealth. To date, no Motswana has ever been appointed to the Court of Appeal.

The High Court is a superior court of record with unlimited original jurisdiction to hear and determine any criminal and civil cases under any law. The High Court is constituted under section 95 of the Constitution, and consists of a Chief Justice and such number of other judges of the High Court as may be prescribed by the National Assembly. There are sixteen permanent judges of the High Court. Until 1992, the judges of the High Court were expatriate judges who were appointed on short-term contracts of two to three years. In 1992 the first citizen judges were appointed to the bench. There are three High Court divisions in Lobatse, Gaborone and Francistown.

Most cases are settled by customary courts, which are presided over by tribal chiefs. These courts are often preferred by the community due to their relative simplicity. There are also Magistrates&#x27; Courts in Botswana. These courts are subordinate to the High Court and hear a range of civil, criminal and family law matters. There are nineteen Magistrates&#x27; Courts in the country, with fifty magistrates of whom seventeen are expatriate.

== Local and tribal government ==
Botswana&#x27;s government is centralised, and the powers of local government are determined by national law. Local government is authorised under the Local Government (District Councils) Act, 1965. The smallest division of government in Botswana is the local council. Cities in Botswana are under the jurisdiction of a mayor and a city council, which is led by a council chairperson. Smaller towns also have town councils, while rural areas are collected under district councils. These councils are primarily responsible for education, health, roads, water, local development, and general welfare. Local governmental bodies do not collect significant funds, and nearly all local spending is funded by the national government.

Tribes are led by tribal chiefs, who often have significant influence over the affairs of local government. Chiefs are responsible for chairing &quot;kgotlas&quot;, traditional tribal meetings of the community, and for presiding over customary courts. &quot;Kgotlas&quot; predate Botswana&#x27;s independence and represent the traditional mode of government in which a chief ruled as the first among equals. Tswana chiefs were historically more accountable to the people than in other African societies, as the region&#x27;s main industry, cattle farming, allowed farmers more mobility and independence than would be provided by growing crops. Tribal land is held and allocated by Land Boards. These Land Boards are made up of members chosen by the tribal community and members appointed by the Minister of Lands.

Botswana is divided into 28 districts. Each district is under the jurisdiction of a district administration, led by a district commissioner.

==Political parties==

Botswana is a dominant-party state led by the Botswana Democratic Party (BDP). This party was formed by Seretse Khama in 1962 during the nation&#x27;s movement toward independence, and it ruled with a majority in every government until 2024 . A multi-party system allows several opposition parties to stand for election and seek representation in the legislature. Despite never holding a majority, opposition parties in Botswana wield more power than those of most other African countries, as there are no legal barriers to restrict the creation or growth of an opposition party.

Historically, the Botswana National Front has been the strongest opposition party, advocating left-wing politics. The opposition in the Botswana legislature has often been fragmented, with several parties competing with one another in addition to challenging the BDP. The opposition has mainly been supported by urbanites, tribes outside of the majority Tswana population, and certain tribal chiefs. Increasing urbanisation has given more strength to opposition parties.

Factionalism is common in Botswana political parties, and several parties have split from the Botswana National Front, including the Botswana Congress Party that became another significant opposition party after its creation in 1998. Some attempts have been made to create alliances between opposition parties, though none have ever prevented the BDP from achieving a majority in the legislature. In 2012, the Botswana National Front, the Botswana Movement for Democracy, and the Botswana People&#x27;s Party joined as the Umbrella for Democratic Change.

== Elections ==

Botswana has held regular elections since its independence at five year intervals, all of which have been won by the Botswana Democratic Party. Elections are overseen by the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC). Elections in Botswana use first-past-the-post voting in which the winner is the candidate that receives a majority or plurality of votes. Botswana is rare among African countries in that its elections have never been associated with widespread political violence.

The independence of Botswana&#x27;s elections have been the subject of scrutiny. While elections are free and opposition parties are unrestrained, the incumbent party has access to other advantages. Prior to the creation of the IEC, the ruling party controlled elections through the Office of the Supervisor of Elections. The creation of the IEC has mitigated this to some extent, though its power to regulate elections is questioned.

== Policy issues ==

=== Economic policy ===

Botswana is an upper middle income country with a mixed economy, and it has one of the strongest economies in Africa. The foundation of Botswana&#x27;s economic policy was set by the first post-independence government in the 1960s, incorporating a self-sustaining budget system through a series of national development plans. There is significant income inequality in Botswana, particularly between the relatively developed urban areas and the poorer rural areas. The unemployment rate in Botswana was 20% as of 2015. Botswana&#x27;s dependence on the diamond industry has led to diversification of the economy becoming one of the nation&#x27;s major economic policy goals throughout its history. Government programs such as the National Development Bank, the Botswana Development Corporation, the Financial Assistance Policy, and the Economic Diversification Drive have been implemented to spur economic growth in other industries, but they have not significantly decreased the nation&#x27;s dependence on its diamond industry.

The economy of colonial Bechuanaland focused on cattle farming, and this was the primary industry for the first decade of Botswana&#x27;s independence. As most of the nation was involved with this field in some form, there was little cause for class conflict in the predominantly rural population. While land distribution was sometimes an issue, there was enough unclaimed land that cattle farmers could operate as nomads, further reducing disagreement over economic issues. In 1967, diamond deposits were found in Botswana. This incentivised the government to pursue a commodity economy from mining, supplemented with smaller industries such as beef farming, manufacturing, and tourism. The country&#x27;s economic success is attributed to neoliberal policies of free markets and private property protections, significantly increasing the population&#x27;s post-independence living standards. Botswana was one of the only sub-Saharan governments that did not engage in significant regulatory or redistributive policy following decolonisation. This, as well as its fiscally responsible management of the diamond industry, led to some of the world&#x27;s largest economic growth over the following decades. More recent development has emphasised welfare statehood through redistributive economic policy.

=== Foreign policy ===

The president is responsible for the foreign policy of Botswana, overseeing the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Botswana&#x27;s political and economic success relative to other countries in Africa has led it to play a larger role in regional and global affairs. By the end of the 20th century, Botswana had begun sending financial and military support to neighbouring countries and international organisations. Botswana has emphasised multilateralism in its foreign policy. Its landlocked territory and export-driven economy have incentivised it to maintain strong diplomatic ties with other countries, and its low population and proximity to unstable governments have caused Botswana to work closely with international organisations for security and resources.

From 1966 to 1994, the countries bordering Botswana were unstable or otherwise hostile to Botswana. It did not establish formal relations with its largest neighbour, South Africa, during the latter&#x27;s discriminatory apartheid rule. In its first years, Botswana had no military. The Botswana Defence Force was eventually created in response to regional instability. As South Africa liberalised after 1994, Botswana&#x27;s primary foreign policy concern became the instability in neighbouring Zimbabwe.

For much of its history as an independent country, Botswana practiced a realpolitik foreign policy. During the presidency of Ian Khama, it shifted to an idealist foreign policy, in which it routinely criticised governments for human rights violations. During this period, it was often the only member of the African Union to support the International Criminal Court or to condemn human rights violations in autocratic nations.

=== Social policy ===
Botswana&#x27;s relative wealth compared to other countries in the region has allowed for high spending on public services such as education, health, and infrastructure. As of 2014, the Ministry of Education and Skills Development had the largest budget of any government initiative. Approximately 10,000 kilometres of road were paved in the first fifty years of the country&#x27;s independence, compared to the 50 kilometres that existed before independence.

Welfare programs in Botswana are relatively limited and subject to means testing, and there is no national level social security. The country&#x27;s predominantly arid environment results in droughts becoming a frequent public welfare concern. HIV/AIDS is the most serious healthcare issue in the country, and the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Botswana is one of the most severe outbreaks in the world. Botswana received less foreign aid when combating the epidemic in the 1990s, allowing it to spread.

== Human rights ==
Freedom House considers Botswana to be free with a score of 72/100 in its 2022 Freedom in the World report. It scored high in political rights, though Freedom House expressed concerns regarding the representation of women and minorities and the lack of freedom of information laws. It also scored high in civil rights, though Freedom House expressed concerns regarding freedom of the press and the right to strike. Transparency International has regularly recognised Botswana as the least corrupt country in Africa, and it is often described as comparable to the liberal democracies of Western Europe. One potential issues for human rights in Botswana is the lack of strong checks and balances in the government, which allows the president to exercise wide latitude over policy and arbitrarily curtail free speech. Early focus on public works projects after Botswana&#x27;s independence rather than militarisation is credited for early legitimacy of the government, permitting stability in the nation&#x27;s politics.

Conceptions of human rights in Botswana are shaped by collectivist traditions such as &quot;botho&quot; philosophy rather than individualist traditions. Confrontational approaches to human rights such as protest, strike action, and public condemnation are often seen as uncivil foreign inventions. Activism in Botswana instead focuses mainly on providing goods and services to those in need. Human rights Non-governmental organisations are relatively uncommon in Botswana. Among the most active is the Botswana Network on Ethics, Law and HIV/AIDS, which emphasises response to HIV but also addresses other areas such as the rights of women, children, and LGBT people.

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 

==External links==
* Judgments of the Botswana Court of Appeal
* Judgments of the Botswana High Court
* Republic of Botswana – Government portal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="0" end="8" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="14" end="36" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q866725" start="50" end="71" title="President of Botswana" label="President of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="80" end="93" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="98" end="116" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q859658" start="280" end="297" title="National Assembly of Botswana" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q859599" start="348" end="363" title="Ntlo ya Dikgosi" label="Ntlo ya Dikgosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="514" end="534" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="542" end="567" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="Botswana Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="587" end="601" title="dominant party" label="dominant party"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146844" start="652" end="665" title="Free and fair election" label="free and fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="786" end="794" title="Political faction" label="factions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347306" start="959" end="989" title="Umbrella for Democratic Change" label="Umbrella for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q219962" start="1139" end="1152" title="Seretse Khama" label="Seretse Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q310574" start="1232" end="1244" title="Quett Masire" label="Quett Masire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193238" start="1412" end="1424" title="Festus Mogae" label="Festus Mogae"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="1447" end="1456" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618891" start="1500" end="1517" title="Mokgweetsi Masisi" label="Mokgweetsi Masisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347306" start="1719" end="1749" title="Umbrella for Democratic Change" label="Umbrella for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618881" start="1814" end="1823" title="Duma Boko" label="Duma Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415386" start="2331" end="2348" title="Wealth inequality" label="Wealth inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="2366" end="2373" title="welfare spending" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413574" start="2514" end="2529" title="multilateralism" label="multilateralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q753861" start="2534" end="2545" title="realpolitik" label="realpolitik"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2547" end="2560" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="2789" end="2802" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="2818" end="2831" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana people"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799101" start="2947" end="2962" title="Property rights (economics)" label="property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="3310" end="3322" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q795071" start="3358" end="3376" title="limited government" label="limited government"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="3388" end="3397" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="3404" end="3418" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3502" end="3516" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="3532" end="3557" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate" label="Bechuanaland Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="3599" end="3608" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="3626" end="3637" title="British law" label="British law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893988" start="3710" end="3742" title="Bechuanaland People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Bechuanaland People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="3748" end="3773" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="Botswana Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q219962" start="3794" end="3807" title="Seretse Khama" label="Seretse Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878577" start="4328" end="4362" title="1965 Bechuanaland general election" label="1965 Bechuanaland general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="4516" end="4526" title="Parliamentary opposition" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q310574" start="4992" end="5004" title="Quett Masire" label="Quett Masire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5180" end="5206" title="National Development Plan (Botswana)" label="National Development Plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q740258" start="5324" end="5346" title="Botswana Defence Force" label="Botswana Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948909" start="5376" end="5399" title="Botswana Police Service" label="Botswana Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310801" start="5464" end="5487" title="Botswana National Front" label="Botswana National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q47537349" start="5509" end="5521" title="Kenneth Koma" label="Kenneth Koma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948956" start="5586" end="5607" title="1969 Botswana general election" label="1969 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635538" start="5854" end="5868" title="political base" label="political base"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447301" start="5882" end="5898" title="Kgabo Commission" label="Kgabo Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298758" start="5958" end="5969" title="Peter Mmusi" label="Peter Mmusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217839" start="5996" end="6012" title="Daniel Kwelagobe" label="Daniel Kwelagobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193238" start="6142" end="6154" title="Festus Mogae" label="Festus Mogae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436517" start="6326" end="6341" title="Mompati Merafhe" label="Mompati Merafhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q859696" start="6368" end="6380" title="David Magang" label="David Magang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6382" end="6395" title="Bahiti Temane" label="Bahiti Temane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372580" start="6397" end="6411" title="Roy Blackbeard" label="Roy Blackbeard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6417" end="6431" title="Chapson Butale" label="Chapson Butale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6496" end="6507" title="Jacob Nkate" label="Jacob Nkate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6560" end="6566" title="A-Team (Botswana)" label="A-Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722325" start="6727" end="6748" title="1994 Botswana general election" label="1994 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139832" start="6881" end="6901" title="Ponatshego Kedikilwe" label="Ponatshego Kedikilwe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6964" end="6977" title="Barata-Phathi" label="Barata-Phathi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7063" end="7081" title="Lawrence Schlemmer" label="Lawrence Schlemmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948952" start="7350" end="7362" title="1997 Botswana electoral reform referendum" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449" start="7761" end="7770" title="Ian Khama" label="Ian Khama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894021" start="8057" end="8080" title="Botswana Congress Party" label="Botswana Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722326" start="8217" end="8238" title="1999 Botswana general election" label="1999 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q859682" start="8488" end="8519" title="Botswana Movement for Democracy" label="Botswana Movement for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581224" start="8528" end="8547" title="Gomolemo Motswaledi" label="Gomolemo Motswaledi"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="8549" end="8562" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618891" start="8702" end="8719" title="Mokgweetsi Masisi" label="Mokgweetsi Masisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q72976241" start="8995" end="9019" title="Botswana Patriotic Front" label="Botswana Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q60713425" start="9096" end="9117" title="2019 Botswana general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449433" start="9527" end="9557" title="2024 Botswana general election" label="2024 Botswana general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618881" start="9776" end="9785" title="Duma Boko" label="Duma Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="9968" end="9990" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592128" start="10007" end="10031" title="Constitution of Botswana" label="Constitution of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395172" start="10245" end="10260" title="Roman-Dutch law" label="Roman-Dutch law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="10262" end="10275" title="customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="10281" end="10291" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919" start="10322" end="10330" title="Gaborone" label="Gaborone"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="10409" end="10427" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="10586" end="10602" title="executive powers" label="executive powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="10822" end="10827" title="Separation of powers" label="check"/>
<link wikidata="Q859658" start="10955" end="10972" title="National Assembly (Botswana)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="10976" end="10986" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q866725" start="11147" end="11168" title="President of Botswana" label="President of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640273" start="11177" end="11209" title="Speaker of the National Assembly of Botswana" label="Speaker of the National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="11214" end="11244" title="Ex officio member" label="&amp;quot;ex officio&amp;quot; members"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286157" start="11361" end="11374" title="question time" label="question time"/>
<link wikidata="Q859599" start="11419" end="11434" title="Ntlo ya Dikgosi" label="Ntlo ya Dikgosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="11997" end="12010" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="12015" end="12033" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="12468" end="12472" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="12591" end="12609" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q859757" start="12645" end="12671" title="Vice-President of Botswana" label="Vice-President of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048312" start="12680" end="12699" title="Cabinet of Botswana" label="Cabinet of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="13216" end="13228" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q27655714" start="13304" end="13314" title="High Court (Botswana)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q165768" start="13931" end="13938" title="Lobatse" label="Lobatse"/>
<link wikidata="Q165422" start="13953" end="13964" title="Francistown" label="Francistown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884199" start="14152" end="14176" title="Magistrates&amp;#x27; Courts" label="Magistrates&amp;#x27; Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="14479" end="14490" title="Centralized government" label="centralised"/>
<link wikidata="Q859645" start="15321" end="15340" title="Kgotla" label="&amp;quot;kgotlas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="15565" end="15583" title="first among equals" label="first among equals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15972" end="15989" title="Minister of Lands (Botswana)" label="Minister of Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q57368" start="16017" end="16029" title="Districts of Botswana" label="28 districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="16171" end="16185" title="Dominant-party system" label="dominant-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q859825" start="16203" end="16228" title="Botswana Democratic Party" label="Botswana Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="16402" end="16420" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="16436" end="16454" title="opposition parties" label="opposition parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310801" start="16756" end="16779" title="Botswana National Front" label="Botswana National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="16832" end="16850" title="left-wing politics" label="left-wing politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="17210" end="17222" title="Political faction" label="Factionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894021" start="17343" end="17366" title="Botswana Congress Party" label="Botswana Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="17483" end="17492" title="Political group" label="alliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q859682" start="17649" end="17680" title="Botswana Movement for Democracy" label="Botswana Movement for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893988" start="17690" end="17718" title="Botswana People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Botswana People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347306" start="17733" end="17763" title="Umbrella for Democratic Change" label="Umbrella for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q126372469" start="17957" end="17989" title="Independent Electoral Commission (Botswana)" label="Independent Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="18023" end="18049" title="first-past-the-post voting" label="first-past-the-post voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="18103" end="18111" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="18115" end="18124" title="Plurality (voting)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399774" start="18241" end="18259" title="political violence" label="political violence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18545" end="18582" title="Office of the Supervisor of Elections (Botswana)" label="Office of the Supervisor of Elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="18794" end="18807" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="19091" end="19108" title="income inequality" label="income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787879" start="19473" end="19498" title="National Development Bank of Botswana" label="National Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19504" end="19536" title="Botswana Development Corporation" label="Botswana Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19542" end="19569" title="Financial Assistance Policy" label="Financial Assistance Policy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19579" end="19609" title="Economic Diversification Drive" label="Economic Diversification Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="20344" end="20361" title="commodity economy" label="commodity economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="20367" end="20373" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="20515" end="20525" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="21019" end="21032" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941290" start="21182" end="21209" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Botswana)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413574" start="21534" end="21549" title="multilateralism" label="multilateralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="21805" end="21832" title="international organisations" label="international organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="22082" end="22091" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q753861" start="22440" end="22451" title="realpolitik" label="realpolitik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745901" start="22521" end="22529" title="Idealism in international relations" label="idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="22676" end="22689" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="22705" end="22733" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892497" start="23004" end="23048" title="Ministry of Education and Skills Development" label="Ministry of Education and Skills Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="23279" end="23286" title="Welfare spending" label="Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357620" start="23346" end="23356" title="means test" label="means test"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="23523" end="23531" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417780" start="23872" end="23892" title="Freedom in the World" label="Freedom in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q329497" start="24046" end="24073" title="freedom of information laws" label="freedom of information laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="24162" end="24182" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="24191" end="24206" title="right to strike" label="right to strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="24208" end="24234" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="24623" end="24635" title="public works" label="public works"/>
<link wikidata="Q213843" start="24898" end="24926" title="Botho philosophy" label="&amp;quot;botho&amp;quot; philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="25016" end="25023" title="protest" label="protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="25025" end="25038" title="strike action" label="strike action"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="25217" end="25246" title="Non-governmental organisation" label="Non-governmental organisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25314" end="25358" title="Botswana Network on Ethics, Law and HIV/AIDS" label="Botswana Network on Ethics, Law and HIV/AIDS"/>
</links>
</doc>
