<doc id="4650" wikidata="Q589" url="?curid=4650" title="Black hole">
<text>A black hole is a massive, compact astronomical object so dense that its gravity prevents anything from escaping, even light. Albert Einstein&#x27;s theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass will form a black hole. The boundary of no escape is called the event horizon. A black hole has a great effect on the fate and circumstances of an object crossing it, but has no locally detectable features according to general relativity. In many ways, a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light. Quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass. This temperature is of the order of billionths of a kelvin for stellar black holes, making it essentially impossible to observe directly.

Objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. In 1916, Karl Schwarzschild found the first modern solution of general relativity that would characterise a black hole. Due to his influential research, the Schwarzschild metric is named after him. David Finkelstein, in 1958, first published the interpretation of &quot;black hole&quot; as a region of space from which nothing can escape. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; it was not until the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars by Jocelyn Bell Burnell in 1967 sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality. The first black hole known was Cygnus X-1, identified by several researchers independently in 1971.

Black holes of stellar mass form when massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. Supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses () may form by absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, or via direct collapse of gas clouds. There is consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centres of most galaxies.

The presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Any matter that falls toward a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction, forming quasars, some of the brightest objects in the universe. Stars passing too close to a supermassive black hole can be shredded into streamers that shine very brightly before being &quot;swallowed.&quot; If other stars are orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole&#x27;s mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of the Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.

== History ==
The idea of a body so big that even light could not escape was briefly proposed by English astronomical pioneer and clergyman John Michell and independently by French scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace. Both scholars proposed very large stars rather than the modern model of stars with extraordinary density.

Michell&#x27;s idea, in a short part of a letter published in 1784, calculated that a star with the same density but 500 times the radius of the sun would not let any emitted light escape; the surface escape velocity would exceed the speed of light. Michell correctly noted that such supermassive but non-radiating bodies might be detectable through their gravitational effects on nearby visible bodies.

In 1796, Laplace mentioned that a star could be invisible if it were sufficiently large while speculating on the origin of the Solar System in his book &quot;Exposition du Système du Monde.&quot; Franz Xaver von Zach asked Laplace for a mathematical analysis, which Laplace provided and published in journal edited by von Zach.

Scholars of the time were initially excited by the proposal that giant but invisible &#x27;dark stars&#x27; might be hiding in plain view, but enthusiasm dampened when the wavelike nature of light became apparent in the early nineteenth century, as if light were a wave rather than a particle, it was unclear what, if any, influence gravity would have on escaping light waves.

=== General relativity ===

In 1915, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, having earlier shown that gravity does influence light&#x27;s motion. Only a few months later, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations that describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass. A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties. This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time.

In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates. In 1933, Georges Lemaître realised that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was a non-physical coordinate singularity. Arthur Eddington commented on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein&#x27;s theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because &quot;a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the Sun. Firstly, the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it, the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth. Secondly, the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence. Thirdly, the mass would produce so much curvature of the spacetime metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere).&quot;

In 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated, using special relativity, that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at ) has no stable solutions. His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse. They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star, which is itself stable.

In 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above another limit, the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit, would collapse further for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar, and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes. Their original calculations, based on the Pauli exclusion principle, gave it as . Subsequent consideration of neutron-neutron repulsion mediated by the strong force raised the estimate to approximately to . Observations of the neutron star merger GW170817, which is thought to have generated a black hole shortly afterward, have refined the TOV limit estimate to ~.

Oppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped. This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. The hypothetical collapsed stars were called &quot;frozen stars&quot;, because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it to the Schwarzschild radius.

Also in 1939, Einstein attempted to prove that black holes were impossible in his publication &quot;On a Stationary System with Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses&quot;, using his theory of general relativity to defend his argument. Months later, Oppenheimer and his student Hartland Snyder provided the Oppenheimer–Snyder model in their paper &quot;On Continued Gravitational Contraction&quot;, which predicted the existence of black holes. In the paper, which made no reference to Einstein&#x27;s recent publication, Oppenheimer and Snyder used Einstein&#x27;s own theory of general relativity to show the conditions on how a black hole could develop, for the first time in contemporary physics.

==== Golden age ====
In 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, &quot;a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction&quot;. This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer&#x27;s results, but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein&#x27;s solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it.

These results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity, which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research. This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars by Jocelyn Bell Burnell in 1967, which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars. Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.

In this period more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged. Through the work of Werner Israel, Brandon Carter, and David Robinson the no-hair theorem emerged, stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr–Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.

At first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artefacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions. However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically. For this work, Penrose received half of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics, Hawking having died in 2018. Based on observations in Greenwich and Toronto in the early 1970s, Cygnus X-1, a galactic X-ray source discovered in 1964, became the first astronomical object commonly accepted to be a black hole.

Work by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics. These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory implies that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, predicting the effect now known as Hawking radiation.

=== Observation ===
On 11 February 2016, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and the Virgo collaboration announced the first direct detection of gravitational waves, representing the first observation of a black hole merger. On 10 April 2019, the first direct image of a black hole and its vicinity was published, following observations made by the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) in 2017 of the supermassive black hole in Messier 87&#x27;s galactic centre. Gaia mission observations have found evidence of a Sun-like star orbiting a black hole named Gaia BH1 around away; evidence suggests a brown dwarf star orbits Gaia BH2. Though only a couple dozen black holes have been found so far in the Milky Way, there are thought to be hundreds of millions, most of which are solitary and do not cause emission of radiation. Therefore, they would only be detectable by gravitational lensing.

=== Etymology ===
Science writer Marcia Bartusiak traces the term &quot;black hole&quot; to physicist Robert H. Dicke, who in the early 1960s reportedly compared the phenomenon to the Black Hole of Calcutta, notorious as a prison where people entered but never left alive.
The term &quot;black hole&quot; was used in print by &quot;Life&quot; and &quot;Science News&quot; magazines in 1963, and by science journalist Ann Ewing in her article Black Holes&#x27; in Space&quot;, dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science held in Cleveland, Ohio.

In December 1967, a student reportedly suggested the phrase &quot;black hole&quot; at a lecture by John Wheeler; Wheeler adopted the term for its brevity and &quot;advertising value&quot;, and it quickly caught on, leading some to credit Wheeler with coining the phrase.

== Properties and structure ==
The escape velocity from a black hole exceeds the speed of light. The formula for escape velocity is 
formula_1 for an object at radius from a spherical mass , with being the gravitational constant. When the velocity is the speed of light, , the radius, formula_2 is called the Schwarzschild radius.
A technical definition of a black hole is any object whose mass is contained in a radius is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius, a limit derived from one solution to the equations of general relativity.

The no-hair theorem postulates that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, electric charge, and angular momentum; the black hole is otherwise featureless. If the conjecture is true, any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable from one another. The degree to which the conjecture is true for real black holes under the laws of modern physics is currently an unsolved problem.

These properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analogue of Gauss&#x27;s law (through the ADM mass), far away from the black hole. Likewise, the angular momentum (or spin) can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field, through for example the Lense–Thirring effect.
When an object falls into a black hole, any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole, and is lost to outside observers. The behaviour of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance—the membrane paradigm. This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible.

Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in. The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon, including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number. This behaviour is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox.

=== Physical properties ===

The simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916. According to Birkhoff&#x27;s theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric. This means there is no observable difference at a distance between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. The popular notion of a black hole &quot;sucking in everything&quot; in its surroundings is therefore correct only near a black hole&#x27;s horizon; far away, the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.

Solutions describing more general black holes also exist. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner–Nordström metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr–Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.

While the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. The total electric charge &quot;Q&quot; and the total angular momentum &quot;J&quot; are expected to satisfy the inequality
: formula_3
for a black hole of mass &quot;M&quot;. Black holes with the minimum possible mass satisfying this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein&#x27;s equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed &quot;unphysical&quot;. The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter. This is supported by numerical simulations.

Due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star. Rotation, however, is expected to be a universal feature of compact astrophysical objects. The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105 appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value. That uncharged limit is
: formula_4
allowing definition of a dimensionless spin parameter such that
: formula_5
Black holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum, &quot;J&quot;. The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is proportional to the mass, &quot;M&quot;, through
:formula_6
where &quot;r&quot; is the Schwarzschild radius and is the mass of the Sun. For a black hole with nonzero spin or electric charge, the radius is smaller, until an extremal black hole could have an event horizon close to
: formula_7

=== Event horizon ===

The defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon—a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can pass only inward towards the mass of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine whether such an event occurred.

As predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass. At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.

In a thought experiment, a distant observer can imagine clocks near a black hole which would appear to tick more slowly than those farther away from the black hole. This effect, known as gravitational time dilation, would also cause an object falling into a black hole to appear to slow as it approaches the event horizon, taking an infinite amount of time to reach it. All processes on this object would appear to slow down, from the viewpoint of a fixed outside observer, and any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift. Eventually, the falling object fades away until it can no longer be seen. Typically this process happens very rapidly with an object disappearing from view within less than a second.

On the other hand, imaginary, indestructible observers falling into a black hole would not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon. Their own clocks appear to them to tick normally, they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour.
In general relativity, it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations, due to Einstein&#x27;s equivalence principle.

The topology of the event horizon of a black hole at equilibrium is always spherical. For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the event horizon is oblate.

=== Singularity ===
At the centre of a black hole, as described by general relativity, may lie a gravitational singularity, a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite. For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point; for a rotating black hole it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation. In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution. The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.

Observers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity once they cross the event horizon. They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a limit. When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole. Before that happens, they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the &quot;noodle effect&quot;.

In the case of a charged (Reissner–Nordström) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole. The possibility of travelling to another universe is, however, only theoretical since any perturbation would destroy this possibility. It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one&#x27;s own past) around the Kerr singularity, which leads to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox. It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes.

The appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signalling the breakdown of the theory. This breakdown, however, is expected; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions, due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions. To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity. It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities.

=== Photon sphere ===

The photon sphere is a spherical boundary where photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a non-stable but circular orbit around the black hole.
For non-rotating black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. Their orbits would be dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time, either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole, or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon.

While light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon. For a Kerr black hole the radius of the photon sphere depends on the spin parameter and on the details of the photon orbit, which can be prograde (the photon rotates in the same sense of the black hole spin) or retrograde.

=== Ergosphere ===

Rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere. This is the result of a process known as frame-dragging; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly &quot;drag&quot; along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation. For a rotating black hole, this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still.

The ergosphere of a black hole is a volume bounded by the black hole&#x27;s event horizon and the &quot;ergosurface&quot;, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but is at a much greater distance around the equator.

Objects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered with. The extra energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole. Thereby the rotation of the black hole slows down. A variation of the Penrose process in the presence of strong magnetic fields, the Blandford–Znajek process is considered a likely mechanism for the enormous luminosity and relativistic jets of quasars and other active galactic nuclei.

=== Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO) ===
In Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists an innermost stable circular orbit (often called the ISCO), for which any infinitesimal inward perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to spiraling into the black hole, and any outward perturbations will, depending on the energy, result in spiraling in, stably orbiting between apastron and periastron, or escaping to infinity. The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole, in the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) is:
: formula_8
and decreases with increasing black hole spin for particles orbiting in the same direction as the spin.

=== Plunging region ===
The final observable region of spacetime around a black hole is called the plunging region. In this area it is no longer possible for matter to follow circular orbits or to stop a final descent into the black hole. Instead it will rapidly plunge toward the black hole close to the speed of light.

== Formation and evolution ==

Given the bizarre character of black holes, it was long questioned whether such objects could actually exist in nature or whether they were merely pathological solutions to Einstein&#x27;s equations. Einstein himself wrongly thought black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilise their motion at some radius. This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years. However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects, and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon.

Penrose demonstrated that once an event horizon forms, general relativity without quantum mechanics requires that a singularity will form within. Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter. The Kerr solution, the no-hair theorem, and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible, making them respectable subjects for research. Conventional black holes are formed by gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but they can also in theory be formed by other processes.

=== Gravitational collapse ===

Gravitational collapse occurs when an object&#x27;s internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object&#x27;s own gravity. For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little &quot;fuel&quot; left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature. In either case the star&#x27;s temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight.

The collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star&#x27;s constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. The result is one of the various types of compact star. Which type forms depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left if the outer layers have been blown away (for example, in a Type II supernova). The mass of the remnant, the collapsed object that survives the explosion, can be substantially less than that of the original star. Remnants exceeding are produced by stars that were over before the collapse.

If the mass of the remnant exceeds about (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit), either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter, even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse. No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole.

The gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to . These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centres of most galaxies. It has further been suggested that massive black holes with typical masses of ~ could have formed from the direct collapse of gas clouds in the young universe. These massive objects have been proposed as the seeds that eventually formed the earliest quasars observed already at redshift formula_9. Some candidates for such objects have been found in observations of the young universe.

While most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.

==== Primordial black holes and the Big Bang ====
Gravitational collapse requires great density. In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are found only in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the Big Bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes. High density alone is not enough to allow black hole formation since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up. In order for primordial black holes to have formed in such a dense medium, there must have been initial density perturbations that could then grow under their own gravity. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the scale of these fluctuations. Various models predict the creation of primordial black holes ranging in size from a Planck mass (formula_10 ≈ ≈ ) to hundreds of thousands of solar masses.

Despite the early universe being extremely dense, it did not re-collapse into a black hole during the Big Bang, since the expansion rate was greater than the attraction. Following inflation theory there was a net repulsive gravitation in the beginning until the end of inflation. Since then the Hubble flow was slowed by the energy density of the universe.

Models for the gravitational collapse of objects of relatively constant size, such as stars, do not necessarily apply in the same way to rapidly expanding space such as the Big Bang.

=== High-energy collisions ===
Gravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes. In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density. As of 2002, no such events have been detected, either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments. This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes. Theoretically, this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass, where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity.

This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the Earth. However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the minimum black hole mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as . This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, or possibly in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. These theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists. Even if micro black holes could be formed, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.

=== Growth ===
Once a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings. This growth process is one possible way through which some supermassive black holes may have been formed, although the formation of supermassive black holes is still an open field of research. A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters. Black holes can also merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. This is thought to have been important, especially in the early growth of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the aggregation of many smaller objects. The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.

=== Evaporation ===
In 1974, Hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation at a temperature &quot;ħc&quot;/(8&quot;πGM&quot;&quot;k&quot;); this effect has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background, he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum. Since Hawking&#x27;s publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches. If Hawking&#x27;s theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles. The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which, for a Schwarzschild black hole, is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes.

A stellar black hole of has a Hawking temperature of 62 nanokelvins. This is far less than the 2.7 K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrinking. To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7 K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimetre.

If a black hole is very small, the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1 TeV/&quot;c&quot; would take less than 10 seconds to evaporate completely. For such a small black hole, quantum gravity effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate this is the case.

The Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception, however, is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes. NASA&#x27;s Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes.

If black holes evaporate via Hawking radiation, a solar mass black hole will evaporate (beginning once the temperature of the cosmic microwave background drops below that of the black hole) over a period of 10 years. A supermassive black hole with a mass of will evaporate in around 2×10 years. Some monster black holes in the universe are predicted to continue to grow up to perhaps during the collapse of superclusters of galaxies. Even these would evaporate over a timescale of up to 10 years.

== Observational evidence ==
By nature, black holes do not themselves emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations. For example, a black hole&#x27;s existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational influence on its surroundings.

=== Direct interferometry ===
The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) is an active program that directly observes the immediate environment of black holes&#x27; event horizons, such as the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. In April 2017, EHT began observing the black hole at the centre of Messier 87. &quot;In all, eight radio observatories on six mountains and four continents observed the galaxy in Virgo on and off for 10 days in April 2017&quot; to provide the data yielding the image in April 2019.

After two years of data processing, EHT released its first image of a black hole, at the center of the Messier 87 galaxy. What is visible is not the black hole—which shows as black because of the loss of all light within this dark region. Instead, it is the gases at the edge of the event horizon, displayed as orange or red, that define the black hole.

On 12 May 2022, the EHT released the first image of Sagittarius A*, the supermassive black hole at the centre of the Milky Way galaxy. The published image displayed the same ring-like structure and &quot;shadow&quot; seen in the M87* black hole. The boundary of the shadow or area of less brightness matches the predicted gravitationally lensed photon orbits. The image was created using the same techniques as for the M87 black hole. The imaging process for Sagittarius A*, which is more than a thousand times smaller and less massive than M87*, was significantly more complex because of the instability of its surroundings. The image of Sagittarius A* was partially blurred by turbulent plasma on the way to the galactic centre, an effect which prevents resolution of the image at longer wavelengths.

The brightening of this material in the &#x27;bottom&#x27; half of the processed EHT image is thought to be caused by Doppler beaming, whereby material approaching the viewer at relativistic speeds is perceived as brighter than material moving away. In the case of a black hole, this phenomenon implies that the visible material is rotating at relativistic speeds (&gt;), the only speeds at which it is possible to centrifugally balance the immense gravitational attraction of the singularity, and thereby remain in orbit above the event horizon. This configuration of bright material implies that the EHT observed M87* from a perspective catching the black hole&#x27;s accretion disc nearly edge-on, as the whole system rotated clockwise.

The extreme gravitational lensing associated with black holes produces the illusion of a perspective that sees the accretion disc from above. In reality, most of the ring in the EHT image was created when the light emitted by the far side of the accretion disc bent around the black hole&#x27;s gravity well and escaped, meaning that most of the possible perspectives on M87* can see the entire disc, even that directly behind the &quot;shadow&quot;.

In 2015, the EHT detected magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of Sagittarius A* and even discerned some of their properties. The field lines that pass through the accretion disc were a complex mixture of ordered and tangled. Theoretical studies of black holes had predicted the existence of magnetic fields.

In April 2023, an image of the shadow of the Messier 87 black hole and the related high-energy jet, viewed together for the first time, was presented.

=== Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes ===

On 14 September 2015, the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful direct observation of gravitational waves. The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes: one with about 36 solar masses, and the other around 29 solar masses. This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date. For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two objects before the merger was just 350 km, or roughly four times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses. The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.

More importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state. Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole. From the LIGO signal, it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown. From these, it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object, which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger. The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere. Hence, observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere; however, it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere.

The observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries. Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.

Since then, many more gravitational wave events have been observed.

=== Stars orbiting Sagittarius A* ===
The proper motions of stars near the centre of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole. Since 1995, astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars.

Since then, one of the stars—called S2—has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data, astronomers were able to refine the calculations of the mass to and a radius of less than 0.002 light-years for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars. The upper limit on the object&#x27;s size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius. Nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume. Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.

=== Accretion of matter ===

Due to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disk-like structure around the object. Artists&#x27; impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat-space body hiding the part of the disk just behind it, but in reality gravitational lensing would greatly distort the image of the accretion disk.

Within such a disk, friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward, allowing matter to fall farther inward, thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas.

When the accreting object is a neutron star or a black hole, the gas in the inner accretion disk orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the compact object. The resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disk to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation (mainly X-rays). These bright X-ray sources may be detected by telescopes. This process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy-producing processes known. Up to 40% of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted as radiation. In nuclear fusion only about 0.7% of the rest mass will be emitted as energy. In many cases, accretion disks are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the poles, which carry away much of the energy. The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood, in part due to insufficient data.

As such, many of the universe&#x27;s more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion disks of supermassive black holes. Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion. It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.

Stars have been observed to get torn apart by tidal forces in the immediate vicinity of supermassive black holes in galaxy nuclei, in what is known as a tidal disruption event (TDE). Some of the material from the disrupted star forms an accretion disk around the black hole, which emits observable electromagnetic radiation.

In November 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported.

==== X-ray binaries ====

X-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars (compact object) accretes matter from another (regular) star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides an opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole.

If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole. The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star. By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit (the maximum mass a star can have without collapsing) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.

The first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton, Louise Webster, and Paul Murdin in 1972. Some doubt remained, due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole. Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients. In this class of system, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. These systems actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10–50 years. During the period of low X-ray emission, called quiescence, the accretion disk is extremely faint, allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period. One of the best such candidates is V404 Cygni.

===== Quasi-periodic oscillations =====
The X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes.

==== Galactic nuclei ====

Astronomers use the term &quot;active galaxy&quot; to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei (AGN) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes, which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of interstellar gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.

Although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies&#x27; nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy.

It is now widely accepted that the centre of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole. The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy&#x27;s bulge, known as the M–sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and that of the galaxy itself.

=== Microlensing ===
Another way the black hole nature of an object may be tested is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected, such as light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. Microlensing occurs when the sources are unresolved and the observer sees a small brightening. The turn of the millennium saw the first 3 candidate detections of black holes in this way, and in January 2022, astronomers reported the first confirmed detection of a microlensing event from an isolated black hole.

Another possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars orbiting the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*.

== Alternatives ==
The evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star. The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter. New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound. A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars, and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars. Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars. These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.

Since the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes. The average density of a black hole is comparable to that of water. Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.

The evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes not to form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections. A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artefacts. For example, in the fuzzball model based on string theory, the individual states of a black hole solution do not generally have an event horizon or singularity, but for a classical/semiclassical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity.

A few theoretical objects have been conjectured to match observations of astronomical black hole candidates identically or near-identically, but which function via a different mechanism. These include the gravastar, the black star, related nestar and the dark-energy star.

== Open questions ==
=== Entropy and thermodynamics ===

In 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge. This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of an isolated system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease in the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.

The link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking&#x27;s discovery in 1974 that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.

One puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard &#x27;t Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.

Although general relativity can be used to perform a semiclassical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities, such as mass, charge, pressure, etc. Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy. Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.

=== Information loss paradox ===

Because a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside, but represented on the event horizon in accordance with the holographic principle. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.

The question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community. In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of a property called unitarity, and it has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy, though this has also been disputed. Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem.

One attempt to resolve the black hole information paradox is known as black hole complementarity. In 2012, the &quot;firewall paradox&quot; was introduced with the goal of demonstrating that black hole complementarity fails to solve the information paradox. According to quantum field theory in curved spacetime, a single emission of Hawking radiation involves two mutually entangled particles. The outgoing particle escapes and is emitted as a quantum of Hawking radiation; the infalling particle is swallowed by the black hole. Assume a black hole formed a finite time in the past and will fully evaporate away in some finite time in the future. Then, it will emit only a finite amount of information encoded within its Hawking radiation. According to research by physicists like Don Page and Leonard Susskind, there will eventually be a time by which an outgoing particle must be entangled with all the Hawking radiation the black hole has previously emitted.

This seemingly creates a paradox: a principle called &quot;monogamy of entanglement&quot; requires that, like any quantum system, the outgoing particle cannot be fully entangled with two other systems at the same time; yet here the outgoing particle appears to be entangled both with the infalling particle and, independently, with past Hawking radiation. In order to resolve this contradiction, physicists may eventually be forced to give up one of three time-tested principles: Einstein&#x27;s equivalence principle, unitarity, or local quantum field theory. One possible solution, which violates the equivalence principle, is that a &quot;firewall&quot; destroys incoming particles at the event horizon. In general, which—if any—of these assumptions should be abandoned remains a topic of debate.

== In science fiction ==

Christopher Nolan&#x27;s 2014 science fiction epic &quot;Interstellar&quot; features a black hole known as Gargantua, which is the central object of a planetary system in a distant galaxy. Humanity accessed this system via a wormhole in the outer solar system, near Saturn.

== See also ==

* Black brane or Black string
* Black Hole Initiative
* Black hole starship
* Black holes in fiction
* Blanet
* BTZ black hole
* Golden binary
* Hypothetical black hole (disambiguation)
* Kugelblitz (astrophysics)
* List of black holes
* List of nearest black holes
* Outline of black holes
* Sonic black hole
* Virtual black hole
* Susskind-Hawking battle
* Timeline of black hole physics
* White hole
* Planck star
* Dark star (dark matter)
== Notes ==
== References ==
==Sources==
* , the lecture notes on which the book was based are available for free from Sean Carroll&#x27;s website 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
=== Popular reading ===
* 
* 
* 
* 


=== University textbooks and monographs ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== Review papers ===

* Lecture notes from 2005 SLAC Summer Institute.
* 


== External links ==

* &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;: &quot;Singularities and Black Holes&quot; by Erik Curiel and Peter Bokulich.
* Black Holes: Gravity&#x27;s Relentless Pull – Interactive multimedia Web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the Space Telescope Science Institute (HubbleSite)
* ESA&#x27;s Black Hole Visualization 
* Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Black Holes
* Schwarzschild Geometry
* Black holes - basic (NYT; April 2021)

=== Videos ===
* 16-year-long study tracks stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
* Movie of Black Hole Candidate from Max Planck Institute
* Computer visualisation of the signal detected by LIGO
* Two Black Holes Merge into One (based upon the signal GW150914)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="2" end="12" title="Black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="126" end="141" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="159" end="177" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="215" end="219" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q875399" start="248" end="256" title="boundary (topology)" label="boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181741" start="284" end="297" title="event horizon" label="event horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="505" end="515" title="black body" label="black body"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246697" start="542" end="582" title="Quantum field theory in curved spacetime" label="Quantum field theory in curved spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q497396" start="617" end="634" title="Hawking radiation" label="Hawking radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="641" end="658" title="thermal radiation" label="the same spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="680" end="691" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q182460" start="755" end="773" title="Orders of magnitude (temperature)" label="order of billionth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="780" end="786" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047034" start="791" end="809" title="stellar black hole" label="stellar black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="881" end="900" title="gravitational field" label="gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q373097" start="982" end="994" title="John Michell" label="John Michell"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="999" end="1019" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q57145" start="1030" end="1048" title="Karl Schwarzschild" label="Karl Schwarzschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q742969" start="1178" end="1198" title="Schwarzschild metric" label="Schwarzschild metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q370157" start="1219" end="1236" title="David Finkelstein" label="David Finkelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="1546" end="1558" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q233974" start="1563" end="1583" title="Jocelyn Bell Burnell" label="Jocelyn Bell Burnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q329273" start="1612" end="1637" title="gravitationally collapsed" label="gravitationally collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q332674" start="1722" end="1732" title="Cygnus X-1" label="Cygnus X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079618" start="1807" end="1819" title="stellar mass" label="stellar mass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1830" end="1852" title="Stellar evolution#Supernova" label="massive stars collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="1873" end="1883" title="Stellar evolution" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="2009" end="2019" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853025" start="2102" end="2117" title="Direct collapse black hole" label="direct collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054444" start="2121" end="2130" title="gas cloud" label="gas cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="2157" end="2180" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="2211" end="2219" title="galaxies" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="2302" end="2308" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q237604" start="2430" end="2444" title="accretion disk" label="accretion disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="2455" end="2463" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="2473" end="2479" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="2964" end="2978" title="binary star" label="binary systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q237284" start="3026" end="3040" title="Sagittarius A*" label="Sagittarius A*"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="3061" end="3070" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="3135" end="3140" title="Solar energy" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q373097" start="3290" end="3302" title="John Michell" label="John Michell"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="3341" end="3361" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q166530" start="3671" end="3686" title="escape velocity" label="escape velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q60662" start="4071" end="4091" title="Franz Xaver von Zach" label="Franz Xaver von Zach"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="4619" end="4634" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="4659" end="4677" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q57145" start="4774" end="4792" title="Karl Schwarzschild" label="Karl Schwarzschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q742969" start="4801" end="4809" title="Schwarzschild metric" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="4817" end="4841" title="Einstein field equations" label="Einstein field equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="4861" end="4880" title="gravitational field" label="gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068091" start="4886" end="4896" title="point mass" label="point mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15821438" start="4953" end="4968" title="Johannes Droste" label="Johannes Droste"/>
<link wikidata="Q41688" start="4983" end="4998" title="Hendrik Lorentz" label="Hendrik Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q72755" start="5170" end="5190" title="Schwarzschild radius" label="Schwarzschild radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q863349" start="5208" end="5216" title="singularity (mathematics)" label="singular"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="5367" end="5383" title="Arthur Eddington" label="Arthur Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="5464" end="5480" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Georges Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168006" start="5569" end="5591" title="coordinate singularity" label="coordinate singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="5817" end="5827" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q148109" start="6373" end="6399" title="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar" label="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="6466" end="6492" title="electron-degenerate matter" label="electron-degenerate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51366" start="6539" end="6558" title="Chandrasekhar limit" label="Chandrasekhar limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q133267" start="6665" end="6675" title="Lev Landau" label="Lev Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="6773" end="6784" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="6857" end="6869" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="6905" end="6923" title="Robert Oppenheimer" label="Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139232" start="6989" end="7021" title="Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit" label="Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q131594" start="7254" end="7279" title="Pauli exclusion principle" label="Pauli exclusion principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38080891" start="7459" end="7467" title="GW170817" label="GW170817"/>
<link wikidata="Q174920" start="8363" end="8378" title="Hartland Snyder" label="Hartland Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q121493524" start="8392" end="8416" title="Oppenheimer–Snyder model" label="Oppenheimer–Snyder model"/>
<link wikidata="Q370157" start="8817" end="8834" title="David Finkelstein" label="David Finkelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478885" start="9247" end="9265" title="Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates" label="complete extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904381" start="9292" end="9306" title="Martin Kruskal" label="Martin Kruskal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936878" start="9381" end="9413" title="golden age of general relativity" label="golden age of general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="9556" end="9562" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q233974" start="9567" end="9587" title="Jocelyn Bell Burnell" label="Jocelyn Bell Burnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q959840" start="10002" end="10010" title="Roy Kerr" label="Roy Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068747" start="10017" end="10035" title="Kerr metric" label="the exact solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094364" start="10042" end="10061" title="rotating black hole" label="rotating black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q453319" start="10080" end="10091" title="Ezra T. Newman" label="Ezra Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="10102" end="10114" title="axisymmetric" label="axisymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="10167" end="10187" title="electrically charged" label="electrically charged"/>
<link wikidata="Q495860" start="10209" end="10222" title="Werner Israel" label="Werner Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q898131" start="10224" end="10238" title="Brandon Carter" label="Brandon Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376515" start="10263" end="10278" title="no-hair theorem" label="no-hair theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190600" start="10389" end="10407" title="Kerr–Newman metric" label="Kerr–Newman metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="10409" end="10413" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="10415" end="10431" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23956" start="10705" end="10722" title="Vladimir A. Belinsky" label="Vladimir Belinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q780498" start="10724" end="10741" title="Isaak Markovich Khalatnikov" label="Isaak Khalatnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q931452" start="10747" end="10762" title="Evgeny Lifshitz" label="Evgeny Lifshitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q193803" start="10861" end="10874" title="Roger Penrose" label="Roger Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="10879" end="10894" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="11015" end="11037" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="11093" end="11102" title="Royal Greenwich Observatory" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q531487" start="11107" end="11114" title="David Dunlap Observatory" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q332674" start="11135" end="11145" title="Cygnus X-1" label="Cygnus X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="11158" end="11163" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161262" start="11275" end="11288" title="James Bardeen" label="James Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q504448" start="11290" end="11306" title="Jacob Bekenstein" label="Jacob Bekenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q911284" start="11373" end="11398" title="black hole thermodynamics" label="black hole thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q849392" start="11474" end="11496" title="laws of thermodynamics" label="laws of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="11533" end="11540" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758384" start="11546" end="11561" title="surface gravity" label="surface gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="11565" end="11576" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="11639" end="11659" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="11707" end="11717" title="black body" label="black body"/>
<link wikidata="Q497396" start="11827" end="11844" title="Hawking radiation" label="Hawking radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458663" start="11892" end="11921" title="LIGO Scientific Collaboration" label="LIGO Scientific Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063130" start="11930" end="11949" title="Virgo interferometer" label="Virgo collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683173" start="11950" end="11986" title="first observation of gravitational waves" label="announced the first direct detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="11990" end="12008" title="gravitational wave" label="gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944788" start="12194" end="12217" title="Event Horizon Telescope" label="Event Horizon Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="12284" end="12299" title="Galactic Center" label="galactic centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q767805" start="12301" end="12313" title="Gaia (spacecraft)" label="Gaia mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q114345349" start="12394" end="12402" title="Gaia BH1" label="Gaia BH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="12436" end="12452" title="brown dwarf star" label="brown dwarf star"/>
<link wikidata="Q116986835" start="12460" end="12468" title="Gaia BH2" label="Gaia BH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="12707" end="12725" title="gravitational lens" label="gravitational lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q504473" start="12833" end="12848" title="Robert H. Dicke" label="Robert H. Dicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202492" start="12915" end="12937" title="Black Hole of Calcutta" label="Black Hole of Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="13063" end="13067" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313730" start="13084" end="13096" title="Science News" label="Science News"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="13269" end="13320" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q202631" start="13446" end="13458" title="John Archibald Wheeler" label="John Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q166530" start="13654" end="13669" title="escape velocity" label="escape velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="13700" end="13714" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q72755" start="13928" end="13948" title="Schwarzschild radius" label="Schwarzschild radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q72755" start="14059" end="14079" title="Schwarzschild radius" label="Schwarzschild radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376515" start="14160" end="14175" title="no-hair theorem" label="no-hair theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q173356" start="14971" end="14987" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q290420" start="15001" end="15009" title="ADM mass" label="ADM mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149343" start="15119" end="15133" title="frame dragging" label="frame dragging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150290" start="15141" end="15162" title="gravitomagnetism" label="gravitomagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083519" start="15188" end="15209" title="Lense–Thirring precession" label="Lense–Thirring effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q596577" start="15474" end="15492" title="dissipative system" label="dissipative system"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="15579" end="15600" title="electrical resistance" label="electrical resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290083" start="15605" end="15622" title="membrane paradigm" label="membrane paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q185674" start="15653" end="15667" title="field theory (physics)" label="field theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q142270" start="15783" end="15798" title="T-symmetry" label="time-reversible"/>
<link wikidata="Q205805" start="16187" end="16210" title="Conservation law" label="approximately conserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q232431" start="16211" end="16225" title="quantum number" label="quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q110346" start="16245" end="16258" title="baryon number" label="baryon number"/>
<link wikidata="Q174012" start="16263" end="16276" title="lepton number" label="lepton number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471710" start="16336" end="16371" title="black hole information loss paradox" label="black hole information loss paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394061" start="16609" end="16617" title="Solutions of the Einstein field equations" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q865665" start="16640" end="16663" title="Birkhoff&amp;#x27;s theorem (relativity)" label="Birkhoff&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908077" start="16680" end="16695" title="Vacuum solution (general relativity)" label="vacuum solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576722" start="16704" end="16725" title="Spherically symmetric spacetime" label="spherically symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316152" start="17217" end="17235" title="charged black hole" label="charged black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q540664" start="17258" end="17283" title="Reissner–Nordström metric" label="Reissner–Nordström metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966119" start="17369" end="17379" title="stationary spacetime" label="stationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601295" start="17880" end="17888" title="extremal black hole" label="extremal"/>
<link wikidata="Q285949" start="18038" end="18057" title="naked singularity" label="naked singularities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191211" start="18146" end="18174" title="cosmic censorship hypothesis" label="cosmic censorship hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q986455" start="18282" end="18298" title="energy conditions" label="realistic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="18389" end="18410" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetic force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073791" start="18657" end="18669" title="GRS 1915+105" label="GRS 1915+105"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="18799" end="18812" title="dimensionless" label="dimensionless"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="19182" end="19197" title="solar mass" label="mass of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="19468" end="19477" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188682" start="20320" end="20347" title="gravitational time dilation" label="gravitational time dilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q656181" start="20691" end="20713" title="gravitational redshift" label="gravitational redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="21192" end="21210" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210546" start="21324" end="21345" title="equivalence principle" label="equivalence principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="21352" end="21360" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q201721" start="21688" end="21713" title="gravitational singularity" label="gravitational singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105538" start="21904" end="21920" title="ring singularity" label="ring singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="22167" end="22174" title="mass density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q223325" start="22640" end="22651" title="tidal force" label="tidal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q788017" start="22691" end="22708" title="spaghettification" label="spaghettification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544" start="23029" end="23037" title="wormhole" label="wormhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876815" start="23215" end="23236" title="closed timelike curve" label="closed timelike curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149766" start="23331" end="23340" title="causality (physics)" label="causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q33447" start="23350" end="23369" title="grandfather paradox" label="grandfather paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="23692" end="23707" title="quantum effects" label="quantum effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="23971" end="23986" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q405372" start="24379" end="24399" title="instability" label="dynamically unstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149343" start="25409" end="25423" title="frame-dragging" label="frame-dragging"/>
<link wikidata="Q616172" start="26146" end="26161" title="Penrose process" label="Penrose process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925027" start="26448" end="26472" title="Blandford–Znajek process" label="Blandford–Znajek process"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="26559" end="26566" title="quasars" label="quasars"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="26577" end="26599" title="active galactic nuclei" label="active galactic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="26652" end="26669" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="Newtonian gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366867" start="26671" end="26684" title="test particle" label="test particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="28669" end="28677" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q193460" start="28705" end="28717" title="scalar field" label="scalar field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384211" start="28728" end="28741" title="exotic matter" label="exotic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068747" start="28747" end="28760" title="Kerr solution" label="Kerr solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q329273" start="28994" end="29016" title="gravitational collapse" label="gravitational collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="29201" end="29209" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="29392" end="29415" title="stellar nucleosynthesis" label="stellar nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="29692" end="29711" title="Degenerate matter" label="degeneracy pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="29796" end="29808" title="Degenerate matter" label="denser state"/>
<link wikidata="Q368442" start="29852" end="29864" title="compact star" label="compact star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049029" start="30004" end="30021" title="Type II supernova" label="Type II supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="30474" end="30481" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047034" start="30780" end="30803" title="stellar mass black hole" label="stellar mass black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="30806" end="30820" title="Star formation" label="Star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="31668" end="31683" title="frame of reference" label="reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155939" start="32659" end="32681" title="primordial black holes" label="primordial black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="33012" end="33023" title="Planck mass" label="Planck mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="33128" end="33133" title="density" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="33265" end="33281" title="inflation theory" label="inflation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="33380" end="33391" title="Hubble flow" label="Hubble flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="33529" end="33533" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="33781" end="33792" title="high-energy physics" label="high-energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="33953" end="33973" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q12986210" start="34462" end="34472" title="braneworld" label="braneworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q609501" start="34559" end="34575" title="micro black hole" label="micro black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="34637" end="34647" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="34701" end="34722" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="34726" end="34730" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q497396" start="34934" end="34943" title="black hole evaporation" label="evaporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="35090" end="35096" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="35145" end="35162" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35305" end="35342" title="Supermassive black hole#Formation" label="formation of supermassive black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050633" start="35437" end="35465" title="intermediate-mass black hole" label="intermediate-mass black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="35476" end="35492" title="globular cluster" label="globular cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="36021" end="36034" title="Boltzmann constant" label="&amp;quot;k&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="36233" end="36252" title="black body spectrum" label="black body spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q497396" start="36586" end="36605" title="Hawking temperature" label="Hawking temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q182460" start="36869" end="36879" title="nanokelvin" label="nanokelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="36933" end="36960" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="37265" end="37269" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q726648" start="38486" end="38517" title="Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope" label="Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="39048" end="39057" title="Chronology of the universe" label="timescale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944788" start="39487" end="39510" title="Event Horizon Telescope" label="Event Horizon Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q237284" start="40369" end="40383" title="Sagittarius A*" label="Sagittarius A*"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="41006" end="41012" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705752" start="41239" end="41254" title="Relativistic beaming" label="Doppler beaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q14041" start="41736" end="41740" title="M87*" label="M87*"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="42879" end="42883" title="LIGO" label="LIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683173" start="42946" end="42987" title="first observation of gravitational waves" label="direct observation of gravitational waves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43696" end="43704" title="Binary black hole#Ringdown" label="ringdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q24717009" start="44705" end="44730" title="List of gravitational wave observations" label="gravitational wave events"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="44794" end="44807" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946193" start="45117" end="45132" title="Keplerian orbit" label="Keplerian orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="45246" end="45256" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514814" start="45332" end="45334" title="S2 (star)" label="S2"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="46052" end="46084" title="conservation of angular momentum" label="conservation of angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544012" start="46107" end="46125" title="gravitational well" label="gravitational well"/>
<link wikidata="Q368442" start="46866" end="46880" title="compact object" label="compact object"/>
<link wikidata="Q284657" start="47401" end="47418" title="relativistic jets" label="relativistic jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="47772" end="47778" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="47903" end="47914" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q129686" start="48047" end="48073" title="ultraluminous X-ray source" label="ultraluminous X-ray source"/>
<link wikidata="Q15850900" start="48290" end="48318" title="tidal disruption event" label="tidal disruption event (TDE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961" start="48610" end="48624" title="X-ray binaries" label="X-ray binaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="48696" end="48701" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q332674" start="49657" end="49667" title="Cygnus X-1" label="Cygnus X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960309" start="49699" end="49720" title="Charles Thomas Bolton" label="Charles Thomas Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q58085614" start="49722" end="49736" title="Louise Webster" label="Louise Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q58208535" start="49742" end="49753" title="Paul Murdin" label="Paul Murdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635586" start="50429" end="50439" title="V404 Cygni" label="V404 Cygni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412335" start="50590" end="50616" title="quasi-periodic oscillation" label="quasi-periodic oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="51055" end="51068" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="51460" end="51463" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="51475" end="51491" title="interstellar gas" label="interstellar gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q284657" start="51535" end="51539" title="relativistic jet" label="jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="51911" end="51927" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13720" start="51929" end="51932" title="Messier 32" label="M32"/>
<link wikidata="Q14041" start="51934" end="51937" title="Messier 87" label="M87"/>
<link wikidata="Q671468" start="51939" end="51947" title="NGC 3115" label="NGC 3115"/>
<link wikidata="Q930908" start="51949" end="51957" title="NGC 3377" label="NGC 3377"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658" start="51959" end="51967" title="NGC 4258" label="NGC 4258"/>
<link wikidata="Q754715" start="51969" end="51977" title="NGC 4889" label="NGC 4889"/>
<link wikidata="Q618632" start="51979" end="51987" title="NGC 1277" label="NGC 1277"/>
<link wikidata="Q580394" start="51989" end="51995" title="OJ 287" label="OJ 287"/>
<link wikidata="Q296198" start="51997" end="52011" title="APM 08279+5255" label="APM 08279+5255"/>
<link wikidata="Q91461627" start="52020" end="52035" title="Sombrero Galaxy" label="Sombrero Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q854155" start="52282" end="52287" title="galactic bulge" label="bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424023" start="52302" end="52318" title="M–sigma relation" label="M–sigma relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="52766" end="52770" title="lens" label="lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="52879" end="52888" title="arcsecond" label="arcsecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028022" start="52891" end="52903" title="Microlensing" label="Microlensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q237284" start="53396" end="53410" title="Sagittarius A*" label="Sagittarius A*"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="53664" end="53680" title="Phase (matter)" label="phases of matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="53723" end="53728" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="53803" end="53817" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071174" start="53850" end="53856" title="Q star" label="Q star"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="53882" end="53896" title="standard model" label="standard model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141611" start="53920" end="53925" title="preon" label="preon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82586" start="53972" end="53978" title="lepton" label="lepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15218857" start="54013" end="54023" title="preon star" label="preon star"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="55127" end="55145" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511048" start="55347" end="55355" title="Fuzzball (string theory)" label="fuzzball"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="55371" end="55384" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q651063" start="55851" end="55860" title="gravastar" label="gravastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298968" start="55866" end="55876" title="black star (semiclassical gravity)" label="black star"/>
<link wikidata="Q651063" start="55886" end="55892" title="nestar" label="nestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002787" start="55901" end="55917" title="dark-energy star" label="dark-energy star"/>
<link wikidata="Q911284" start="56193" end="56227" title="second law of black hole mechanics" label="second law of black hole mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="56258" end="56286" title="second law of thermodynamics" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="56395" end="56408" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="56949" end="56968" title="blackbody radiation" label="blackbody radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q911284" start="57449" end="57482" title="first law of black hole mechanics" label="first law of black hole mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179380" start="57505" end="57532" title="first law of thermodynamics" label="first law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q911916" start="57763" end="57781" title="extensive quantity" label="extensive quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184592" start="57856" end="57876" title="Gerard &amp;#x27;t Hooft" label="Gerard &amp;#x27;t Hooft"/>
<link wikidata="Q203243" start="57881" end="57897" title="Leonard Susskind" label="Leonard Susskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q911473" start="57913" end="57934" title="holographic principle" label="holographic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="58212" end="58233" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q507732" start="58585" end="58602" title="Andrew Strominger" label="Andrew Strominger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143841" start="58607" end="58618" title="Cumrun Vafa" label="Cumrun Vafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q739962" start="58899" end="58919" title="loop quantum gravity" label="loop quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471710" start="59863" end="59893" title="black hole information paradox" label="black hole information paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550684" start="60034" end="60043" title="unitarity (physics)" label="unitarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582215" start="60407" end="60433" title="black hole complementarity" label="black hole complementarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452017" start="60454" end="60470" title="Firewall (physics)" label="firewall paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246697" start="60608" end="60648" title="quantum field theory in curved spacetime" label="quantum field theory in curved spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="60652" end="60667" title="Black-body radiation" label="single emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q215675" start="60711" end="60720" title="quantum entanglement" label="entangled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035873" start="61119" end="61127" title="Don Page (physicist)" label="Don Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q106808950" start="61360" end="61384" title="monogamy of entanglement" label="monogamy of entanglement"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="62128" end="62152" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417189" start="62185" end="62197" title="Interstellar (film)" label="Interstellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544" start="62353" end="62361" title="wormhole" label="wormhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="62375" end="62387" title="Solar System" label="solar system"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="62394" end="62400" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q740956" start="62421" end="62432" title="Black brane" label="Black brane"/>
<link wikidata="Q740956" start="62436" end="62448" title="Black string" label="Black string"/>
<link wikidata="Q48841064" start="62451" end="62472" title="Black Hole Initiative" label="Black Hole Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420061" start="62475" end="62494" title="Black hole starship" label="Black hole starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922345" start="62497" end="62519" title="Black holes in fiction" label="Black holes in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q98273894" start="62522" end="62528" title="Blanet" label="Blanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836741" start="62531" end="62545" title="BTZ black hole" label="BTZ black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378077" start="62548" end="62561" title="Golden binary" label="Golden binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613891" start="62564" end="62604" title="Hypothetical black hole (disambiguation)" label="Hypothetical black hole (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003861" start="62607" end="62632" title="Kugelblitz (astrophysics)" label="Kugelblitz (astrophysics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064688" start="62635" end="62654" title="List of black holes" label="List of black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068183" start="62657" end="62684" title="List of nearest black holes" label="List of nearest black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001176" start="62687" end="62709" title="Outline of black holes" label="Outline of black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254125" start="62712" end="62728" title="Sonic black hole" label="Sonic black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120995" start="62731" end="62749" title="Virtual black hole" label="Virtual black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471710" start="62752" end="62775" title="Susskind-Hawking battle" label="Susskind-Hawking battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084417" start="62778" end="62808" title="Timeline of black hole physics" label="Timeline of black hole physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131468" start="62811" end="62821" title="White hole" label="White hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q18881932" start="62824" end="62835" title="Planck star" label="Planck star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495963" start="62838" end="62861" title="Dark star (dark matter)" label="Dark star (dark matter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q915217" start="63182" end="63186" title="SLAC" label="SLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="63240" end="63275" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="63545" end="63548" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4651" wikidata="Q306786" url="?curid=4651" title="Beta decay">
<text>In nuclear physics, beta decay (β-decay) is a type of radioactive decay in which an atomic nucleus emits a beta particle (fast energetic electron or positron), transforming into an isobar of that nuclide. For example, beta decay of a neutron transforms it into a proton by the emission of an electron accompanied by an antineutrino; or, conversely a proton is converted into a neutron by the emission of a positron with a neutrino in what is called &quot;positron emission&quot;. Neither the beta particle nor its associated (anti-)neutrino exist within the nucleus prior to beta decay, but are created in the decay process. By this process, unstable atoms obtain a more stable ratio of protons to neutrons. The probability of a nuclide decaying due to beta and other forms of decay is determined by its nuclear binding energy. The binding energies of all existing nuclides form what is called the nuclear band or valley of stability. For either electron or positron emission to be energetically possible, the energy release (see below) or &quot;Q&quot; value must be positive.

Beta decay is a consequence of the weak force, which is characterized by relatively long decay times. Nucleons are composed of up quarks and down quarks, and the weak force allows a quark to change its flavour by means of a virtual W boson leading to creation of an electron/antineutrino or positron/neutrino pair. For example, a neutron, composed of two down quarks and an up quark, decays to a proton composed of a down quark and two up quarks.

Electron capture is sometimes included as a type of beta decay, because the basic nuclear process, mediated by the weak force, is the same. In electron capture, an inner atomic electron is captured by a proton in the nucleus, transforming it into a neutron, and an electron neutrino is released.

==Description==
The two types of beta decay are known as &quot;beta minus&quot; and &quot;beta plus&quot;. In beta minus (β−) decay, a neutron is converted to a proton, and the process creates an electron and an electron antineutrino; while in beta plus (β+) decay, a proton is converted to a neutron and the process creates a positron and an electron neutrino. β+ decay is also known as positron emission.

Beta decay conserves a quantum number known as the lepton number, or the number of electrons and their associated neutrinos (other leptons are the muon and tau particles). These particles have lepton number +1, while their antiparticles have lepton number −1. Since a proton or neutron has lepton number zero, β+ decay (a positron, or antielectron) must be accompanied with an electron neutrino, while β− decay (an electron) must be accompanied by an electron antineutrino.

An example of electron emission (β− decay) is the decay of carbon-14 into nitrogen-14 with a half-life of about 5,730 years:

In this form of decay, the original element becomes a new chemical element in a process known as nuclear transmutation. This new element has an unchanged mass number , but an atomic number that is increased by one. As in all nuclear decays, the decaying element (in this case ) is known as the &quot;parent nuclide&quot; while the resulting element (in this case ) is known as the &quot;daughter nuclide&quot;.

Another example is the decay of hydrogen-3 (tritium) into helium-3 with a half-life of about 12.3 years:

An example of positron emission (β+ decay) is the decay of magnesium-23 into sodium-23 with a half-life of about 11.3 s:
β+ decay also results in nuclear transmutation, with the daughter element having an atomic number that is decreased by one.
The beta spectrum, or distribution of energy values for the beta particles, is continuous. The total energy of the decay process is divided between the electron, the antineutrino, and the recoiling nuclide. In the figure to the right, an example of an electron with 0.40 MeV energy from the beta decay of 210Bi is shown. In this example, the total decay energy is 1.16 MeV, so the antineutrino has the remaining energy: . An electron at the far right of the curve would have the maximum possible kinetic energy, leaving the energy of the neutrino to be only its small rest mass.

==History==

===Discovery and initial characterization===
Radioactivity was discovered in 1896 by Henri Becquerel in uranium, and subsequently observed by Marie and Pierre Curie in thorium and in the newly discovered elements polonium and radium. In 1899, Ernest Rutherford separated radioactive emissions into two types: alpha and beta (now beta minus), based on penetration of objects and ability to cause ionization. Alpha rays could be stopped by thin sheets of paper or aluminium, whereas beta rays could penetrate several millimetres of aluminium. In 1900, Paul Villard identified a still more penetrating type of radiation, which Rutherford identified as a fundamentally new type in 1903 and termed gamma rays. Alpha, beta, and gamma are the first three letters of the Greek alphabet.

In 1900, Becquerel measured the mass-to-charge ratio () for beta particles by the method of J.J. Thomson used to study cathode rays and identify the electron. He found that for a beta particle is the same as for Thomson&#x27;s electron, and therefore suggested that the beta particle is in fact an electron.

In 1901, Rutherford and Frederick Soddy showed that alpha and beta radioactivity involves the transmutation of atoms into atoms of other chemical elements. In 1913, after the products of more radioactive decays were known, Soddy and Kazimierz Fajans independently proposed their radioactive displacement law, which states that beta (i.e., ) emission from one element produces another element one place to the right in the periodic table, while alpha emission produces an element two places to the left.

===Neutrinos===

The study of beta decay provided the first physical evidence for the existence of the neutrino. In both alpha and gamma decay, the resulting alpha or gamma particle has a narrow energy distribution, since the particle carries the energy from the difference between the initial and final nuclear states. However, the kinetic energy distribution, or spectrum, of beta particles measured by Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn in 1911 and by Jean Danysz in 1913 showed multiple lines on a diffuse background. These measurements offered the first hint that beta particles have a continuous spectrum. In 1914, James Chadwick used a magnetic spectrometer with one of Hans Geiger&#x27;s new counters to make more accurate measurements which showed that the spectrum was continuous. The results, which appeared to be in contradiction to the law of conservation of energy, were validated by means of calorimetric measurements in 1929 by Lise Meitner and Wilhelm Orthmann. If beta decay were simply electron emission as assumed at the time, then the energy of the emitted electron should have a particular, well-defined value. For beta decay, however, the observed broad distribution of energies suggested that energy is lost in the beta decay process. This spectrum was puzzling for many years.

A second problem is related to the conservation of angular momentum. Molecular band spectra showed that the nuclear spin of nitrogen-14 is 1 (i.e., equal to the reduced Planck constant) and more generally that the spin is integral for nuclei of even mass number and half-integral for nuclei of odd mass number. This was later explained by the proton-neutron model of the nucleus. Beta decay leaves the mass number unchanged, so the change of nuclear spin must be an integer. However, the electron spin is 1/2, hence angular momentum would not be conserved if beta decay were simply electron emission.

From 1920 to 1927, Charles Drummond Ellis (along with Chadwick and colleagues) further established that the beta decay spectrum is continuous. In 1933, Ellis and Nevill Mott obtained strong evidence that the beta spectrum has an effective upper bound in energy. Niels Bohr had suggested that the beta spectrum could be explained if conservation of energy was true only in a statistical sense, thus this principle might be violated in any given decay. However, the upper bound in beta energies determined by Ellis and Mott ruled out that notion. Now, the problem of how to account for the variability of energy in known beta decay products, as well as for conservation of momentum and angular momentum in the process, became acute.

In a famous letter written in 1930, Wolfgang Pauli attempted to resolve the beta-particle energy conundrum by suggesting that, in addition to electrons and protons, atomic nuclei also contained an extremely light neutral particle, which he called the neutron. He suggested that this &quot;neutron&quot; was also emitted during beta decay (thus accounting for the known missing energy, momentum, and angular momentum), but it had simply not yet been observed. In 1931, Enrico Fermi renamed Pauli&#x27;s &quot;neutron&quot; the &quot;neutrino&quot; (&#x27;little neutral one&#x27; in Italian). In 1933, Fermi published his landmark theory for beta decay, where he applied the principles of quantum mechanics to matter particles, supposing that they can be created and annihilated, just as the light quanta in atomic transitions. Thus, according to Fermi, neutrinos are created in the beta-decay process, rather than contained in the nucleus; the same happens to electrons. The neutrino interaction with matter was so weak that detecting it proved a severe experimental challenge. Further indirect evidence of the existence of the neutrino was obtained by observing the recoil of nuclei that emitted such a particle after absorbing an electron. Neutrinos were finally detected directly in 1956 by the American physicists Clyde Cowan and Frederick Reines in the Cowan–Reines neutrino experiment. The properties of neutrinos were (with a few minor modifications) as predicted by Pauli and Fermi.

=== decay and electron capture===
In 1934, Frédéric and Irène Joliot-Curie bombarded aluminium with alpha particles to effect the nuclear reaction  +  →  + , and observed that the product isotope emits a positron identical to those found in cosmic rays (discovered by Carl David Anderson in 1932). This was the first example of  decay (positron emission), which they termed artificial radioactivity since is a short-lived nuclide which does not exist in nature. In recognition of their discovery, the couple were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1935.

The theory of electron capture was first discussed by Gian-Carlo Wick in a 1934 paper, and then developed by Hideki Yukawa and others. K-electron capture was first observed in 1937 by Luis Alvarez, in the nuclide 48V. Alvarez went on to study electron capture in 67Ga and other nuclides.

===Non-conservation of parity===
In 1956, Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang noticed that there was no evidence that parity was conserved in weak interactions, and so they postulated that this symmetry may not be preserved by the weak force. They sketched the design for an experiment for testing conservation of parity in the laboratory. Later that year, Chien-Shiung Wu and coworkers conducted the Wu experiment showing an asymmetrical beta decay of  at cold temperatures that proved that parity is not conserved in beta decay. This surprising result overturned long-held assumptions about parity and the weak force. In recognition of their theoretical work, Lee and Yang were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1957. However Wu, who was female, was not awarded the Nobel prize.

==β− decay ==

In  decay, the weak interaction converts an atomic nucleus into a nucleus with atomic number increased by one, while emitting an electron () and an electron antineutrino ().  decay generally occurs in neutron-rich nuclei. The generic equation is:
where and are the mass number and atomic number of the decaying nucleus, and X and X′ are the initial and final elements, respectively.

Another example is when the free neutron () decays by  decay into a proton ():


At the fundamental level (as depicted in the Feynman diagram on the right), this is caused by the conversion of the negatively charged () down quark to the positively charged () up quark, which is promoted by a virtual boson; the boson subsequently decays into an electron and an electron antineutrino:

==β+ decay ==

In  decay, or positron emission, the weak interaction converts an atomic nucleus into a nucleus with atomic number decreased by one, while emitting a positron () and an electron neutrino (). &quot; decay generally occurs in proton-rich nuclei. The generic equation is:
This may be considered as the decay of a proton inside the nucleus to a neutron:
:p → n + + 

However,  decay cannot occur in an isolated proton because it requires energy, due to the mass of the neutron being greater than the mass of the proton.  decay can only happen inside nuclei when the daughter nucleus has a greater binding energy (and therefore a lower total energy) than the mother nucleus. The difference between these energies goes into the reaction of converting a proton into a neutron, a positron, and a neutrino and into the kinetic energy of these particles. This process is opposite to negative beta decay, in that the weak interaction converts a proton into a neutron by converting an up quark into a down quark resulting in the emission of a or the absorption of a . When a boson is emitted, it decays into a positron and an electron neutrino:

==Electron capture (K-capture/L-capture)==
In all cases where  decay (positron emission) of a nucleus is allowed energetically, so too is electron capture allowed. This is a process during which a nucleus captures one of its atomic electrons, resulting in the emission of a neutrino:

An example of electron capture is one of the decay modes of krypton-81 into bromine-81:

All emitted neutrinos are of the same energy. In proton-rich nuclei where the energy difference between the initial and final states is less than 2,  decay is not energetically possible, and electron capture is the sole decay mode.

If the captured electron comes from the innermost shell of the atom, the K-shell, which has the highest probability to interact with the nucleus, the process is called K-capture. If it comes from the L-shell, the process is called L-capture, etc.

Electron capture is a competing (simultaneous) decay process for all nuclei that can undergo β+ decay. The converse, however, is not true: electron capture is the &quot;only&quot; type of decay that is allowed in proton-rich nuclides that do not have sufficient energy to emit a positron and neutrino.

==Nuclear transmutation==
If the proton and neutron are part of an atomic nucleus, the above described decay processes transmute one chemical element into another. For example:

Beta decay does not change the number () of nucleons in the nucleus, but changes only its charge . Thus the set of all nuclides with the same  can be introduced; these &quot;isobaric&quot; nuclides may turn into each other via beta decay. For a given there is one that is most stable. It is said to be beta stable, because it presents a local minimum of the mass excess: if such a nucleus has numbers, the neighbour nuclei and have higher mass excess and can beta decay into , but not vice versa. For all odd mass numbers , there is only one known beta-stable isobar. For even , there are up to three different beta-stable isobars experimentally known; for example, , , and are all beta-stable. There are about 350 known beta-decay stable nuclides.

===Competition of beta decay types===
Usually unstable nuclides are clearly either &quot;neutron rich&quot; or &quot;proton rich&quot;, with the former undergoing beta decay and the latter undergoing electron capture (or more rarely, due to the higher energy requirements, positron decay). However, in a few cases of odd-proton, odd-neutron radionuclides, it may be energetically favorable for the radionuclide to decay to an even-proton, even-neutron isobar either by undergoing beta-positive or beta-negative decay. An often-cited example is the single isotope (29 protons, 35 neutrons), which illustrates three types of beta decay in competition. Copper-64 has a half-life of about 12.7 hours. This isotope has one unpaired proton and one unpaired neutron, so either the proton or the neutron can decay. This particular nuclide (though not all nuclides in this situation) is almost equally likely to decay through proton decay by positron emission () or electron capture () to , as it is through neutron decay by electron emission () to .

===Stability of naturally occurring nuclides===
Most naturally occurring nuclides on earth are beta stable. Nuclides that are not beta stable have half-lives ranging from under a second to periods of time significantly greater than the age of the universe. One common example of a long-lived isotope is the odd-proton odd-neutron nuclide , which undergoes all three types of beta decay (, and electron capture) with a half-life of .

==Conservation rules for beta decay==

===Baryon number is conserved===

formula_1
where
* formula_2 is the number of constituent quarks, and
* formula_3 is the number of constituent antiquarks.

Beta decay just changes neutron to proton or, in the case of positive beta decay (electron capture) proton to neutron so the number of individual quarks doesn&#x27;t change. It is only the baryon flavor that changes, here labelled as the isospin.

Up and down quarks have total isospin formula_4 and isospin projections
formula_5

All other quarks have .

In general
formula_6

===Lepton number is conserved===

formula_7

so all leptons have assigned a value of +1, antileptons −1, and non-leptonic particles 0. 
formula_8

===Angular momentum===
For allowed decays, the net orbital angular momentum is zero, hence only spin quantum numbers are considered.

The electron and antineutrino are fermions, spin-1/2 objects, therefore they may couple to total formula_9 (parallel) or formula_10 (anti-parallel).

For forbidden decays, orbital angular momentum must also be taken into consideration.

==Energy release==
The value is defined as the total energy released in a given nuclear decay. In beta decay, is therefore also the sum of the kinetic energies of the emitted beta particle, neutrino, and recoiling nucleus. (Because of the large mass of the nucleus compared to that of the beta particle and neutrino, the kinetic energy of the recoiling nucleus can generally be neglected.) Beta particles can therefore be emitted with any kinetic energy ranging from 0 to . A typical is around 1 MeV, but can range from a few keV to a few tens of MeV.

Since the rest mass of the electron is 511 keV, the most energetic beta particles are ultrarelativistic, with speeds very close to the speed of light.
In the case of Re, the maximum speed of the beta particle is only 9.8% of the speed of light.

The following table gives some examples:

===β− decay===
Consider the generic equation for beta decay
The value for this decay is
:formula_11,
where formula_12 is the mass of the nucleus of the atom, formula_13 is the mass of the electron, and formula_14 is the mass of the electron antineutrino. In other words, the total energy released is the mass energy of the initial nucleus, minus the mass energy of the final nucleus, electron, and antineutrino. The mass of the nucleus is related to the standard atomic mass by
formula_15
That is, the total atomic mass is the mass of the nucleus, plus the mass of the electrons, minus the sum of all &quot;electron&quot; binding energies for the atom. This equation is rearranged to find formula_12, and formula_17 is found similarly. Substituting these nuclear masses into the -value equation, while neglecting the nearly-zero antineutrino mass and the difference in electron binding energies, which is very small for high- atoms, we have
formula_18
This energy is carried away as kinetic energy by the electron and antineutrino.

Because the reaction will proceed only when the  value is positive, β− decay can occur when the mass of atom is greater than the mass of atom .

===β+ decay===
The equations for β+ decay are similar, with the generic equation
giving
formula_19
However, in this equation, the electron masses do not cancel, and we are left with
formula_20

Because the reaction will proceed only when the  value is positive, β+ decay can occur when the mass of atom exceeds that of by at least twice the mass of the electron.

===Electron capture===
The analogous calculation for electron capture must take into account the binding energy of the electrons. This is because the atom will be left in an excited state after capturing the electron, and the binding energy of the captured innermost electron is significant. Using the generic equation for electron capture
we have
formula_21
which simplifies to
formula_22
where is the binding energy of the captured electron.

Because the binding energy of the electron is much less than the mass of the electron, nuclei that can undergo β+ decay can always also undergo electron capture, but the reverse is not true.

==Beta emission spectrum==

Beta decay can be considered as a perturbation as described in quantum mechanics, and thus Fermi&#x27;s Golden Rule can be applied. This leads to an expression for the kinetic energy spectrum of emitted betas as follows:

formula_23

where is the kinetic energy, is a shape function that depends on the forbiddenness of the decay (it is constant for allowed decays), is the Fermi Function (see below) with &quot;Z&quot; the charge of the final-state nucleus, is the total energy, formula_24 is the momentum, and is the Q value of the decay. The kinetic energy of the emitted neutrino is given approximately by minus the kinetic energy of the beta.

As an example, the beta decay spectrum of 210Bi (originally called RaE) is shown to the right.

===Fermi function===

The Fermi function that appears in the beta spectrum formula accounts for the Coulomb attraction / repulsion between the emitted beta and the final state nucleus. Approximating the associated wavefunctions to be spherically symmetric, the Fermi function can be analytically calculated to be:

formula_25

where is the final momentum, Γ the Gamma function, and (if is the fine-structure constant and the radius of the final state nucleus) formula_26, formula_27 (+ for electrons, − for positrons), and formula_28.

For non-relativistic betas (), this expression can be approximated by:

formula_29

Other approximations can be found in the literature.

===Kurie plot===
A Kurie plot (also known as a Fermi–Kurie plot) is a graph used in studying beta decay developed by Franz N. D. Kurie, in which the square root of the number of beta particles whose momenta (or energy) lie within a certain narrow range, divided by the Fermi function, is plotted against beta-particle energy. It is a straight line for allowed transitions and some forbidden transitions, in accord with the Fermi beta-decay theory. The energy-axis (x-axis) intercept of a Kurie plot corresponds to the maximum energy imparted to the electron/positron (the decay&#x27;s  value). With a Kurie plot one can find the limit on the effective mass of a neutrino.

==Helicity (polarization) of neutrinos, electrons and positrons emitted in beta decay==
After the discovery of parity non-conservation (see History), it was found that, in beta decay, electrons are emitted mostly with negative helicity, i.e., they move, naively speaking, like left-handed screws driven into a material (they have negative longitudinal polarization). Conversely, positrons have mostly positive helicity, i.e., they move like right-handed screws. Neutrinos (emitted in positron decay) have negative helicity, while antineutrinos (emitted in electron decay) have positive helicity.

The higher the energy of the particles, the higher their polarization.

==Types of beta decay transitions==

Beta decays can be classified according to the angular momentum (value) and total spin (value) of the emitted radiation. Since total angular momentum must be conserved, including orbital and spin angular momentum, beta decay occurs by a variety of quantum state transitions to various nuclear angular momentum or spin states, known as &quot;Fermi&quot; or &quot;Gamow–Teller&quot; transitions. When beta decay particles carry no angular momentum (), the decay is referred to as &quot;allowed&quot;, otherwise it is &quot;forbidden&quot;.

Other decay modes, which are rare, are known as bound state decay and double beta decay.

===Fermi transitions===
A Fermi transition is a beta decay in which the spins of the emitted electron (positron) and anti-neutrino (neutrino) couple to total spin formula_10, leading to an angular momentum change formula_31 between the initial and final states of the nucleus (assuming an allowed transition). In the non-relativistic limit, the nuclear part of the operator for a Fermi transition is given by
formula_32
with formula_33 the weak vector coupling constant, formula_34 the isospin raising and lowering operators, and formula_35 running over all protons and neutrons in the nucleus.

===Gamow–Teller transitions===
A Gamow–Teller transition is a beta decay in which the spins of the emitted electron (positron) and anti-neutrino (neutrino) couple to total spin formula_9, leading to an angular momentum change formula_37 between the initial and final states of the nucleus (assuming an allowed transition).
In this case, the nuclear part of the operator is given by
formula_38
with formula_39 the weak axial-vector coupling constant, and formula_40 the spin Pauli matrices, which can produce a spin-flip in the decaying nucleon.

===Forbidden transitions===
When , the decay is referred to as &quot;forbidden&quot;. Nuclear selection rules require high  values to be accompanied by changes in nuclear spin () and parity (). The selection rules for the th forbidden transitions are:
formula_41
where corresponds to no parity change or parity change, respectively. The special case of a transition between isobaric analogue states, where the structure of the final state is very similar to the structure of the initial state, is referred to as &quot;superallowed&quot; for beta decay, and proceeds very quickly. The following table lists the Δ and Δ values for the first few values of :

==Rare decay modes==

===Bound-state β decay===
A very small minority of free neutron decays (about four per million) are &quot;two-body decays&quot;: the proton, electron and antineutrino are produced, but the electron fails to gain the 13.6 eV energy necessary to escape the proton, and therefore simply remains bound to it, as a neutral hydrogen atom. In this type of beta decay, in essence all of the neutron decay energy is carried off by the antineutrino.

For fully ionized atoms (bare nuclei), it is possible in likewise manner for electrons to fail to escape the atom, and to be emitted from the nucleus into low-lying atomic bound states (orbitals). This cannot occur for neutral atoms with low-lying bound states which are already filled by electrons.

Bound-state β decays were predicted by Daudel, Jean, and Lecoin in 1947, and the phenomenon in fully ionized atoms was first observed for Dy in 1992 by Jung et al. of the Darmstadt Heavy-Ion Research Center. Though neutral Dy is stable, fully ionized Dy undergoes β decay into the K and L shells with a half-life of 47 days. The resulting nucleus – Ho – is stable only in this almost fully ionized state and will decay via electron capture into Dy in the neutral state. Likewise, while being stable in the neutral state, the fully ionized Tl undergoes bound-state β decay to Pb with a half-life of days. The half-lives of neutral Ho and Pb are respectively 4570 years and years. In addition, it is estimated that β decay is energetically impossible for natural atoms but theoretically possible when fully ionized also for 193Ir, 194Au, 202Tl, 215At, 243Am, and 246Bk.

Another possibility is that a fully ionized atom undergoes greatly accelerated β decay, as observed for Re by Bosch et al., also at Darmstadt. Neutral Re does undergo β decay, with half-life years, but for fully ionized Re this is shortened to only 32.9 years. This is because Re is energetically allowed to undergo β decay to the first-excited state in Os, a process energetically disallowed for natural Re. Similarly, neutral Pu undergoes β decay with a half-life of 14.3 years, but in its fully ionized state the beta-decay half-life of Pu decreases to 4.2 days. For comparison, the variation of decay rates of other nuclear processes due to chemical environment is less than 1%. Moreover, current mass determinations cannot decisively determine whether Rn is energetically possible to undergo β decay (the decay energy given in AME2020 is (−6 ± 8) keV), but in either case it is predicted that β will be greatly accelerated for fully ionized Rn.

===Double beta decay===

Some nuclei can undergo double beta decay (2β) where the charge of the nucleus changes by two units. Double beta decay is difficult to study, as it has an extremely long half-life. In nuclei for which both β decay and 2β are possible, the rarer 2β process is effectively impossible to observe. However, in nuclei where β decay is forbidden but 2β is allowed, the process can be seen and a half-life measured. Thus, 2β is usually studied only for beta stable nuclei. Like single beta decay, double beta decay does not change ; thus, at least one of the nuclides with some given has to be stable with regard to both single and double beta decay.

&quot;Ordinary&quot; 2β results in the emission of two electrons and two antineutrinos. If neutrinos are Majorana particles (i.e., they are their own antiparticles), then a decay known as neutrinoless double beta decay will occur. Most neutrino physicists believe that neutrinoless 2β has never been observed.

==See also==
* Common beta emitters
*Neutrino
*Betavoltaics
*Particle radiation
*Radionuclide
*Tritium illumination, a form of fluorescent lighting powered by beta decay
*Pandemonium effect
*Total absorption spectroscopy

==References==
==Bibliography==
*

==External links==
* The Live Chart of Nuclides - IAEA with filter on decay type
*Beta decay simulation </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="3" end="18" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="20" end="30" title="Beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="54" end="71" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="84" end="98" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="107" end="120" title="beta particle" label="beta particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="137" end="145" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="149" end="157" title="positron" label="positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q516369" start="181" end="187" title="isobar (nuclide)" label="isobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="234" end="241" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="263" end="269" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="319" end="331" title="antineutrino" label="antineutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="422" end="430" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="455" end="472" title="positron emission" label="positron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410640" start="678" end="706" title="proton–neutron ratio" label="ratio of protons to neutrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750062" start="804" end="826" title="nuclear binding energy" label="nuclear binding energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554047" start="914" end="933" title="valley of stability" label="valley of stability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1026" end="1035" title="#Energy release" label="see below"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265671" start="1040" end="1059" title="Q value (nuclear science)" label="&amp;quot;Q&amp;quot; value"/>
<link wikidata="Q11418" start="1114" end="1124" title="Weak interaction" label="weak force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732" start="1206" end="1214" title="up quark" label="up quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745" start="1220" end="1230" title="down quark" label="down quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="1261" end="1266" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q874733" start="1281" end="1288" title="flavour (particle physics)" label="flavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q211922" start="1311" end="1318" title="W boson" label="W boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="1527" end="1543" title="Electron capture" label="Electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q619699" start="1792" end="1809" title="electron neutrino" label="electron neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q619699" start="2036" end="2057" title="electron antineutrino" label="electron antineutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="2212" end="2229" title="positron emission" label="positron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q174012" start="2283" end="2296" title="lepton number" label="lepton number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151" start="2379" end="2383" title="muon" label="muon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188392" start="2388" end="2391" title="Tau (particle)" label="tau"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="2766" end="2775" title="carbon-14" label="carbon-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q470479" start="2781" end="2792" title="nitrogen-14" label="nitrogen-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="2800" end="2809" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="2930" end="2951" title="nuclear transmutation" label="nuclear transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="2987" end="2998" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="3008" end="3021" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="3289" end="3296" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q533498" start="3303" end="3311" title="helium-3" label="helium-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q468882" start="3410" end="3422" title="magnesium-23" label="magnesium-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q470561" start="3428" end="3437" title="sodium-23" label="sodium-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q41269" start="4274" end="4289" title="Henri Becquerel" label="Henri Becquerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="4293" end="4300" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="4331" end="4336" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="4341" end="4353" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="4357" end="4364" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q979" start="4402" end="4410" title="polonium" label="polonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="4415" end="4421" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="4432" end="4449" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q531898" start="4739" end="4751" title="Paul Villard" label="Paul Villard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="4882" end="4891" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="4952" end="4966" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q874659" start="5001" end="5021" title="mass-to-charge ratio" label="mass-to-charge ratio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5061" end="5073" title="J.J. Thomson" label="J.J. Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q102830" start="5302" end="5317" title="Frederick Soddy" label="Frederick Soddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="5372" end="5385" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213667" start="5511" end="5527" title="Kazimierz Fajans" label="Kazimierz Fajans"/>
<link wikidata="Q407358" start="5557" end="5585" title="Radioactive displacement law of Fajans and Soddy" label="radioactive displacement law"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="5700" end="5714" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="5885" end="5893" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q762856" start="5984" end="5996" title="Frequency distribution" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189" start="6187" end="6199" title="Lise Meitner" label="Lise Meitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q57065" start="6204" end="6213" title="Otto Hahn" label="Otto Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149238" start="6229" end="6240" title="Jean Danysz" label="Jean Danysz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80884" start="6395" end="6409" title="James Chadwick" label="James Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="6426" end="6438" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57189" start="6451" end="6469" title="Hans Geiger" label="Hans Geiger&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q48171" start="6474" end="6482" title="Geiger counter" label="counters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="6623" end="6652" title="law of conservation of energy" label="law of conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189" start="6718" end="6730" title="Lise Meitner" label="Lise Meitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002262" start="6735" end="6751" title="Wilhelm Orthmann" label="Wilhelm Orthmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="7112" end="7144" title="conservation of angular momentum" label="conservation of angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879445" start="7185" end="7197" title="nuclear spin" label="nuclear spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q470479" start="7201" end="7212" title="nitrogen-14" label="nitrogen-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="7238" end="7261" title="reduced Planck constant" label="reduced Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="7327" end="7338" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7420" end="7455" title="Discovery of the neutron#Proton–neutron model of the nucleus" label="proton-neutron model of the nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306233" start="7698" end="7720" title="Charles Drummond Ellis" label="Charles Drummond Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189485" start="7841" end="7852" title="Nevill Mott" label="Nevill Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="7941" end="7951" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="8011" end="8033" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="8082" end="8091" title="Laws of science" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8416" end="8429" title="Electron neutrino#Pauli&amp;#x27;s letter" label="famous letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q65989" start="8447" end="8461" title="Wolfgang Pauli" label="Wolfgang Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="8879" end="8891" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406423" start="9041" end="9062" title="Fermi&amp;#x27;s interaction" label="theory for beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q722947" start="9729" end="9740" title="Clyde Cowan" label="Clyde Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191922" start="9745" end="9761" title="Frederick Reines" label="Frederick Reines"/>
<link wikidata="Q386377" start="9769" end="9801" title="Cowan–Reines neutrino experiment" label="Cowan–Reines neutrino experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q150989" start="9946" end="9954" title="Frédéric Joliot-Curie" label="Frédéric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504" start="9959" end="9977" title="Irène Joliot-Curie" label="Irène Joliot-Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q169366" start="10171" end="10190" title="Carl David Anderson" label="Carl David Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="10239" end="10256" title="positron emission" label="positron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q423066" start="10277" end="10301" title="artificial radioactivity" label="artificial radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="10428" end="10452" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="10477" end="10493" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522269" start="10517" end="10532" title="Gian-Carlo Wick" label="Gian-Carlo Wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q155777" start="10572" end="10585" title="Hideki Yukawa" label="Hideki Yukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178344" start="10647" end="10659" title="Luis Walter Alvarez" label="Luis Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q183679" start="10794" end="10807" title="Tsung-Dao Lee" label="Tsung-Dao Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q181369" start="10812" end="10826" title="Chen Ning Yang" label="Chen Ning Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q141160" start="10867" end="10873" title="parity (physics)" label="parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q450317" start="11106" end="11121" title="Chien-Shiung Wu" label="Chien-Shiung Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303351" start="11150" end="11163" title="Wu experiment" label="Wu experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q932960" start="11202" end="11202" title="cobalt-60" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="11441" end="11464" title="Nobel Prize for Physics" label="Nobel Prize for Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11418" start="11566" end="11582" title="weak interaction" label="weak interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="11595" end="11609" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="11630" end="11643" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11708" end="11720" title="Neutrino#Antineutrinos" label="antineutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="11816" end="11827" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="11832" end="11845" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="11963" end="11975" title="free neutron" label="free neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="12023" end="12034" title="fundamental particle" label="fundamental"/>
<link wikidata="Q386272" start="12061" end="12076" title="Feynman diagram" label="Feynman diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q211922" start="12235" end="12240" title="W boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q619699" start="12504" end="12521" title="electron neutrino" label="electron neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="12788" end="12792" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750062" start="12928" end="12942" title="nuclear binding energy" label="binding energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="13433" end="13441" title="positron" label="positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q619699" start="13449" end="13466" title="electron neutrino" label="electron neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="13607" end="13623" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373439" start="13814" end="13824" title="krypton-81" label="krypton-81"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220795" start="13830" end="13840" title="bromine-81" label="bromine-81"/>
<link wikidata="Q193793" start="14149" end="14156" title="Electron shell" label="K-shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="14694" end="14708" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="14746" end="14755" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="transmute"/>
<link wikidata="Q102165" start="14849" end="14856" title="nucleon" label="nucleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="14895" end="14901" title="electric charge" label="charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q108149" start="14924" end="14931" title="nuclide" label="nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q516369" start="14973" end="15002" title="isobar (nuclide)" label="&amp;quot;isobaric&amp;quot; nuclides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571163" start="15163" end="15174" title="mass excess" label="mass excess"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897203" start="15526" end="15552" title="beta-decay stable isobars" label="beta-decay stable nuclides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="16488" end="16505" title="positron emission" label="positron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="16512" end="16528" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="16745" end="16755" title="half-life" label="half-lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="16834" end="16853" title="age of the universe" label="age of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="17252" end="17259" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="17263" end="17269" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="17310" end="17326" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="17328" end="17334" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="17338" end="17345" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="17374" end="17380" title="quarks" label="quarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q836938" start="17466" end="17473" title="isospin" label="isospin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="17488" end="17494" title="quarks" label="quarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="17921" end="17929" title="fermions" label="fermions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265671" start="18147" end="18152" title="Q value (nuclear science)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="18563" end="18577" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="18620" end="18623" title="MeV" label="MeV"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="18650" end="18653" title="keV" label="keV"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="18687" end="18696" title="Mass–energy equivalence" label="rest mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880617" start="18763" end="18780" title="Ultrarelativistic limit" label="ultrarelativistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="18812" end="18826" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="19428" end="19439" title="atomic mass" label="atomic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q911364" start="21206" end="21218" title="Perturbation theory (quantum mechanics)" label="perturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073295" start="21263" end="21287" title="Fermi&amp;#x27;s Golden Rule" label="Fermi&amp;#x27;s Golden Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265671" start="21691" end="21698" title="Q value (nuclear science)" label="Q value"/>
<link wikidata="Q190573" start="22279" end="22293" title="Gamma function" label="Gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997" start="22310" end="22333" title="fine-structure constant" label="fine-structure constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083134" start="22708" end="22725" title="Franz N. D. Kurie" label="Franz N. D. Kurie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23404" end="23411" title="Beta decay#Non-conservation of parity" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305173" start="23491" end="23499" title="Chirality (physics)" label="helicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q962347" start="23616" end="23628" title="Spin polarization" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190143" start="24035" end="24040" title="Angular momentum operator" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="24058" end="24063" title="Spin (physics)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q836938" start="25085" end="25092" title="isospin" label="isospin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186765" start="25093" end="25123" title="Ladder operator" label="raising and lowering operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="25664" end="25683" title="Pauli matrices" label="spin Pauli matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q932483" start="25810" end="25819" title="forbidden transition" label="forbidden"/>
<link wikidata="Q570412" start="25835" end="25849" title="selection rule" label="selection rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879445" start="25904" end="25916" title="nuclear spin" label="nuclear spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q141160" start="25924" end="25930" title="Parity (physics)" label="parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643508" start="26737" end="26750" title="hydrogen atom" label="hydrogen atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q191632" start="26810" end="26822" title="decay energy" label="decay energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420786" start="27200" end="27206" title="Raymond Daudel" label="Daudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q558574" start="27299" end="27301" title="isotopes of dysprosium" label="Dy"/>
<link wikidata="Q703993" start="27332" end="27367" title="GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research" label="Darmstadt Heavy-Ion Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q466737" start="27510" end="27512" title="isotopes of holmium" label="Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="27584" end="27600" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223" start="27700" end="27702" title="Isotopes of thallium" label="Tl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372384" start="27736" end="27738" title="isotopes of lead" label="Pb"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232" start="28134" end="28136" title="Isotopes of rhenium" label="Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205705" start="28458" end="28460" title="Plutonium-241" label="Pu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28699" end="28711" title="radioactive decay#Changing rates" label="less than 1%"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065883" start="29756" end="29773" title="Majorana particle" label="Majorana particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416324" start="29839" end="29869" title="neutrinoless double beta decay" label="neutrinoless double beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153511" start="29977" end="29997" title="Common beta emitters" label="Common beta emitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="29999" end="30007" title="Neutrino" label="Neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q831008" start="30009" end="30021" title="Betavoltaics" label="Betavoltaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q945733" start="30023" end="30041" title="Particle radiation" label="Particle radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="30043" end="30055" title="Radionuclide" label="Radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q362735" start="30057" end="30077" title="Tritium illumination" label="Tritium illumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="30089" end="30109" title="fluorescent lighting" label="fluorescent lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130580" start="30133" end="30151" title="Pandemonium effect" label="Pandemonium effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353590" start="30153" end="30182" title="Total absorption spectroscopy" label="Total absorption spectroscopy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4652" wikidata="Q56506" url="?curid=4652" title="Blitzkrieg">
<text>Blitzkrieg is a word used to describe a combined arms surprise attack, using a rapid, overwhelming force concentration that may consist of armored and motorized or mechanized infantry formations, together with artillery, air assault, and close air support. The intent is to break through an opponent&#x27;s lines of defense, dislocate the defenders, confuse the enemy by making it difficult to respond to the continuously changing front, and defeat them in a decisive : a battle of annihilation.

During the interwar period, aircraft and tank technologies matured and were combined with the systematic application of the traditional German tactic of (maneuver warfare), involving the deep penetrations and the bypassing of enemy strong points to encircle and destroy opposing forces in a (cauldron battle/battle of encirclement). During the invasion of Poland, Western journalists adopted the term &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; to describe that form of armored warfare. The term had appeared in 1935, in the German military periodical (&quot;German Defence&quot;), in connection to quick or lightning warfare.

German maneuver operations were successful during the campaigns of 1939–1941, involving the invasions of Belgium, The Netherlands and France and, by 1940, the term &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; was being extensively used in Western media. Blitzkrieg operations capitalised on surprise penetrations, such as that in the Ardennes forest, the Allies&#x27; general lack of preparedness, and their inability to match the pace of the German attack. During the Battle of France, the French made attempts to reform defensive lines along rivers but were frustrated when German forces arrived first and pressed on. 

Despite being common in German and English-language journalism during World War II, the word was never used as an official military term by the Wehrmacht, except for propaganda, and it was never officially adopted as a concept or doctrine. According to David Reynolds, &quot;Hitler himself called the term Blitzkrieg &#x27;a completely idiotic word&#x27; ()&quot;. Some senior German officers, including Kurt Student, Franz Halder and Johann Adolf von Kielmansegg, even disputed the idea that it was a military concept. Kielmansegg asserted that what many regarded as blitzkrieg was nothing more than &quot;ad hoc solutions that simply popped out of the prevailing situation&quot;. Kurt Student described it as ideas that &quot;naturally emerged from the existing circumstances&quot; as a response to operational challenges. 

In 2005, the historian Karl-Heinz Frieser summarized blitzkrieg as the result of German commanders using the latest technology in the most advantageous way, according to traditional military principles, and employing &quot;the right units in the right place at the right time&quot;. Modern historians now understand blitzkrieg as the combination of traditional German military principles, methods and doctrines of the 19th century with the military technology of the interwar period. Modern historians use the term casually as a generic description for the style of maneuver warfare practised by Germany during the early part of World War II, rather than as an explanation. According to Frieser, in the context of the thinking of Heinz Guderian on mobile combined arms formations, blitzkrieg can be used as a synonym for modern maneuver warfare on the operational level.

==Definition==
===Common interpretation===
The traditional meaning of &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; is that of German tactical and operational methodology during the first half of the Second World War that is often hailed as a new method of warfare. The word, meaning &quot;lightning war&quot; or &quot;lightning attack&quot; in its strategic sense describes a series of quick and decisive short battles to deliver a knockout blow to an enemy state before it can fully mobilize. Tactically, blitzkrieg is a coordinated military effort by tanks, motorized infantry, artillery and aircraft, to create an overwhelming local superiority in combat power, to defeat the opponent and break through its defences. &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; as used by Germany had considerable psychological or &quot;terror&quot; elements, such as the &quot;Jericho Trompete&quot;, a noise-making siren on the Junkers Ju 87 dive bomber, to affect the morale of enemy forces. The devices were largely removed when the enemy became used to the noise after the Battle of France in 1940, and instead, bombs sometimes had whistles attached. It is also common for historians and writers to include psychological warfare by using fifth columnists to spread rumours and lies among the civilian population in the theatre of operations.

===Origin of term===
The origin of the term &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; is obscure. It was never used in the title of a military doctrine or handbook of the German Army or Air Force, and no &quot;coherent doctrine&quot; or &quot;unifying concept of blitzkrieg&quot; existed; German High Command mostly referred to the group of tactics as &quot;Bewegungskrieg&quot; (Maneuver Warfare). The term seems to have been rarely used in the German military press before 1939, and recent research at the German &quot;Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt&quot;, at Potsdam, found it in only two military articles from the 1930s. Both used the term to mean a swift strategic knockout, rather than a radically new military doctrine or approach to war.

The first article (1935) dealt primarily with supplies of food and materiel in wartime. The term &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; was used in reference to German efforts to win a quick victory in the First World War but was not associated with the use of armored, mechanized or air forces. It argued that Germany must develop self-sufficiency in food because it might again prove impossible to deal a swift knockout to its enemies, which would lead to a long war.

In the second article (1938), launching a swift strategic knockout was described as an attractive idea for Germany but difficult to achieve on land under modern conditions (especially against systems of fortification like the Maginot Line) unless an exceptionally high degree of surprise could be achieved. The author vaguely suggested that a massive strategic air attack might hold out better prospects, but the topic was not explored in detail.

A third relatively early use of the term in German occurred in &quot;Die Deutsche Kriegsstärke&quot; (German War Strength) by Fritz Sternberg, a Jewish Marxist political economist and refugee from Nazi Germany, published in 1938 in Paris and in London as &quot;Germany and a Lightning War&quot;. Sternberg wrote that Germany was not prepared economically for a long war but might win a quick war (&quot;Blitzkrieg&quot;). He did not go into detail about tactics or suggest that the German armed forces had evolved a radically new operational method. His book offered scant clues as to how German lightning victories might be won.
In English and other languages, the term had been used since the 1920s. The term was first used in the publications of Ferdinand Otto Miksche, first in the magazine &quot;Army Quarterly&quot;, and in his 1941 book &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot;, in which he defined the concept. In September 1939, &quot;Time&quot; magazine termed the German military action as a &quot;war of quick penetration and obliteration – &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot;, lightning war&quot;. After the invasion of Poland, the British press commonly used the term to describe German successes in that campaign. J. P. Harris called the term &quot;a piece of journalistic sensationalism – a buzz-word with which to label the spectacular early successes of the Germans in the Second World War&quot;. The word was later applied to the bombing of Britain, particularly London, hence &quot;The Blitz&quot;.

The German popular press followed suit nine months later, after the Fall of France in 1940; thus, although the word had first been used in Germany, it was popularized by British journalism. Heinz Guderian referred to it as a word coined by the Allies: &quot;as a result of the successes of our rapid campaigns our enemies ... coined the word &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot;&quot;. After the German failure in the Soviet Union in 1941, the use of the term began to be frowned upon in Nazi Germany, and Hitler then denied ever using the term and said in a speech in November 1941, &quot;I have never used the word &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot;, because it is a very silly word&quot;. In early January 1942, Hitler dismissed it as &quot;Italian phraseology&quot;.

==Military evolution, 1919–1939==
===Germany===

In 1914, German strategic thinking derived from the writings of Carl von Clausewitz (1 June 1780 – 16 November 1831), Helmuth von Moltke the Elder (26 October 1800 – 24 April 1891) and Alfred von Schlieffen (28 February 1833 – 4 January 1913), who advocated maneuver, mass and envelopment to create the conditions for a decisive battle (). During the war, officers such as Willy Rohr developed tactics to restore maneuver on the battlefield. Specialist light infantry (&quot;Stosstruppen&quot;, &quot;storm troops&quot;) were to exploit weak spots to make gaps for larger infantry units to advance with heavier weapons, exploit the success and leave isolated strong points to the troops that were following up. Infiltration tactics were combined with short hurricane artillery bombardments, which used massed artillery. Devised by Colonel Georg Bruchmüller, the attacks relied on speed and surprise, rather than on weight of numbers. The tactics met with great success in Operation Michael, the German spring offensive of 1918 and restored temporarily the war of movement once the Allied trench system had been overrun. The German armies pushed on towards Amiens and then Paris and came within before supply deficiencies and Allied reinforcements halted the advance.

The historian James Corum criticised the German leadership for failing to understand the technical advances of the First World War, conducting no studies of the machine gun prior to the war and giving tank production the lowest priority during the war. After Germany&#x27;s defeat, the Treaty of Versailles limited the Reichswehr to a maximum of 100,000 men, which prevented the deployment of mass armies. The German General Staff was abolished by the treaty but continued covertly as the &quot;Truppenamt&quot; (Troop Office) and was disguised as an administrative body. Committees of veteran staff officers were formed within the &quot;Truppenamt&quot; to evaluate 57 issues of the war to revise German operational theories. By the time of the Second World War, their reports had led to doctrinal and training publications, including H. Dv. 487, &quot;Führung und Gefecht der verbundenen Waffen&quot; (&quot;Command and Battle of the Combined Arms)&quot;, known as &quot;Das Fug&quot; (1921–1923) and &quot;Truppenführung&quot; (1933–1934), containing standard procedures for combined-arms warfare. The &quot;Reichswehr&quot; was influenced by its analysis of pre-war German military thought, particularly infiltration tactics since at the end of the war, they had seen some breakthroughs on the Western Front and the maneuver warfare which dominated the Eastern Front.

On the Eastern Front, the war did not bog down into trench warfare since the German and the Russian Armies fought a war of maneuver over thousands of miles, which gave the German leadership unique experience that was unavailable to the trench-bound Western Allies. Studies of operations in the East led to the conclusion that small and coordinated forces possessed more combat power than large uncoordinated forces.

After the war, the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; expanded and improved infiltration tactics. The commander in chief, Hans von Seeckt, argued that there had been an excessive focus on encirclement and emphasised speed instead. Seeckt inspired a revision of &quot;Bewegungskrieg&quot; (maneuver warfare) thinking and its associated &quot;Auftragstaktik&quot; in which the commander expressed his goals to subordinates and gave them discretion in how to achieve them. The governing principle was &quot;the higher the authority, the more general the orders were&quot;; it was the responsibility of the lower echelons to fill in the details. Implementation of higher orders remained within limits that were determined by the training doctrine of an elite officer corps.

Delegation of authority to local commanders increased the tempo of operations, which had great influence on the success of German armies in the early war period. Seeckt, who believed in the Prussian tradition of mobility, developed the German army into a mobile force and advocated technical advances that would lead to a qualitative improvement of its forces and better coordination between motorized infantry, tanks, and planes.

===Britain===

The British Army took lessons from the successful infantry and artillery offensives on the Western Front in late 1918. To obtain the best co-operation between all arms, emphasis was placed on detailed planning, rigid control and adherence to orders. Mechanization of the army, as part of a combined-arms theory of war, was considered a means to avoid mass casualties and the indecisive nature of offensives. The four editions of &quot;Field Service Regulations&quot; that were published after 1918 held that only combined-arms operations could create enough fire power to enable mobility on a battlefield. That theory of war also emphasised consolidation and recommended caution against overconfidence and ruthless exploitation.

During the Sinai and Palestine campaign, operations involved some aspects of what would later be called blitzkrieg. The decisive Battle of Megiddo included concentration, surprise and speed. Success depended on attacking only in terrain favouring the movement of large formations around the battlefield and tactical improvements in the British artillery and infantry attack. General Edmund Allenby used infantry to attack the strong Ottoman front line in co-operation with supporting artillery, augmented by the guns of two destroyers. Through constant pressure by infantry and cavalry, two Ottoman armies in the Judean Hills were kept off-balance and virtually encircled during the Battles of Sharon and Nablus (Battle of Megiddo).

The British methods induced &quot;strategic paralysis&quot; among the Ottomans and led to their rapid and complete collapse. In an advance of , captures were estimated to be &quot;at least prisoners and 260 guns&quot;. Liddell Hart considered that important aspects of the operation had been the extent to which Ottoman commanders were denied intelligence on the British preparations for the attack through British air superiority and air attacks on their headquarters and telephone exchanges, which paralyzed attempts to react to the rapidly-deteriorating situation.

===France===
Norman Stone detects early blitzkrieg operations in offensives by French Generals Charles Mangin and Marie-Eugène Debeney in 1918. However, French doctrine in the interwar years became defence-oriented. Colonel Charles de Gaulle advocated concentration of armor and airplanes. His opinions appeared in his 1934 book &quot;Vers l&#x27;Armée de métier&quot; (&quot;Towards the Professional Army&quot;). Like von Seeckt, de Gaulle concluded that France could no longer maintain the huge armies of conscripts and reservists that had fought the First World War, and he sought to use tanks, mechanized forces and aircraft to allow a smaller number of highly trained soldiers to have greater impact in battle. His views endeared him little to the French high command, but, according to historian Henrik Bering, were studied with great interest by Heinz Guderian.

===Russia and Soviet Union===
In 1916, General Alexei Brusilov had used surprise and infiltration tactics during the Brusilov Offensive. Later, Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky (1893–1937), (1898–1976) and other members of the Red Army developed a concept of deep battle from the experience of the Polish–Soviet War of 1919–1920. Those concepts would guide the Red Army doctrine throughout the Second World War. Realising the limitations of infantry and cavalry, Tukhachevsky advocated mechanized formations and the large-scale industrialisation that they required. Robert Watt (2008) wrote that blitzkrieg has little in common with Soviet deep battle. In 2002, H. P. Willmott had noted that deep battle contained two important differences from blitzkrieg by being a doctrine of total war, not of limited operations, and rejecting decisive battle in favour of several large simultaneous offensives.

The &quot;Reichswehr&quot; and the Red Army began a secret collaboration in the Soviet Union to evade the Treaty of Versailles occupational agent, the Inter-Allied Commission. In 1926 war games and tests began at Kazan and Lipetsk, in the Soviet Russia. The centers served to field-test aircraft and armored vehicles up to the battalion level and housed aerial- and armoured-warfare schools through which officers rotated.

===Nazi Germany===
After becoming Chancellor of Germany in 1933, Adolf Hitler ignored the provisions of the Treaty of Versailles. Within the Wehrmacht, which was established in 1935, the command for motorized armored forces was named the &quot;Panzerwaffe&quot; in 1936. The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;, the German air force, was officially established in February 1935, and development began on ground-attack aircraft and doctrines. Hitler strongly supported the new strategy. He read Guderian&#x27;s 1937 book &quot;Achtung – Panzer!&quot; and upon observing armored field exercises at Kummersdorf, he remarked, &quot;That is what I want – and that is what I will have&quot;.

====Guderian====

Guderian summarized combined-arms tactics as the way to get the mobile and motorized armored divisions to work together and support each other to achieve decisive success. In his 1950 book, &quot;Panzer Leader&quot;, he wrote:

Guderian believed that developments in technology were required to support the theory, especially by equipping armored divisions, tanks foremost, with wireless communications. Guderian insisted in 1933 to the high command that every tank in the German armored force must be equipped with a radio. At the start of World War II, only the German Army was thus prepared with all tanks being &quot;radio-equipped&quot;. That proved critical in early tank battles in which German tank commanders exploited the organizational advantage over the Allies that radio communication gave them.

All Allied armies would later copy that innovation. During the Polish campaign, the performance of armored troops, under the influence of Guderian&#x27;s ideas, won over a number of skeptics who had initially expressed doubt about armored warfare, such as von Rundstedt and Rommel.

====Rommel====
According to David A. Grossman, by the Twelfth Battle of Isonzo (October–November 1917), while he was conducting a light-infantry operation, Rommel had perfected his maneuver-warfare principles, which were the very same ones that were applied during the blitzkrieg against France in 1940 and were repeated in the Coalition ground offensive against Iraq in the 1991 Gulf War. During the Battle of France and against his staff advisor&#x27;s advice, Hitler ordered that everything should be completed in a few weeks. Fortunately for the Germans, Rommel and Guderian disobeyed the General Staff&#x27;s orders (particularly those of General Paul Ludwig Ewald von Kleist) and forged ahead making quicker progress than anyone had expected, on the way &quot;inventing the idea of Blitzkrieg&quot;.

It was Rommel who created the new archetype of Blitzkrieg by leading his division far ahead of flanking divisions. MacGregor and Williamson remark that Rommel&#x27;s version of blitzkrieg displayed a significantly better understanding of combined-arms warfare than that of Guderian. General Hermann Hoth submitted an official report in July 1940 which declared that Rommel had &quot;explored new paths in the command of Panzer divisions&quot;.

==Methods of operations==
===&quot;Schwerpunkt&quot;===
&quot;Schwerpunktprinzip&quot; was a heuristic device (conceptual tool or thinking formula) that was used in the German Army from the nineteenth century to make decisions from tactics to strategy about priority. &quot;Schwerpunkt&quot; has been translated as &quot;center of gravity&quot;, &quot;crucial&quot;, &quot;focal point&quot; and &quot;point of main effort&quot;. None of those forms is sufficient to describe the universal importance of the term and the concept of &quot;Schwerpunktprinzip&quot;. Every unit in the army, from the company to the supreme command, decided on a &quot;Schwerpunkt&quot; by &quot;schwerpunktbildung&quot;, as did the support services, which meant that commanders always knew what was the most important and why. The German army was trained to support the &quot;Schwerpunkt&quot; even when risks had to be taken elsewhere to support the point of main effort and to attack with overwhelming firepower. &quot;Schwerpunktbildung&quot; allowed the German Army to achieve superiority at the &quot;Schwerpunkt&quot;, whether attacking or defending, to turn local success at the &quot;Schwerpunkt&quot; into the progressive disorganisation of the opposing force and to create more opportunities to exploit that advantage even if the Germans were numerically and strategically inferior in general. In the 1930s, Guderian summarized that as &quot;Klotzen, nicht kleckern!&quot; (roughly &quot;splash, don&#x27;t spill&quot;)

===Pursuit===
Having achieved a breakthrough of the enemy&#x27;s line, units comprising the &quot;Schwerpunkt&quot; were not supposed to become decisively engaged with enemy front line units to the right and the left of the breakthrough area. Units pouring through the hole were to drive upon set objectives behind the enemy front line. During the Second World War, German Panzer forces used their motorized mobility to paralyze the opponent&#x27;s ability to react. Fast-moving mobile forces seized the initiative, exploited weaknesses and acted before the opposing forces could respond. Central to that was the decision cycle (tempo). Through superior mobility and faster decision-making cycles, mobile forces could act faster than the forces opposing them.

Directive control was a fast and flexible method of command. Rather than receiving an explicit order, a commander would be told of his superior&#x27;s intent and the role that his unit was to fill in that concept. The method of execution was then a matter for the discretion of the subordinate commander. The staff burden was reduced at the top and spread among tiers of command with knowledge about their situation. Delegation and the encouragement of initiative aided implementation, and important decisions could be taken quickly and communicated verbally or with only brief written orders.

===Mopping-up===
The last part of an offensive operation was the destruction of unsubdued pockets of resistance, which had been enveloped earlier and bypassed by the fast-moving armored and motorized spearheads. The &quot;Kesselschlacht&quot; (&quot;cauldron battle&quot;) was a concentric attack on such pockets. It was there that most losses were inflicted upon the enemy, primarily through the mass capture of prisoners and weapons. During Operation Barbarossa, huge encirclements in 1941 produced nearly 3.5 million Soviet prisoners, along with masses of equipment.

===Air power===

Close air support was provided in the form of the dive bomber and medium bomber, which would support the focal point of attack from the air. German successes are closely related to the extent to which the German &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; could control the air war in early campaigns in Western and Central Europe and in the Soviet Union. However, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; was a broadly based force with no constricting central doctrine other than its resources should be used generally to support national strategy. It was flexible and could carry out both operational-tactical, and strategic bombing.

Flexibility was the strength of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; in 1939 to 1941. Paradoxically, that became its weakness. While Allied Air Forces were tied to the support of the Army, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; deployed its resources in a more general operational way. It switched from air superiority missions to medium-range interdiction, to strategic strikes to close support duties, depending on the need of the ground forces. In fact, far from it being a specialist panzer spearhead arm, less than 15 percent of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; was intended for close support of the army in 1939.

===Stimulants===
Methamphetamine use among troops, especially Temmler&#x27;s 3 mg Pervitin tablets, likely contributed to the Wehrmacht&#x27;s &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; success by enabling synchronized, high-endurance operations with minimal rest.

==Limitations and countermeasures==
===Environment===
The concepts associated with the term &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; (deep penetrations by armor, large encirclements, and combined arms attacks) were largely dependent upon terrain and weather conditions. Wherever the ability for rapid movement across &quot;tank country&quot; was not possible, armored penetrations often were avoided or resulted in failure. The terrain would ideally be flat, firm, unobstructed by natural barriers or fortifications, and interspersed with roads and railways. If it were instead hilly, wooded, marshy, or urban, armor would be vulnerable to infantry in close-quarters combat and unable to break out at full speed. Additionally, units could be halted by mud (thawing along the Eastern Front regularly slowed both sides) or extreme snow. Operation Barbarossa helped confirm that armor effectiveness and the requisite aerial support depended on weather and terrain. The disadvantages of terrain could be nullified if surprise was achieved over the enemy by an attack in areas that had been considered natural obstacles, as occurred during the Battle of France in which the main German offensive went through the Ardennes. Since the French thought that the Ardennes unsuitable for massive troop movement, particularly for tanks, the area was left with only light defences, which were quickly overrun by the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;. The Germans quickly advanced through the forest and knocked down the trees that the French had thought would impede them.

===Air superiority===

The influence of air forces over forces on the ground changed significantly over the course of the Second World War. Early German successes were conducted when Allied aircraft could not make a significant impact on the battlefield. In May 1940, there was near parity in numbers of aircraft between the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; and the Allies, but the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; had been developed to support Germany&#x27;s ground forces, had liaison officers with the mobile formations and operated a higher number of sorties per aircraft. In addition, the Germans&#x27; air parity or superiority allowed the unencumbered movement of ground forces, their unhindered assembly into concentrated attack formations, aerial reconnaissance, aerial resupply of fast moving formations and close air support at the point of attack. The Allied air forces had no close air support aircraft, training or doctrine. The Allies flew 434 French and 160 British sorties a day but methods of attacking ground targets had yet to be developed and so Allied aircraft caused negligible damage. Against the Allies&#x27; 600 sorties, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; on average flew 1,500 sorties a day.

On 13 May, &quot;Fliegerkorps&quot; VIII flew 1,000 sorties in support of the crossing of the Meuse. The following day the Allies made repeated attempts to destroy the German pontoon bridges, but German fighter aircraft, ground fire and &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; flak batteries with the panzer forces destroyed 56 percent of the attacking Allied aircraft, and the bridges remained intact.

Allied air superiority became a significant hindrance to German operations during the later years of the war. By June 1944, the Western Allies had the complete control of the air over the battlefield, and their fighter-bomber aircraft were very effective at attacking ground forces. On D-Day, the Allies flew 14,500 sorties over the battlefield area alone, not including sorties flown over Northwestern Europe. Against them the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; flew some 300 sorties on 6 June. Though German fighter presence over Normandy increased over the next days and weeks, it never approached the numbers that the Allies commanded. Fighter-bomber attacks on German formations made movement during daylight almost impossible.

Subsequently, shortages soon developed in food, fuel and ammunition and severely hampered the German defenders. German vehicle crews and even flak units experienced great difficulty moving during daylight. Indeed, the final German offensive operation in the west, Operation Wacht am Rhein, was planned to take place during poor weather to minimise interference by Allied aircraft. Under those conditions, it was difficult for German commanders to employ the &quot;armored idea&quot;, if at all.

===Counter-tactics===

Blitzkrieg is vulnerable to an enemy that is robust enough to weather the shock of the attack and does not panic at the idea of enemy formations in its rear area. That is especially true if the attacking formation lacks the reserve to keep funnelling forces into the spearhead or the mobility to provide infantry, artillery and supplies into the attack. If the defender can hold the shoulders of the breach, it has the opportunity to counter-attack into the flank of the attacker and potentially to cut it off the van, as what happened to Kampfgruppe Peiper in the Ardennes.

During the Battle of France in 1940, the 4th Armoured Division (Major-General Charles de Gaulle) and elements of the 1st Army Tank Brigade (British Expeditionary Force) made probing attacks on the German flank and pushed into the rear of the advancing armored columns at times. That may have been a reason for Hitler to call a halt to the German advance. Those attacks combined with Maxime Weygand&#x27;s hedgehog tactic would become the major basis for responding to blitzkrieg attacks in the future. Deployment in depth, or permitting enemy or &quot;shoulders&quot; of a penetration, was essential to channelling the enemy attack; artillery, properly employed at the shoulders, could take a heavy toll on attackers. Allied forces in 1940 lacked the experience to develop those strategies successfully, which resulted in the French armistice with heavy losses, but those strategies characterized later Allied operations.

At the Battle of Kursk, the Red Army used a combination of defence in great depth, extensive minefields and tenacious defense of breakthrough shoulders. In that way, they depleted German combat power even as German forces advanced. The reverse can be seen in the Russian summer offensive of 1944, Operation Bagration, which resulted in the destruction of Army Group Center. German attempts to weather the storm and fight out of encirclements failed because of the Soviets&#x27; ability to continue to feed armored units into the attack, maintain the mobility and strength of the offensive and arrive in force deep in the rear areas faster than the Germans could regroup.

===Logistics===
Although effective in quick campaigns against Poland and France, mobile operations could not be sustained by Germany in later years. Strategies based on maneuver have the inherent danger of the attacking force overextending its supply lines and can be defeated by a determined foe who is willing and able to sacrifice territory for time in which to regroup and rearm, as the Soviets did on the Eastern Front, as opposed to, for example, the Dutch, who had no territory to sacrifice. Tank and vehicle production was a constant problem for Germany. Indeed, late in the war, many panzer &quot;divisions&quot; had no more than a few dozen tanks.

As the end of the war approached, Germany also experienced critical shortages in fuel and ammunition stocks as a result of Anglo-American strategic bombing and blockade. Although the production of &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; fighter aircraft continued, they could not fly because of lack of fuel. What fuel there was went to panzer divisions, and even then, they could not operate normally. Of the Tiger tanks lost against the US Army, nearly half of them were abandoned for lack of fuel.

==Military operations==
===Spanish Civil War===
German volunteers first used armor in live field-conditions during the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939). Armor commitment consisted of Panzer Battalion 88, a force built around three companies of Panzer I tanks that functioned as a training cadre for Spain&#x27;s Nationalists. The Luftwaffe deployed squadrons of fighters, dive-bombers and transport aircraft as the &quot;Condor Legion&quot;. Guderian said that the tank deployment was &quot;on too small a scale to allow accurate assessments to be made&quot;. (The true test of his &quot;armored idea&quot; would have to wait for the Second World War.) However, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; also provided volunteers to Spain to test both tactics and aircraft in combat, including the first combat use of the &quot;Stuka&quot;.

During the war, the &quot;Condor Legion&quot; undertook the 1937 bombing of Guernica, which had a tremendous psychological effect on the populations of Europe. The results were exaggerated, and the Western Allies concluded that the &quot;city-busting&quot; techniques were now part of the German way in war. The targets of the German aircraft were actually the rail lines and bridges, but lacking the ability to hit them with accuracy (only three or four Ju 87s saw action in Spain), the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; chose a method of carpet bombing, resulting in heavy civilian casualties.

===Poland, 1939===
Although journalists popularized the term &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; during the September 1939 invasion of Poland, the historians Matthew Cooper and J. P. Harris have written that German operations during the campaign were consistent with traditional methods. The Wehrmacht strategy was more in line with &quot;Vernichtungsgedanke&quot;, a focus on envelopment to create pockets in broad-front annihilation. The German generals dispersed Panzer forces among the three German concentrations with little emphasis on independent use. They deployed tanks to create or destroy close pockets of Polish forces and to seize operational-depth terrain in support of the largely-unmotorized infantry, which followed.

The Wehrmacht used available models of tanks, Stuka dive-bombers and concentrated forces in the Polish campaign, but the majority of the fighting involved conventional infantry and artillery warfare, and most Luftwaffe action was independent of the ground campaign. Matthew Cooper wrote:

John Ellis wrote that &quot;there is considerable justice in Matthew Cooper&#x27;s assertion that the panzer divisions were not given the kind of &quot;strategic&quot; mission that was to characterize authentic armored blitzkrieg, and were almost always closely subordinated to the various mass infantry armies&quot;. Steven Zaloga wrote, &quot;Whilst Western accounts of the September campaign have stressed the shock value of the panzer and Stuka attacks, they have tended to underestimate the punishing effect of German artillery on Polish units. Mobile and available in significant quantity, artillery shattered as many units as any other branch of the Wehrmacht.&quot;

===Low Countries and France, 1940===
The German invasion of France, with subsidiary attacks on Belgium and the Netherlands, consisted of two phases, Operation Yellow (&quot;Fall Gelb&quot;) and Operation Red (&quot;Fall Rot&quot;). Yellow opened with a feint conducted against the Netherlands and Belgium by two armored corps and paratroopers. Most of the German armored forces were placed in Panzer Group Kleist, which attacked through the Ardennes, a lightly defended sector that the French planned to reinforce if necessary before the Germans could bring up heavy and siege artillery. There was no time for the French to send such reinforcement, as the Germans did not wait for siege artillery but reached the Meuse and achieved a breakthrough at the Battle of Sedan in three days.

Panzer Group Kleist raced to the English Channel, reached the coast at Abbeville and cut off the BEF, the Belgian Army and some of the best-equipped divisions of the French Army in northern France. Armored and motorized units under Guderian, Rommel and others advanced far beyond the marching and horse-drawn infantry divisions and far in excess of what Hitler and the German high command had expected or wished. When the Allies counter-attacked at Arras by using the heavily armored British Matilda I and Matilda II tanks, a brief panic ensued in the German High Command.

Hitler halted his armored and motorized forces outside the port of Dunkirk, which the Royal Navy had started using to evacuate the Allied forces. Hermann Göring promised that the Luftwaffe would complete the destruction of the encircled armies, but aerial operations failed to prevent the evacuation of the majority of the Allied troops. In Operation Dynamo, some French and British troops escaped.

Case Yellow surprised everyone by overcoming the Allies&#x27; 4,000 armored vehicles, many of which were better than their German equivalents in armor and gunpower. The French and British frequently used their tanks in the dispersed role of infantry support, rather than by concentrating force at the point of attack, to create overwhelming firepower.
The French armies were much reduced in strength and the confidence of their commanders shaken. With much of their own armor and heavy equipment lost in Northern France, they lacked the means to fight a mobile war. The Germans followed their initial success with Operation Red, a triple-pronged offensive. The XV Panzer Corps attacked towards Brest, XIV Panzer Corps attacked east of Paris, towards Lyon and the XIX Panzer Corps encircled the Maginot Line. The French, hard pressed to organise any sort of counter-attack, were continually ordered to form new defensive lines and found that German forces had already bypassed them and moved on. An armored counter-attack, organized by Colonel Charles de Gaulle, could not be sustained, and he had to retreat.

Prior to the German offensive in May, Winston Churchill had said, &quot;Thank God for the French Army&quot;. The same French Army collapsed after barely two months of fighting. That was in shocking contrast to the four years of trench warfare on which French forces had engaged during the First World War. French Prime Minister Paul Reynaud, analyzed the collapse in a speech on 21 May 1940:

The Germans had not used paratroopry attacks in France and made only one large drop in the Netherlands to capture three bridges; some small glider-landings were conducted in Belgium to take bottlenecks on routes of advance before the arrival of the main force (the most renowned being the landing on Fort Eben-Emael in Belgium).

===Eastern Front, 1941–44===

Use of armored forces was crucial for both sides on the Eastern Front. Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, involved a number of breakthroughs and encirclements by motorized forces. Its goal, according to Führer Directive 21 (18 December 1940), was &quot;to destroy the Russian forces deployed in the West and to prevent their escape into the wide-open spaces of Russia&quot;. The Red Army was to be destroyed west of the Dvina and Dnieper rivers, which were about east of the Soviet border, to be followed by a mopping-up operation. The surprise attack resulted in the near annihilation of the Voyenno-Vozdushnye Sily (VVS, Soviet Air Force) by simultaneous attacks on airfields, allowing the Luftwaffe to achieve total air supremacy over all the battlefields within the first week. On the ground, four German panzer groups outflanked and encircled disorganized Red Army units, and the marching infantry completed the encirclements and defeated the trapped forces. In late July, after 2nd Panzer Group (commanded by Guderian) captured the watersheds of the Dvina and Dnieper rivers near Smolensk, the panzers had to defend the encirclement, because the marching infantry divisions remained hundreds of kilometers to the west.

The Germans conquered large areas of the Soviet Union, but their failure to destroy the Red Army before the winter of 1941-1942 was a strategic failure and made German tactical superiority and territorial gains irrelevant. The Red Army had survived enormous losses and regrouped with new formations far to the rear of the front line. During the Battle of Moscow (October 1941 to January 1942), the Red Army defeated the German Army Group Center and for the first time in the war seized the strategic initiative.

In the summer of 1942, Germany launched another offensive and this time focusing on Stalingrad and the Caucasus in the southern Soviet Union. The Soviets again lost tremendous amounts of territory, only to counter-attack once more during winter. The German gains were ultimately limited because Hitler diverted forces from the attack on Stalingrad and drove towards the Caucasus oilfields simultaneously. The &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; became overstretched. Although it won operationally, it could not inflict a decisive defeat as the durability of the Soviet Union&#x27;s manpower, resources, industrial base and aid from the Western Allies began to take effect.

In July 1943, the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; conducted Operation Zitadelle (Citadel) against a salient at Kursk, which Soviet troop heavily defended. Soviet defensive tactics had by now hugely improved, particularly in the use of artillery and air support. By April 1943, the Stavka had learned of German intentions through intelligence supplied by front-line reconnaissance and Ultra intercepts. In the following months, the Red Army constructed deep defensive belts along the paths of the planned German attack. The Soviets made a concerted effort to disguise their knowledge of German plans and the extent of their own defensive preparations, and the German commanders still hoped to achieve operational surprise when the attack commenced.

The Germans did not achieve surprise and could not outflank or break through into enemy rear areas during the operation. Several historians assert that Operation Citadel was planned and intended to be a blitzkrieg operation. Many of the German participants who wrote about the operation after the war, including Erich von Manstein, make no mention of blitzkrieg in their accounts. In 2000, Niklas Zetterling and Anders Frankson characterised only the southern pincer of the German offensive as a &quot;classical blitzkrieg attack&quot;. Pier Battistelli wrote that the operational planning marked a change in German offensive thinking away from blitzkrieg and that more priority was given to brute force and fire power than to speed and maneuver.

In 1995, David Glantz stated that blitzkrieg was at Kursk for the first time defeated in summer, and the opposing Soviet forces mounted a successful counter-offensive. The Battle of Kursk ended with two Soviet counter-offensives and the revival of deep operations. In the summer of 1944, the Red Army destroyed Army Group Centre in Operation Bagration by using combined-arms tactics for armor, infantry and air power in a coordinated strategic assault, known as deep operations, which led to an advance of in six weeks.

===Western Front, 1944–1945===
Allied armies began using combined-arms formations and deep-penetration strategies that Germany had used in the opening years of the war. Many Allied operations in the Western Desert and on the Eastern Front, relied on firepower to establish breakthroughs by fast-moving armored units. The artillery-based tactics were also decisive in Western Front operations after 1944&#x27;s Operation Overlord, and the British Commonwealth and American armies developed flexible and powerful systems for using artillery support. What the Soviets lacked in flexibility, they made up for in number of rocket launchers, guns and mortars. The Germans never achieved the kind of fire concentrations that their enemies were achieving 1944.

After the Allied landings in Normandy (June 1944), the Germans began a counter-offensive to overwhelm the landing force with armored attacks, but they failed because of a lack of co-ordination and to Allied superiority in anti-tank defense and in the air. The most notable attempt to use deep-penetration operations in Normandy was Operation Luttich at Mortain, which only hastened the Falaise Pocket and the destruction of German forces in Normandy. The Mortain counter-attack was defeated by the American 12th Army Group with little effect on its own offensive operations.

The last German offensive on the Western front, the Battle of the Bulge (Operation Wacht am Rhein), was an offensive launched towards the port of Antwerp in December 1944. Launched in poor weather against a thinly-held Allied sector, it achieved surprise and initial success as Allied air-power was grounded due to cloud cover. Determined defense by American troops in places throughout the Ardennes, the lack of good roads and German supply shortages caused delays. Allied forces deployed to the flanks of the German penetration, and as soon as the skies cleared, Allied aircraft returned to the battlefield. Allied counter-attacks soon forced back the Germans, who abandoned much equipment for lack of fuel.

==Post-war controversy==
Blitzkrieg had been called a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA), but many writers and historians have concluded that the Germans did not invent a new form of warfare but applied new technologies to traditional ideas of &quot;Bewegungskrieg&quot; (maneuver warfare) to achieve decisive victory.

===Strategy===
In 1965, Captain Robert O&#x27;Neill, Professor of the History of War at the University of Oxford produced an example of the popular view. In &quot;Doctrine and Training in the German Army 1919–1939&quot;, O&#x27;Neill wrote:

Other historians wrote that blitzkrieg was an operational doctrine of the German armed forces and a strategic concept on which the leadership of Nazi Germany based its strategic and economic planning. Military planners and bureaucrats in the war economy appear rarely, if ever, to have employed the term &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; in official documents. That the German army had a &quot;blitzkrieg doctrine&quot; was rejected in the late 1970s by Matthew Cooper. The concept of a blitzkrieg &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; was challenged by Richard Overy in the late 1970s and by Williamson Murray in the mid-1980s. That Nazi Germany went to war on the basis of &quot;blitzkrieg economics&quot; was criticized by Richard Overy in the 1980s, and George Raudzens described the contradictory senses in which historians have used the word. The notion of a German blitzkrieg concept or doctrine survives in popular history and many historians still support the thesis.

Frieser wrote that after the failure of the Schlieffen Plan in 1914, the German army concluded that decisive battles were no longer possible in the changed conditions of the twentieth century. Frieser wrote that the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW), which was created in 1938 had intended to avoid the decisive battle concepts of its predecessors and planned for a long war of exhaustion (&quot;Ermattungskrieg&quot;). It was only after the improvised plan for the Battle of France in 1940 was unexpectedly successful that the German General Staff came to believe that &quot;Vernichtungskrieg&quot; was still feasible. German thinking reverted to the possibility of a quick and decisive war for the Balkan campaign and Operation Barbarossa.

===Doctrine===
Most academic historians regard the notion of blitzkrieg as military doctrine to be a myth. Shimon Naveh wrote, &quot;The striking feature of the blitzkrieg concept is the complete absence of a coherent theory which should have served as the general cognitive basis for the actual conduct of operations&quot;. Naveh described it as an &quot;ad hoc solution&quot; to operational dangers, thrown together at the last moment. Overy disagreed with the idea that Hitler and the Nazi regime ever intended a blitzkrieg war because the once-popular belief that the Nazi state organized its economy to carry out its grand strategy in short campaigns was false. Hitler had intended for a rapid unlimited war to occur much later than 1939, but Germany&#x27;s aggressive foreign policy forced the state into war before it was ready. The planning of Hitler and the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; in the 1930s did not reflect a blitzkrieg method but the opposite. J. P. Harris wrote that the Wehrmacht never used the word, and it did not appear in German army or air force field manuals. The word was coined in September 1939 by a &quot;Times&quot; newspaper reporter. Harris also found no evidence that German military thinking developed a blitzkrieg mentality. Karl-Heinz Frieser and Adam Tooze reached similar conclusions to Overy and Naveh that the notions of blitzkrieg economy and strategy are myths. Frieser wrote that surviving German economists and General Staff officers denied that Germany went to war with a blitzkrieg strategy. Robert M. Citino argues:

Historian Victor Davis Hanson states that &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; &quot;played on the myth of German technological superiority and industrial dominance&quot; and adds that German successes, particularly that of its Panzer divisions were &quot;instead predicated on the poor preparation and morale of Germany&#x27;s enemies&quot;. Hanson also reports that at a Munich public address in November 1941, Hitler had &quot;disowned&quot; the concept of &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; by calling it an &quot;idiotic word&quot;. Further, successful &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; operations were predicated on superior numbers, air support and were possible for only short periods of time without sufficient supply lines. For all intents and purposes, &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; ended at the Eastern Front once the German forces had given up Stalingrad, after they faced hundreds of new T-34 tanks, when the Luftwaffe became unable to assure air dominance, and after the stalemate at Kursk. To that end, Hanson concludes that German military success was not accompanied by the adequate provisioning of its troops with food and materiel far from the source of supply, which contributed to its ultimate failure. Despite its later disappointments as German troops extended their lines at too great a distance, the very specter of armored &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; forces initially proved victorious against the Polish, Dutch, Belgian and French Armies early in the war.

===Economics===
In the 1960s, Alan Milward developed a theory of blitzkrieg economics: Germany could not fight a long war and chose to avoid comprehensive rearmament and armed in breadth to win quick victories. Milward described an economy positioned between a full war economy and a peacetime economy. The purpose of the blitzkrieg economy was to allow the German people to enjoy high living standards in the event of hostilities and avoid the economic hardships of the First World War.

Overy wrote that blitzkrieg as a &quot;coherent military and economic concept has proven a difficult strategy to defend in light of the evidence&quot;. Milward&#x27;s theory was contrary to Hitler&#x27;s and German planners&#x27; intentions. The Germans, aware of the errors of the First World War, rejected the concept of organizing its economy to fight only a short war. Therefore, focus was given to the development of armament in depth for a long war, instead of armament in breadth for a short war. Hitler claimed that relying on surprise alone was &quot;criminal&quot; and that &quot;we have to prepare for a long war along with surprise attack&quot;. During the winter of 1939–1940, Hitler demobilized many troops from the army to return as skilled workers to factories because the war would be decided by production, not a quick &quot;Panzer operation&quot;.

In the 1930s, Hitler had ordered rearmament programs that cannot be considered limited. In November 1937, he had indicated that most of the armament projects would be completed by 1943–1945. The rearmament of the &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot; was to have been completed in 1949 and the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; rearmament program was to have matured in 1942, with a force capable of strategic bombing with heavy bombers. The construction and the training of motorized forces and a full mobilization of the rail networks would not begin until 1943 and 1944, respectively. Hitler needed to avoid war until these projects were complete but his misjudgements in 1939 forced Germany into war before rearmament was complete.

After the war, Albert Speer claimed that the German economy achieved greater armaments output not because of diversions of capacity from civilian to military industry but by streamlining of the economy. Overy pointed out some 23 percent of German output was military by 1939. Between 1937 and 1939, 70 percent of investment capital went into the rubber, synthetic fuel, aircraft and shipbuilding industries. Hermann Göring had consistently stated that the task of the Four Year Plan was to rearm Germany for total war. Hitler&#x27;s correspondence with his economists also reveals that his intent was to wage war in 1943–1945, when the resources of central Europe had been absorbed into Nazi Germany.

Living standards were not high in the late 1930s. Consumption of consumer goods had fallen from 71 percent in 1928 to 59 percent in 1938. The demands of the war economy reduced the amount of spending in non-military sectors to satisfy the demand for the armed forces. On 9 September, Göring, as Head of the &quot;Reich Defense Council&quot;, called for complete &quot;employment&quot; of living and fighting power of the national economy for the duration of the war. Overy presents that as evidence that a &quot;blitzkrieg economy&quot; did not exist.

Adam Tooze wrote that the German economy was being prepared for a long war. The expenditure for the war was extensive and put the economy under severe strain. The German leadership were concerned less with how to balance the civilian economy and the needs of civilian consumption but to figure out how to best prepare the economy for total war. Once war had begun, Hitler urged his economic experts to abandon caution and expend all available resources on the war effort, but the expansion plans only gradually gained momentum in 1941. Tooze wrote that the huge armament plans in the pre-war period did not indicate any clear-sighted blitzkrieg economy or strategy.

===&quot;Heer&quot;===
Frieser wrote that the () was not ready for blitzkrieg at the start of the war. A blitzkrieg method called for a young, highly skilled mechanized army. In 1939–1940, 45 percent of the army was 40 years old and 50 percent of the soldiers had only a few weeks&#x27; training. The German Army, contrary to the blitzkrieg legend, was not fully motorized and had only 120,000 vehicles, compared to the 300,000 of the French Army. The British also had an &quot;enviable&quot; contingent of motorized forces. Thus, &quot;the image of the German &#x27;Blitzkrieg&#x27; army is a figment of propaganda imagination&quot;. During the First World War, the German army used 1.4 million horses for transport and in the Second World War 2.7 million horses. Only ten percent of the army was motorized in 1940.

Half of the German divisions available in 1940 were combat ready, but they were less well-equipped than the British and French or the Imperial German Army of 1914. In the spring of 1940, the German army was semi-modern in which a small number of well-equipped and &quot;elite&quot; divisions were offset by many second and third rate divisions&quot;. In 2003, John Mosier wrote that while the French soldiers in 1940 were better trained than German soldiers, as were the Americans later and that the German Army was the least mechanized of the major armies, its leadership cadres were larger and better and that the high standard of leadership was the main reason for the successes of the German army in World War II, as it had been in World War I.

===&quot;Luftwaffe&quot;===
James Corum wrote that it was a myth that the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; had a doctrine of terror bombing in which civilians were attacked to break the will or aid the collapse of an enemy by the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; in &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; operations. After the bombing of Guernica in 1937 and the Rotterdam Blitz in 1940, it was commonly assumed that terror bombing was a part of &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; doctrine. During the interwar period, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; leadership rejected the concept of terror bombing in favour of battlefield support and interdiction operations:

Corum continued: General Walther Wever compiled a doctrine known as &quot;The Conduct of the Aerial War&quot;. This document, which the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; adopted, rejected Giulio Douhet&#x27;s theory of terror bombing. Terror bombing was deemed to be &quot;counter-productive&quot;, increasing rather than destroying the enemy&#x27;s will to resist. Such bombing campaigns were regarded as diversion from the &quot;Luftwaffe&#x27;s&quot; main operations; destruction of the enemy armed forces. The bombings of Guernica, Rotterdam and Warsaw were tactical missions in support of military operations and were not intended as strategic terror attacks.

J. P. Harris wrote that most Luftwaffe leaders from Goering through the general staff believed, as did their counterparts in Britain and the United States, that strategic bombing was the chief mission of the air force and that given such a role, the Luftwaffe would win the next war and that

The Luftwaffe ended up with an air force consisting mainly of relatively short-range aircraft, but that does not prove that the German air force was solely interested in &quot;tactical&quot; bombing. It happened because the German aircraft industry lacked the experience to build a long-range bomber fleet quickly and because Hitler was insistent on the very rapid creation of a numerically large force. It is also significant that Germany&#x27;s position in the centre of Europe to a large extent obviated the need to make a clear distinction between bombers suitable only for &quot;tactical&quot; purposes and those necessary for strategic purposes in the early stages of a likely future war.

===Fuller and Liddell Hart===
The British theorists John Frederick Charles Fuller and Captain Basil Henry Liddell Hart have often been associated with the development of blitzkrieg, but that is a matter of controversy. In recent years historians have uncovered that Liddell Hart distorted and falsified facts to make it appear as if his ideas has been adopted. After the war Liddell Hart imposed his own perceptions after the event by claiming that the mobile tank warfare has been practiced by the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; was a result of his influence. By manipulation and contrivance, Liddell Hart distorted the actual circumstances of the blitzkrieg formation, and he obscured its origins. By his indoctrinated idealization of an ostentatious concept, he reinforced the myth of blitzkrieg. Imposing retrospectively his own perceptions of mobile warfare upon the shallow concept of blitzkrieg, he &quot;created a theoretical imbroglio that has taken 40 years to unravel&quot;. Blitzkrieg was not an official doctrine, and historians in recent times have come to the conclusion that it did not exist as such:

The early 1950s literature transformed blitzkrieg into a historical military doctrine, which carried the signature of Liddell Hart and Guderian. The main evidence of Liddell Hart&#x27;s deceit and &quot;tendentious&quot; report of history can be found in his letters to Erich von Manstein, Heinz Guderian, and the relatives and associates of Erwin Rommel. Liddell Hart, in letters to Guderian, &quot;imposed his own fabricated version of blitzkrieg on the latter and compelled him to proclaim it as original formula&quot;. Kenneth Macksey found Liddell Hart&#x27;s original letters to Guderian in the latter&#x27;s papers. Liddell Hart requested Guderian to give him credit for &quot;impressing him&quot; with his ideas of armored warfare. When Liddell Hart was questioned about this in 1968 and the discrepancy between the English and German editions of Guderian&#x27;s memoirs, &quot;he gave a conveniently unhelpful though strictly truthful reply. (&#x27;There is nothing about the matter in my file of correspondence with Guderian himself except... that I thanked him... for what he said in that additional paragraph&#x27;.)&quot;.

During the First World War, Fuller had been a staff officer attached to the new tank corps. He developed Plan 1919 for massive independent tank operations, which he claimed were subsequently studied by the German military. It is variously argued that Fuller&#x27;s wartime plans and post-war writings were inspirations or that his readership was low and German experiences during the war received more attention. The German view of themselves as the losers of the war may be linked to the senior and experienced officers&#x27; undertaking a thorough review in studying and rewriting of all of their Army doctrine and training manuals.

Fuller and Liddell Hart were &quot;outsiders&quot;. Liddell Hart was unable to serve as a soldier after 1916 after being gassed on the Somme, and Fuller&#x27;s abrasive personality resulted in his premature retirement in 1933. Their views had limited impact in the British army; the War Office permitted the formation of an Experimental Mechanized Force on 1 May 1927, composed of tanks, motorized infantry, self-propelled artillery and motorized engineers but the force was disbanded in 1928 on the grounds that it had served its purpose. A new experimental brigade was intended for the next year and became a permanent formation in 1933, during the cuts of the financial years.

===Continuity===
It has been argued that blitzkrieg was not new, and that the Germans did not invent something called blitzkrieg in the 1920s and 1930s. Rather, the German concept of wars of movement and concentrated force were seen in wars of Prussia and the German Wars of Unification. The first European general to introduce rapid movement, concentrated power and integrated military effort was Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus during the Thirty Years&#x27; War. The appearance of the aircraft and tank in the First World War, called an RMA, offered the German military a chance to get back to the traditional war of movement as practiced by Moltke the Elder. The so-called &quot;blitzkrieg campaigns&quot; of 1939 to around 1942 were well within that operational context.

At the outbreak of war, the German army had no radically new theory of war. The operational thinking of the German army had not changed significantly since the First World War or since the late 19th century. J. P. Harris and Robert M. Citino point out that the Germans had always had a marked preference for short decisive campaigns but were unable to achieve short-order victories in First World War conditions. The transformation from the stalemate of the First World War into tremendous initial operational and strategic success in the Second World War was partly the employment of a relatively-small number of mechanized divisions, most importantly the Panzer divisions, and the support of an exceptionally powerful air force.

===Guderian===
Heinz Guderian is widely regarded as being highly influential in developing the military methods of warfare used by Germany&#x27;s tank men at the start of the Second World War. That style of warfare brought the maneuver back to the fore and placed an emphasis on the offensive. Along with the shockingly-rapid collapse in the armies that opposed it, that came to be branded as blitzkrieg warfare.

After Germany&#x27;s military reforms of the Guderian emerged as a strong proponent of mechanized forces. Within the Inspectorate of Transport Troops, Guderian and colleagues performed theoretical and field exercise work. Guderian met with opposition from some in the General Staff, who were distrustful of the new weapons and who continued to view the infantry as the primary weapon of the army. Among them, Guderian claimed, was Chief of the General Staff Ludwig Beck (1935–1938), who he alleged was skeptical that armored forces could be decisive. That claim has been disputed by later historians. James Corum wrote:

By Guderian&#x27;s account, he single-handedly created the German tactical and operational methodology. Between 1922 and 1928 Guderian wrote a number of articles concerning military movement. As the ideas of making use of the combustible engine in a protected encasement to bring mobility back to warfare developed in the German army, Guderian was a leading proponent of the formations that would be used for this purpose. He was later asked to write an explanatory book, which was titled &quot;Achtung Panzer!&quot; (1937) in which he explained the theories of the tank men and defended them.

Guderian argued that the tank would be the decisive weapon of the next war. &quot;If the tanks succeed, then victory follows&quot;, he wrote. In an article addressed to critics of tank warfare, he wrote that &quot;until our critics can produce some new and better method of making a successful land attack other than self-massacre, we shall continue to maintain our beliefs that tanks—properly employed, needless to say—are today the best means available for land attack&quot;.

Addressing the faster rate at which defenders could reinforce an area than attackers could penetrate it during the First World War, Guderian wrote that &quot;since reserve forces will now be motorized, the building up of new defensive fronts is easier than it used to be; the chances of an offensive based on the timetable of artillery and infantry co-operation are, as a result, even slighter today than they were in the last war.&quot; He continued, &quot;We believe that by attacking with tanks we can achieve a higher rate of movement than has been hitherto obtainable, and—what is perhaps even more important—that we can keep moving once a breakthrough has been made&quot;. Guderian additionally required for tactical radios to be widely used to facilitate coordination and command by having one installed in all tanks.

Guderian&#x27;s leadership was supported, fostered and institutionalized by his supporters in the Reichswehr General Staff system, which worked the Army to greater and greater levels of capability through massive and systematic Movement Warfare war games in the 1930s. Guderian&#x27;s book incorporated the work of theorists such as Ludwig Ritter von Eimannsberger, whose book, &quot;The Tank War&quot; (&quot;Der Kampfwagenkrieg&quot;) (1934) gained a wide audience in the German Army. Another German theorist, Ernst Volckheim, wrote a huge amount on tank and combined arms tactics and was influential to German thinking on the use of armored formations, but his work was not acknowledged in Guderian&#x27;s writings.

==See also==
* AirLand Battle, blitzkrieg-like doctrine of US Army in 1980s
* Armoured warfare
* Maneuver warfare
* Shock and awe, the 21st century US military doctrine.
* &quot;Vernichtungsgedanke&quot;, or &quot;annihilation concept&quot;.
* Mission-type tactics
* Deep Battle, Soviet Red Army Military Doctrine from the 1930s often confused with blitzkrieg.
* &quot;Battleplan&quot; (documentary TV series)
* &quot;Vernichtungsschlacht&quot;, Battle of annihilation

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
===Books===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
===Conferences===

===Journals===
* 
* 
* 

===Websites===
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* Raudzens, George. &quot;Blitzkrieg Ambiguities: Doubtful Usage of a Famous Word.&quot; &quot;War &amp; Society&quot; 7.2 (1989): 77–94. https://doi.org/10.1179/106980489790305551

== External links ==
* Armstrong, G. P. The Controversy over Tanks in the British Army 1919 to 1933 (PhD 1976)
* Sinesi, Michael. Patrick. Modern Bewegungskrieg: German Battle Doctrine, 1920–1940 (2001)
* Vardi, Gil-Li. The Enigma of German Operational Theory: the Evolution of Military Thought in Germany, 1919–1938 (PhD 2008)
* Spiegel Online: The Nazi Death Machine, Hitler&#x27;s Drugged Soldiers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="40" end="53" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467464" start="99" end="118" title="force concentration" label="force concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="139" end="146" title="armoured warfare" label="armored"/>
<link wikidata="Q692886" start="151" end="160" title="motorised infantry" label="motorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="164" end="183" title="mechanised infantry" label="mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="210" end="219" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="221" end="232" title="air assault" label="air assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="238" end="255" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872822" start="472" end="494" title="battle of annihilation" label="battle of annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="508" end="523" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283371" start="651" end="667" title="manoeuvre warfare" label="maneuver warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569578" start="746" end="766" title="encirclement" label="encircle and destroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="841" end="859" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1209" end="1216" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1218" end="1233" title="Netherlands" label="The Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1238" end="1244" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="1416" end="1424" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1437" end="1449" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1551" end="1567" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1774" end="1786" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="1848" end="1857" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239010" start="1957" end="1971" title="David Reynolds (British historian)" label="David Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1979" end="1985" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q76544" start="2108" end="2120" title="Kurt Student" label="Kurt Student"/>
<link wikidata="Q57174" start="2122" end="2134" title="Franz Halder" label="Franz Halder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692273" start="2139" end="2167" title="Johann Adolf von Kielmansegg" label="Johann Adolf von Kielmansegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q108402" start="2554" end="2572" title="Karl-Heinz Frieser" label="Karl-Heinz Frieser"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="3261" end="3275" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="3514" end="3522" title="Military tactics" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="3527" end="3538" title="military operation" label="operational"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="4276" end="4289" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Junkers Ju 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="4424" end="4440" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="4589" end="4605" title="fifth columnists" label="fifth columnists"/>
<link wikidata="Q14567502" start="5196" end="5232" title="Military History Research Office (Germany)" label="Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="5243" end="5250" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="5496" end="5504" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="6087" end="6100" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q162746" start="6110" end="6122" title="Maginot Line" label="Maginot Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q88483" start="6458" end="6473" title="Fritz Sternberg" label="Fritz Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="6484" end="6491" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="7589" end="7603" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="7803" end="7812" title="The Blitz" label="The Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="8011" end="8025" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76430" start="8680" end="8699" title="Carl von Clausewitz" label="Carl von Clausewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44205" start="8734" end="8762" title="Helmuth von Moltke the Elder" label="Helmuth von Moltke the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q28938" start="8801" end="8822" title="Alfred von Schlieffen" label="Alfred von Schlieffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109973" start="8989" end="8999" title="Willy Rohr" label="Willy Rohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="9069" end="9083" title="light infantry" label="light infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304229" start="9091" end="9103" title="Stosstruppen" label="Stosstruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q460942" start="9373" end="9405" title="hurricane bombardment" label="hurricane artillery bombardments"/>
<link wikidata="Q90265" start="9455" end="9472" title="Georg Bruchmüller" label="Georg Bruchmüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q152008" start="9588" end="9605" title="Operation Michael" label="Operation Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q750567" start="9611" end="9634" title="German spring offensive" label="German spring offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="10045" end="10056" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328012" start="10085" end="10100" title="history of the tank" label="tank production"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="10170" end="10190" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="10203" end="10213" title="Reichswehr" label="Reichswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572199" start="10294" end="10314" title="German General Staff" label="German General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386803" start="10379" end="10389" title="Truppenamt" label="Truppenamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848016" start="10893" end="10907" title="Truppenführung" label="Truppenführung"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="11241" end="11254" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="11309" end="11323" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q57204" start="11784" end="11799" title="Hans von Seeckt" label="Hans von Seeckt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283371" start="11929" end="11943" title="Bewegungskrieg" label="Bewegungskrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q787491" start="12003" end="12017" title="Auftragstaktik" label="Auftragstaktik"/>
<link wikidata="Q727536" start="13621" end="13649" title="Sinai and Palestine campaign" label="Sinai and Palestine campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q199371" start="13739" end="13756" title="Battle of Megiddo (1918)" label="Battle of Megiddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334846" start="13993" end="14007" title="Edmund Allenby" label="Edmund Allenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="14043" end="14050" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="14223" end="14228" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13565998" start="14293" end="14310" title="Battle of Sharon" label="Battles of Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871841" start="14315" end="14321" title="Battle of Nablus (1918)" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q508659" start="15008" end="15022" title="Charles Mangin" label="Charles Mangin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441102" start="15027" end="15047" title="Marie-Eugène Debeney" label="Marie-Eugène Debeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="15137" end="15154" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="15766" end="15780" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207738" start="15830" end="15845" title="Alexei Brusilov" label="Alexei Brusilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q221967" start="15900" end="15918" title="Brusilov Offensive" label="Brusilov Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q142141" start="15935" end="15955" title="Mikhail Tukhachevsky" label="Mikhail Tukhachevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="16006" end="16014" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194366" start="16038" end="16049" title="deep battle" label="deep battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="16077" end="16094" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Polish–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="16759" end="16771" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665892" start="16830" end="16853" title="Military Inter-Allied Commission of Control" label="Inter-Allied Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q357104" start="16863" end="16872" title="military exercise" label="war games"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="16892" end="16897" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490" start="16902" end="16909" title="Lipetsk" label="Lipetsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="16918" end="16931" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="17137" end="17158" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="17168" end="17180" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288083" start="17347" end="17358" title="Panzerwaffe" label="Panzerwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="17384" end="17393" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664337" start="17615" end="17632" title="Achtung – Panzer!" label="Achtung – Panzer!"/>
<link wikidata="Q565801" start="17685" end="17696" title="Kummersdorf" label="Kummersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q584948" start="17990" end="18003" title="Panzer Leader (book)" label="Panzer Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="18560" end="18566" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q242644" start="18941" end="18965" title="Battle of Caporetto" label="Twelfth Battle of Isonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115894" start="19215" end="19224" title="Coalition of the Gulf War" label="Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="19262" end="19275" title="1991 Gulf War" label="1991 Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q57137" start="19539" end="19567" title="Paul Ludwig Ewald von Kleist" label="Paul Ludwig Ewald von Kleist"/>
<link wikidata="Q57150" start="19985" end="19997" title="Hermann Hoth" label="Hermann Hoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="20232" end="20241" title="heuristic" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185451" start="21487" end="21500" title="strategy" label="strategically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249230" start="22262" end="22276" title="decision cycle" label="decision cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q787491" start="22410" end="22427" title="Mission-type tactics" label="Directive control"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044407" start="22545" end="22567" title="commander&amp;#x27;s intent" label="superior&amp;#x27;s intent"/>
<link wikidata="Q30678285" start="23095" end="23102" title="pocket (military)" label="pockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380926" start="23133" end="23140" title="envelop" label="envelop"/>
<link wikidata="Q619776" start="23284" end="23294" title="concentric" label="concentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="23448" end="23468" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="23593" end="23610" title="Close air support" label="Close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q678321" start="23643" end="23654" title="dive bomber" label="dive bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q10796151" start="23659" end="23672" title="medium bomber" label="medium bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="24472" end="24487" title="air superiority" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="24799" end="24814" title="Methamphetamine" label="Methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q984204" start="24844" end="24858" title="Temmler" label="Temmler&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368357" start="25767" end="25774" title="thaw (weather)" label="thawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="29118" end="29142" title="Operation Wacht am Rhein" label="Operation Wacht am Rhein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29912" end="29930" title="Joachim Peiper#Battle of the Bulge" label="Kampfgruppe Peiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817026" start="29990" end="30011" title="4th Armored Division (France, 1940)" label="4th Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="30088" end="30117" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="(British Expeditionary Force)"/>
<link wikidata="Q170357" start="30332" end="30346" title="Maxime Weygand" label="Maxime Weygand"/>
<link wikidata="Q669417" start="30354" end="30369" title="hedgehog tactic" label="hedgehog tactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q750633" start="30451" end="30470" title="Defence in depth" label="Deployment in depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="30879" end="30894" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Battle of Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q151052" start="31169" end="31188" title="Operation Bagration" label="Operation Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q658035" start="31788" end="31799" title="supply line" label="supply line"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="32284" end="32288" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="32293" end="32303" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="32341" end="32358" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151221" start="32595" end="32600" title="Tiger I" label="Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="32806" end="32823" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151465" start="32928" end="32936" title="Panzer I" label="Panzer I"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="33046" end="33054" title="Fighter aircraft" label="fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445518" start="33073" end="33091" title="Military transport aircraft" label="transport aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q153324" start="33105" end="33118" title="Condor Legion" label="Condor Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170351" start="33574" end="33593" title="bombing of Guernica" label="bombing of Guernica"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="33707" end="33721" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="33964" end="33969" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Ju 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q838364" start="34037" end="34051" title="carpet bombing" label="carpet bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262970" start="34420" end="34439" title="Vernichtungsgedanke" label="Vernichtungsgedanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q248989" start="34698" end="34711" title="Polish Army" label="Polish forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q730347" start="35423" end="35436" title="Steven Zaloga" label="Steven Zaloga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899063" start="35953" end="35962" title="Fall Gelb" label="Fall Gelb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350870" start="35995" end="36003" title="Fall Rot" label="Fall Rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="36110" end="36121" title="paratrooper" label="paratrooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q163388" start="36173" end="36192" title="1st Panzer Army" label="Panzer Group Kleist"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="36221" end="36229" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q269207" start="36534" end="36549" title="Battle of Sedan (1940)" label="Battle of Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="36599" end="36614" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28520" start="36637" end="36646" title="Abbeville" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="36663" end="36666" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="BEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257572" start="36672" end="36684" title="Belgian Army" label="Belgian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="36732" end="36743" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q696839" start="37015" end="37020" title="Battle of Arras (1940)" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q431675" start="37058" end="37067" title="Matilda I (tank)" label="Matilda I"/>
<link wikidata="Q502412" start="37072" end="37082" title="Matilda II" label="Matilda II"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="37207" end="37214" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="37286" end="37300" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="37481" end="37497" title="Operation Dynamo" label="Operation Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="38234" end="38239" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070929" start="38241" end="38257" title="XIV Panzer Corps" label="XIV Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="38290" end="38294" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="38583" end="38600" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="38688" end="38705" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q161076" start="38978" end="38990" title="Paul Reynaud" label="Paul Reynaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q947912" start="39343" end="39358" title="Fort Eben-Emael" label="Fort Eben-Emael"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="39474" end="39494" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511740" start="39647" end="39666" title="List of Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s directives" label="Führer Directive 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="39864" end="39869" title="Daugava (river)" label="Dvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="39874" end="39881" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="40037" end="40060" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Voyenno-Vozdushnye Sily"/>
<link wikidata="Q210404" start="40428" end="40444" title="2nd Panzer Group" label="2nd Panzer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="41015" end="41031" title="Battle of Moscow" label="Battle of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="41097" end="41114" title="Army Group Centre" label="Army Group Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="41267" end="41277" title="Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="41286" end="41294" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="41311" end="41323" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159" start="41944" end="41949" title="Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q540951" start="42114" end="42120" title="Stavka" label="Stavka"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="42217" end="42222" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q57135" start="42894" end="42912" title="Erich von Manstein" label="Erich von Manstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q356036" start="43339" end="43351" title="David Glantz" label="David Glantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194366" start="43578" end="43593" title="Soviet deep battle" label="deep operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q151052" start="43662" end="43681" title="Operation Bagration" label="Operation Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194366" start="43792" end="43807" title="deep operations" label="deep operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="44043" end="44064" title="North African campaign" label="in the Western Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="44261" end="44279" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q192223" start="44469" end="44485" title="Katyusha rocket launcher" label="rocket launchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="44634" end="44642" title="Normandy Landings" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q698220" start="44937" end="44954" title="Operation Luttich" label="Operation Luttich"/>
<link wikidata="Q602744" start="44991" end="45005" title="Falaise Pocket" label="Falaise Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="45233" end="45252" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="45327" end="45334" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q690689" start="45946" end="45976" title="Revolution in Military Affairs" label="Revolution in Military Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="46238" end="46245" title="Captain (land)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345949" start="46246" end="46265" title="Robert O&amp;#x27;Neill (historian)" label="Robert O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="46306" end="46326" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="46949" end="46958" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376016" start="46983" end="46996" title="Richard Overy" label="Richard Overy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152468" start="47451" end="47466" title="Schlieffen Plan" label="Schlieffen Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="47623" end="47649" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q162362" start="48106" end="48121" title="Balkans campaign (World War II)" label="Balkan campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="48923" end="48937" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="49022" end="49031" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q108402" start="49404" end="49422" title="Karl-Heinz Frieser" label="Karl-Heinz Frieser"/>
<link wikidata="Q351075" start="49427" end="49437" title="Adam Tooze" label="Adam Tooze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347107" start="49682" end="49698" title="Robert M. Citino" label="Robert M. Citino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276395" start="49718" end="49737" title="Victor Davis Hanson" label="Victor Davis Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="52720" end="52732" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534114" start="52899" end="52911" title="heavy bomber" label="heavy bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="53228" end="53240" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="53621" end="53635" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q704959" start="53681" end="53695" title="Four Year Plan" label="Four Year Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131760" start="56731" end="56742" title="James Corum" label="James Corum"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="56817" end="56831" title="terror bombing" label="terror bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q714349" start="57028" end="57043" title="Rotterdam Blitz" label="Rotterdam Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046081" start="57284" end="57296" title="interdiction" label="interdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="57327" end="57334" title="General" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q62236" start="57335" end="57348" title="Walther Wever (general)" label="Walther Wever"/>
<link wikidata="Q364463" start="57486" end="57499" title="Giulio Douhet" label="Giulio Douhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q656397" start="57848" end="57854" title="Bombing of Warsaw in World War II" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q548803" start="59005" end="59034" title="John Frederick Charles Fuller" label="John Frederick Charles Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q299431" start="59047" end="59071" title="Basil Henry Liddell Hart" label="Basil Henry Liddell Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q57135" start="60332" end="60350" title="Erich von Manstein" label="Erich von Manstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="60404" end="60416" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195193" start="60585" end="60600" title="Kenneth Macksey" label="Kenneth Macksey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421600" start="61275" end="61289" title="Royal Tank Regiment" label="new tank corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905993" start="61304" end="61313" title="Plan 1919" label="Plan 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421120" start="62159" end="62188" title="Experimental Mechanized Force" label="Experimental Mechanized Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640292" start="62243" end="62267" title="Birch gun" label="self-propelled artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="62760" end="62767" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="62776" end="62802" title="Unification of Germany" label="German Wars of Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="62927" end="62944" title="Gustavus Adolphus" label="Gustavus Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="62956" end="62978" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44205" start="63159" end="63175" title="Moltke the Elder" label="Moltke the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347107" start="63516" end="63532" title="Robert M. Citino" label="Robert M. Citino"/>
<link wikidata="Q61883" start="64011" end="64020" title="air force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q57170" start="64895" end="64906" title="Ludwig Beck" label="Ludwig Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q90490" start="67291" end="67322" title="Ludwig von Eimannsberger" label="Ludwig Ritter von Eimannsberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876178" start="67693" end="67707" title="AirLand Battle" label="AirLand Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="67756" end="67772" title="Armored warfare" label="Armoured warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283371" start="67775" end="67791" title="Maneuver warfare" label="Maneuver warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434392" start="67794" end="67807" title="Shock and awe" label="Shock and awe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262970" start="67856" end="67875" title="Vernichtungsgedanke" label="Vernichtungsgedanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q787491" start="67922" end="67942" title="Mission-type tactics" label="Mission-type tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194366" start="67945" end="67956" title="Deep Battle" label="Deep Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873180" start="68047" end="68057" title="Battleplan" label="Battleplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872822" start="68090" end="68122" title="Battle of annihilation" label="&amp;quot;Vernichtungsschlacht&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15764581" start="68512" end="68529" title="War &amp;amp; Society" label="War &amp;amp; Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4653" wikidata="Q965587" url="?curid=4653" title="The Beano">
<text>The Beano (formerly The Beano Comic) is a British anthology comic magazine created by Scottish publishing company DC Thomson. Its first issue was published on 30 July 1938, and it published its 4000th issue in August 2019. Popular and well-known comic strips and characters include &quot;Dennis the Menace&quot;, &quot;Minnie the Minx&quot;, &quot;The Bash Street Kids&quot;, &quot;Roger the Dodger&quot;, &quot;Billy Whizz&quot;, &quot;Lord Snooty and His Pals&quot;, &quot;Ivy the Terrible&quot;, &quot;General Jumbo&quot;, &quot;Jonah&quot;, and &quot;Biffo the Bear&quot;.

&quot;The Beano&quot; was planned as a pioneering children&#x27;s magazine that contained mostly comic strips, in the style of American newspaper gag-a-days, as opposed to the more text-based story papers that were immensely popular before the Second World War. In the present, its legacy is its misbehaving characters, escapist tales and anarchic humour with an audience of all ages. &quot;Beano&quot; is a multimedia franchise with spin-off books and Christmas annuals, a website, theme park rides, games, cartoon adaptations, and a production company.

&quot;The Beano&quot; is the best-selling comic magazine outside Japan, having sold over 2 billion copies since its inception, and is the world’s longest-running comic magazine, having been run on a weekly basis since 1938, alongside its sister comic &quot;The Dandy&quot; until 2012. 

It has had three characters as the mascot throughout the years: Big Eggo (1938–1948), Biffo the Bear (1948–1974), and the current, Dennis the Menace and Gnasher (1974–present).

==History==
===Creation (1920s–1939)===
Throughout the 1920s, DC Thomson dominated the British comics industry. Dubbed &quot;the big five&quot;, the publisher&#x27;s most successful comics were &quot;Adventure&quot; (1921), &quot;The Rover&quot; and &quot;The Wizard&quot; (1922), &quot;The Skipper&quot; (1930) and &quot;The Hotspur&quot; (1933). These were weekly issued boys&#x27; magazines for preteen males, containing anthologies by DC Thomson&#x27;s creator staff designed in various formats and genres. They became popular throughout the United Kingdom, notably in English industrial cities, helped through the company&#x27;s ability to view sales and promotions in the areas much more easily than the rival publishers in London. Although many were about &quot;super men&quot; the young readers could idolise, the rest of the stories would be comic strips inspired by the gag-a-day strips in American newspapers full of stylised characters, slapstick and puns.

Overseeing the magazines was the Managing Editor of Children&#x27;s Publications, R. D. Low, who first joined the company in 1913. Almost a decade into the big five&#x27;s success, the stories shifted to comedic and included more comic strips, which gave Low an idea of creating a new &quot;big five&quot; which focused on the funnies more than drama. The suggestion was approved; editors Bill Blain and (sub-editor) Albert Barnes of &quot;The Wizard&quot; and &quot;The Hotspur&quot;, respectively, joined Low&#x27;s project. The new team placed a newspaper advertisement into &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; asking for artists and/or comic ideas. With the help of the advertisement responses and employed artists at DC Thomson, &quot;The Dandy&quot; was published in 1937, the New Big Five&#x27;s first member. For &quot;The Beano&quot; (initially called &quot;The Beano Comic&quot; until issue 412), Low received comic strip suggestions by Reg Carter, an English illustrator in Sussex who had created funnies for several British comics and designed humorous postcards. After an in-person interview, Low and Carter planned the front cover for &quot;The Beano&quot; first issue, eventually creating the character Big Eggo (originally named Oswald the Ostrich). It would be in colour whilst the inside of the magazine would be black and white, a tactic used for &quot;The Dandy&quot; first issue (black and white stories inside, colourful Korky the Cat strip on the front). Joining the &quot;Big Eggo&quot; strip would be many funnies, such as Hugh McNeill&#x27;s &quot;Ping the Elastic Man&quot;, James Jewell&#x27;s &quot;Wee Peem&quot;, Allan Morley&#x27;s &quot;Big Fat Joe&quot;, Eric Roberts&#x27; &quot;Rip Van Wink&quot;, Dudley D. Watkins&#x27; &quot;Lord Snooty and His Pals&quot;, and Roland Davies&#x27; &quot;Contrary Mary&quot;. Despite the aim to make a new comic series full of American-inspired comic strips, &quot;The Beano&quot; also contained short stories, serial fiction and adventure stories similar to the Big Five&#x27;s magazines; &quot;Morgyn the Mighty&quot; was previously in &quot;The Rover&quot;. &quot;Tin-Can Tommy&quot; and &quot;Brave Captain Kipper&quot; were reprints, co-produced by the Italian art agency Torelli Bros.

Worth 2d with a free prize of a &quot;whoopee mask&quot;, issue 1 of &quot;The Beano&quot; was released on 26 July 1938 for the 30th, selling roughly 443,000 copies. Like &quot;The Dandy&quot;, its name is from a Low-led DC Thomson office party called The DB Club (The Beano Club). DC Thomson had several office party clubs that hosted different types of staff gatherings to choose from (e.g. The Prancers would hike hills), but Low&#x27;s DB Club preferred playing golf and dining throughout Dundee. The two magazines also followed the one-word titles of other comics by rival companies, such as Amalgamated Press&#x27; &quot;Crackers&quot;, &quot;Sparkler&quot;, &quot;Puck&quot; and some books from its &quot;Union Jack&quot; series (&quot;The Marvel&quot;, &quot;The Magnet&quot; and &quot;The Gem&quot;); and Target Publications&#x27; &quot;Chuckler&quot;, &quot;Rattler&quot; and &quot;Dazzler&quot;. &quot;Beano&quot; editor-in-chief was George Moonie, former sub-editor of &quot;The Wizard&quot;, who would be editor until the summer of 1959. He later explained DC Thomson was a competitive company that wanted to make the best children&#x27;s literature in the United Kingdom, but there was also competition within itself as &quot;Beano&quot; offices was determined to beat &quot;The Dandy&quot; popularity.

===World War Two, reaching million sales (1939–1945)===
Drastic changes occurred behind the scenes of &quot;The Beano&quot; during the Second World War: George Moonie and editing partner Ron Fraser left to join the Royal Marines and Air Force respectively, both not returning until c. 1946. Stuart Gilchrist became sole editor-in-chief after Moonie&#x27;s other sub-editor Freddie Simpson became ill and resigned. Contact was also lost with Torelli Bros. so in-house creations of &quot;Tin-Can Tommy&quot; began from issue 69 by Sam Fair. Paper rationing caused the rest of Low&#x27;s New Big Five to be cancelled (it stopped at three published, the third member being &quot;The Magic Comic&quot; (1939), which ended with 80 issues in 1941), and &quot;The Beano&quot; to fluctuate its page count instead of its usual 28. Eventually, &quot;The Beano&quot; became a fortnightly magazine (alternating with The Dandy comic) until 23 July 1949.

Comic strips would encourage readers to help their parents and other adults with the war effort, and to be optimistic about the war&#x27;s outcome. New comic strips mocked Mussolini and propagandist William Joyce, &quot;Lord Snooty and His Pals&quot; stories would be about the protagonists outsmarting the Axis leaders, and other stories would be about characters recycling paper. &quot;Big Eggo&quot; front covers were often about Eggo pranking servicemen during the Blitz, and Pansy Potter received a medal for single-handedly capturing a Nazi U-boat. Issue 192 would debut a 16-part prose story about a boy and his mother being evacuated to the United States and becoming the enemy of a Chicago gangster&#x27;s widow.

Issues published weekly every Tuesday in 1938, and when the magazine changed distribution to every two weeks, the day remained unchanged. From issue 366, the day changed to Friday until issue 375 which began the Thursday publication day schedule.

===Post-war changes (1945–1988)===
December 1945 marked a milestone: issue 272 became the first &quot;Beano&quot; issue to sell over a million copies. The end of the war also ushered in a new era for the comic, debuting superhero Jack Flash, the debut of Biffo the Bear as new cover star and a new generation of trouble-making kids: Dennis the Menace, Minnie the Minx, The Bash Street Kids, and Roger the Dodger. DC Thomson also introduced new comic magazines like &quot;The Beezer&quot; and &quot;The Topper&quot; that a few &quot;Beano&quot; artists also created characters and stories for.

After the war saw a drift away from text stories and adventure comics, with the last text story published in 1955; adventure comics lasted longer with 1975 being the last year to feature them as &quot;General Jumbo&quot; eighth series drew to a close in issue 1734.

George Moonie resigned as editor-in-chief in 1959 to develop comics for girls. Sub-editor of &quot;The Beezer&quot; Harry Cramond succeeded Moonie until retiring in 1984, described as the most influential editor in &quot;The Beano&quot; history. He oversaw new merchandising, high sales, and the thousandth and two thousandth issues. DC Thomson&#x27;s &quot;Beano&quot; offices featured on documentary television and Cramond&#x27;s successor Euan Kerr guest-starred on television for the magazine&#x27;s 50th anniversary.

===Move to full colour (1988–present)===

&quot;The Beano&quot; began to advertise outside of DC Thomson&#x27;s products in 1988 in order to keep both it and &quot;The Dandy&quot; &quot;pocket money&quot; cheap, beginning with issue 2407. Issue 2674 in 1993 was the first issue to feature every page in colour.

A notable revamp was the 50th birthday issue, which had an abnormally larger page count with more coloured sections and printed on wider sheets. A decade later, issues gained eight extra pages with computer-based art. In the 21st century, there were seven changes within a five-year span: logo updates, fonts assigned for certain design roles, and the magazine started using glossy paper.

From issue 3442 in 2008 (and as of 2020), the day the comic was released was changed to Wednesday.

Outside of the magazine, &quot;Beano&quot;″s brand expanded into a multimedia franchise. Theme park tie-ins, a website, spin-off magazines, and animated television programmes starring the popular comic characters (several for Dennis the Menace) became common, keeping &quot;The Beano&quot; in popular culture. The turn of the millennium began a sales decline and led to friendly rival &quot;The Dandy&quot; being discontinued in 2012. Eventually, &quot;The Beano&quot; recovered after the creation of its magazine subscription service, which also shipped internationally.

==Stories==

Plots and dialogue are written into a script by an (often) uncredited DC Thomson writer, a formerly common practice for DC Thomson magazines. Uncredited artists assigned to a strip(s) will design all its stories into a &quot;series&quot; that the chief editor will arrange into an order to publish for each issue. Strips are sometimes ghostwritten by other artists who imitate the original designer&#x27;s style, which is helpful if artists retire or die unexpectedly, otherwise the strip is discontinued. &quot;When I started I was drawing two pages a week and thinking &#x27;Phew, that&#x27;s quite a lot&#x27;. Now I do 10 or 12 pages a week. You have to do more all the time to stay where you are,&quot; explained Nigel Parkinson. From March 2016, authors and illustrators are now credited in issues.

There have been over a thousand stories throughout the magazine&#x27;s history told through various ways. Since November 1975, the magazine has contained only comic strips in the style of American newspaper &quot;funnies&quot;, but it began with other genres. The last genre to leave &quot;Beano&quot; was adventure stories: short tales eleven-pictures long in text comics format. The stories were either dramatic or dramedies, but heavily featured hobbies and interests young boys had (war and the military, hunting, sailing, jungle men). They also stood out because the illustrations of backgrounds, animals and human characters were photorealistic. Although artists like Dudley D. Watkins drew for a few series, the most prolific illustrator was Irish artist Paddy Brennan, who notably drew for &quot;The Daring Deeds of Sinbad the Sailor&quot;, &quot;Red Rory of the Eagles&quot; and &quot;General Jumbo&quot; in the 1950s. Comic adventure stories were a hybrid: adventure stories presented as a comic strip.

Prose stories were a page of text with an illustration at the top. Some stories were about animals with artwork by former Big Five illustrator Richard &quot;Toby&quot; Baines, but the longest-running prose character in the magazine&#x27;s history was Prince Ivor, who first starred in &quot;Follow the Secret Hand&quot;. The last prose story to appear was &quot;Ace From Space&quot; in 1955.

Although comic strips have featured in &quot;The Beano&quot; since issue 1, their contents has changed throughout. Anthropomorphic animals were common stars that would partake in human activities, and the punchlines occurred from the failures to do so. Misbehaving children showed most popular with &quot;Lord Snooty and His Pals&quot; becoming the first longest-running strip when it concluded in 1991, but the most well known that continue to appear in issues are &quot;Dennis the Menace&quot;, &quot;Minnie the Minx&quot;, &quot;The Bash Street Kids&quot;, and &quot;Roger the Dodger&quot;. Some adult-starring characters also misbehaved but they were usually portrayed as incompetent, notably Jonah. In the late 20th century, merging comic strip characters in the same vicinity became common in the franchise, such as the video game &quot;Beanotown Racing&quot;, but characters living together in &quot;Beanotown&quot; became a prominent feature of comic strips into the present.

Due to the initial target audience of &quot;The Beano&quot; being schoolboys, masculine interests, hobbies, and values dominated issues constantly. Aside from aforementioned adventure stories and comedic characters, there were cowboys, aliens, kings, the supernatural, fantasy creatures (and talking animals), and men whose lifestyle or jobs require physical strength (despite the story making their careers incidental). &quot;The Beano&quot; alternated between mocking or idolising these characters through story formats; wealthy characters causing mischief, caring about their families or being shown underprivileged lives made the working-class audience relate and sympathise with them. Female characters were usually supporting a male character, joint protagonist with a male character, or the antagonist. Prose stories starring girls and women were about the protagonist searching out the truth to a secret, usually over a friend&#x27;s/family disappearance, or they were witches cursing or tormenting the male protagonists. Female comic characters were also in supporting roles with or join-protagonist with a male character, but the starring characters notably had binary stereotypical traits: drawn as tall and flowy, &quot;Swanky, Lanky Liz&quot; is obsessed with fashion and makeup and acts vain and snobbish, whereas Pansy Potter, Minnie the Minx and Toots from &quot;The Bash Street Kids&quot; share the round-faced and snub-nosed art style of the boys in their stories and are unruly tomboys (in Pansy Potter&#x27;s case, showcases the strength she inherited from her father). Non-White characters starred in their stories either set in Africa, Asia, or South America, or were about the character adapting to a new life in the United Kingdom.

Stories used to vary in length and layout, but in 2012, &quot;The Beano&quot; debuted a chapter called Funsize Funnies where shorter comic strips shared some pages. In some instances, these extremely short strips were brand new (&quot;Stunt Gran&quot;, &quot;BamBeanos&quot;, &quot;BSK CCTV&quot;, &quot;Gnash Gnews&quot;, &quot;Winston&quot;), but others were tiny reboots of older comic strips that the new audience could not recall reading before. Quiet reboots included &quot;Simply Smiffy&quot; (cancelled 1987), &quot;Rasher&quot; (cancelled 1995), &quot;Little Plum&quot; (cancelled 2007), &quot;Les Pretend&quot; (cancelled 2007), &quot;Baby Face Finlayson&quot; (cancelled 2005), &quot;Biffo the Bear&quot; (cancelled 1999), &quot;Pansy Potter&quot; (cancelled 1993), and &quot;Lord Snooty&quot; (cancelled 1991).

===Crossovers===
&quot;The Beano&quot; allows its characters from different strips to interact with each other. Reprinting old stories or redistributing characters into other magazines is common throughout DC Thomson&#x27;s history, as if the stories are set in the same universe. The &quot;Lord Snooty&quot; series discontinued old characters and replaced them with &quot;Beano&quot; strip characters of the past; &quot;Dennis the Menace&quot; featured in DC Thomson&#x27;s &quot;Champ&quot; magazine in the mid-1980s and &quot;The Weekly News&quot; tabloid-magazine for four years in the 1950s. &quot;Morgyn the Mighty&quot;, &quot;Tricky Dicky&quot;, &quot;Bananaman&quot; and &quot;Corporal Clott&quot; were stories previously from &quot;The Rover&quot;, &quot;The Topper&quot;, &quot;Nutty&quot; and &quot;The Dandy&quot;, respectively, whereas one of Gnasher&#x27;s puppies had her own strip in &quot;The Beezer and Topper&quot; and &quot;Jackie&quot; magazine.

=== Anniversary issues ===
Along with guest editors, anniversary issues are frequently contained with crossovers. The 2000th issue had the &quot;Hall of Fame&quot; strip which showed framed portraits of characters from the past, and issue 3443&#x27;s &quot;Fred&#x27;s Bed&quot; featured Fred crawling under his bed and time travelling through the magazine&#x27;s comic strips. For the 80th anniversary, issue 3945 was guest edited by actor-turned children&#x27;s author David Walliams and had a large crossover story about Bash Street School opening the Beanotown&#x27;s 1938 time capsule and discovering a map, which leads to robots and a giant tentacle monster breaking out to attack the residents. There was also a flashback panel of the time capsule being sealed which featured a handful of comic strip characters from the first issue, later helping the present day characters discover how to defeat the tentacle monster, named Simon. Issue 4000&#x27;s crossover was a time travel story where the Beanotown characters of the present helped their future selves save the world.

==Creators==
===Chief Editor history===
As of 2020, there have been seven official chief editors:
*George Moonie (1938–1939, c. 1946–1959)
*Harold Cramond (1959–1984)
*Euan Kerr (1984–2006)
*Alan Digby (2006–2011)
*Michael Stirling (2011–2012)
*Craig Graham (2012–2016)
*John Anderson (2016–present)

Temporary chief editors:
*Stuart Gilchrist (1939–c. 1946) stood in as editor when George Moonie joined the Navy for World War Two.
*Dick and Dom (2006) edited issue 3311 and chose their favourite strips from the available 2005 waiting list.
*Nick Park (2008) edited issue 3443 to celebrate &quot;Beano&quot; 70th anniversary.
*Harry Hill (published 6 March 2013) edited the 2013 Red Nose Day special.
*Andy Murray (28 June 2014) edited the Wimbledon special.
*David Walliams (2018) edited issue 3945 to celebrate the 80th anniversary.
*Joe Sugg (2021) edited issue 4077 for &quot;Dennis the Menace&quot; 70th anniversary.
*Marcus Rashford (2022) edited issue 4146 following the release of his book, &quot;You Can Do It: How to Find Your Voice and Make a Difference.&quot;
*Leah Williamson (2023) edited issue 4212 to celebrate &quot;Minnie The Mix&quot; 70th anniversary.

===Notable artists===
==Merchandise==

From the first issue, readers have received free gifts from &quot;The Beano&quot;: toy masks, sweets, posters, and toys. Originally, free gifts would be attached inside the cover or strategically on the front so that it could distract the buyer from other comics next to &quot;The Beano&quot; on the shelves, hopefully excited for the next issue after reading it and eating/playing with the toys. Gifts were intentionally sporadic, especially during the Christmas period when families&#x27; money would be saved for food and presents. Issue 90 would be the last issue with a gift (licorice &quot;black eye&quot;) due to rationing, the next free gift being the Flying Snorter Balloon in issue 953. The most popular free gift was issue 2201&#x27;s Gnasher Snapper, a prank toy that would make a bang sound when unfolded, and was re-gifted occasionally in later issues, as well as the 60th anniversary.

During the 25th anniversary of &quot;Dennis the Menace&quot;, The Dennis the Menace Fan Club was formed. The fan club was instantly popular, recalls Euan Kerr in 1984; &quot;The club enrolled over 2000 new members every week, well into the 90s[.]&quot; Membership was 30p, and new members received a membership card full of classified communication tactics and two badges: a red one with Dennis&#x27; face on the front and a furry one of a googly-eyed Gnasher face—the latter was the most sought-after badge in the club&#x27;s history. For two years, there was a tie-in agony aunt page called &quot;Dear Dennis&quot; (issue 1679–1767) where fan club members sent Dennis their problems that Dennis would reply to in the following issue; thousands of letters would arrive at DC Thomson per week and the authors of the messages would receive prizes. The club would be renamed The Beano Club, which ended in 2010, but had over 1.5 million members. A spin-off was introduced called Gnasher&#x27;s Fang Club, and Gnasher would ask readers to send him stories about their pets&#x27; adventures which could be printed into the next issue. &quot;The mailbag of little drawings of pets was several thousand per week,&quot; remembers sub-editor Morris Heggie. &quot;And the popularity lasted and lasted.&quot;

The 21st century celebrated anniversaries with more memorabilia. For &quot;The Beano&quot; 70th birthday, DC Thomson published &quot;The Beano Special Collectors Edition: 70 Years of Fun&quot; (2008), and &quot;The History of The Beano&quot; (2008) was published by Waverly Books, both documenting the magazine&#x27;s history; two exhibitions at the University of Dundee (&quot;Happy Birthday, Beano!&quot;) and The Cartoon Museum (&quot;Beano and Dandy Birthday Bash!&quot;) showed the public private DC Thomson artwork and the history of the magazine. For 2018, readers could buy a box for the 80th anniversary containing posters, reprints of selected older issues, and two books updating the previous documentation of the magazine&#x27;s history, as well as &quot;Minnie the Minx&quot; origins. Both anniversaries had tie-in museum exhibitions that also told their audiences the magazine&#x27;s history. Limited-edition figurines from Robert Harrop were available to buy from their official website in late 2008. The 21st century also began &quot;Beano&quot; branching into different mediums: their first website, Beanotown.com, formed in 2000, and Chessington World of Adventures opened Beanoland in the same year. Both would later discontinue but Beanotown.com would be revamped as beano.com, a website full of games, &quot;Beano&quot; secrets and other activities for children. Gulliver&#x27;s Travels opened the Beano 6 Super Ride in May 2021. &quot;The Beano&quot; was also the face of the United Kingdom&#x27;s 2018 Summer Reading Challenge, called Mischief Makers, which included a special Dennis the Menace novel tie-in called &quot;Dennis the Menace and the Chamber of Mischief&quot; by Beano artist Nigel Auchterlounie. The Dennis the Menace Fan Club was re-launched as a phone app, rebranded as The Dennis and Gnasher Fan Club, and allowed readers free membership, printable badges, and pranks. On television, the Sky Kids show &quot;SO Beano!&quot; aired; a TV show with special guests, children presenters, and fun and games, in a similar style to &quot;Friday Download&quot; and &quot;Scrambled!&quot;

===Annuals===
The first Beano annual hardcover book was published as far back as 1939, a year after the first weekly comic was published. In 2018, it was estimated that an original first issue Beano annual in relatively good condition could fetch between £1,200 to £1,500.

===Spin-off comics===
====Comic libraries====

Since 1982 the comic, along with &quot;The Dandy&quot;, has also run &quot;Comic Library&quot; titles. Released monthly, these titles are a feature-length (usually about 64-page) adventure, featuring a character from the comic itself. They are available in A5 size only. In 1998, these were replaced by the &quot;Fun Size Beano&quot;. Fun Size Comics were discontinued in late 2010.

====&quot;Beano Specials&quot;====
The comic also ran A4-sized &quot;Beano Specials&quot; in 1987 with full coloured pages, which later were replaced by &quot;Beano Superstars&quot; which ran for 121 issues from 1992 to 2002. These were similar to the Comic Library series. Some of the last issues were printed versions of episodes from the 1996–1998 &quot;Dennis and Gnasher&quot; animated TV series. A &quot;Beano Poster Comic&quot; series was also printed in the early 1990s.

The Beano Specials returned in 2003, and are now published seasonally. The issues were numbered, and the first one was a Dennis and Friends special, the last a Christmas reprint special. These were replaced by BeanoMAX in early 2007.

====BeanoMAX====

On 15 February 2007, the first issue of a monthly comic entitled &quot;BeanoMAX&quot; was published. The sister comic features many of the same characters; however, the stories in &quot;BeanoMAX&quot; are written in a longer format meant for 10- to 13-year-olds. The first issue was a Comic Relief special featuring assorted celebrity guests. The magazine has been rebranded several times since 2013, and is currently known as &quot;EPIC Magazine&quot;.

====&quot;Plug&quot;====

&quot;Plug&quot; was a comic based on the eponymous character from &quot;The Bash Street Kids&quot; that began with issue dated 24 September 1977, and is notable for being the first comic to make use of rotogravure printing. The magazine similar in style to I.P.C&#x27;s &quot;Krazy&quot; which had started the previous year. It contained uncharacteristically outlandish material for D C. Thomson, as well as later including celebrity appearances in the comic.

The comic revealed Plug&#x27;s full name to be Percival Proudfoot Plugsley and also gave him a pet monkey by the name of Chumkee. Plug&#x27;s strip was mostly drawn by Vic Neill but other artists, including Dave Gudgeon drew some later strips. Other strips included &quot;Antchester United&quot;, &quot;Violent Elizabeth&quot;, &quot;Eebagoom&quot;, &quot;Hugh&#x27;s Zoo&quot; and &quot;D&#x27;ye Ken John Squeal and his Hopeless Hounds&quot;.

The venture was unsuccessful, in part because the comic cost 9p, with the &quot;Beano&quot; at the time only costing 4p and most of its rivals priced similarly. It merged with &quot;The Beezer&quot; on 24 February 1979.

====&quot;Dennis and Gnasher&quot;====
The brand new &quot;Dennis and Gnasher&quot; was launched separately from &quot;The Beano&quot; in September 2009. It coincided with their new cartoon on CBBC of the same name.

====&quot;BeanOLD&quot;====
44-page special issue 4062, with cover date 21 November 2020, during a lockdown in the COVID-19 pandemic had an eight-page adult pullout named &quot;BeanOLD&quot;, with cartoons poking fun at British politicians such as Boris Johnson and Dominic Cummings, and with appearances by Greta Thunberg, Captain Tom, and footballer Marcus Rashford. The slogan was &quot;2020 has been tough. So tough that even grown-ups need &quot;Beano&quot;&quot;.

==Beano Studios==

In June 2016, DC Thomson launched Beano Studios, a spin-off media studio based in London and Dundee, to create media for children and expand The Beano franchise. The launch was marked in The Beano issue 3854, featuring a new cover design, updated logo, and the introduction of the website beano.com. 

Michael Stirling, former chief editor, returned as head of the Dundee studio, with Jodie Morris, James Neal, Nigel Pickard, and Emma Scott joining in key roles. The website beano.com offers games, news, videos, and content that appeals to children and nostalgic parents alike, drawing over two million annual visitors. This online presence contributed to a 10% rise in comic sales by 2018. 

Beano Studios quickly expanded its reach with the popular CBBC series Dennis &amp; Gnasher: Unleashed! in 2017, which aired in over 90 countries and earned an International Emmy nomination. Building on this success, Beano Studios pursued new projects including a live-action Minnie the Minx show, another Dennis the Menace adaptation, and a Bananaman cartoon in collaboration with Fox Entertainment.

==Reception and legacy==

&quot;The Beano&quot; was an instant success upon release, and became the longest-running, weekly-issued comic of all time in 2018. Although interest in comic magazines dwindled, it survived surrounding setbacks. In the 1950s, it (and &quot;The Dandy&quot;) were unaffected by DC Thomson&#x27;s magazine cancellations (selling over 100 million per year) that were caused by both paper rationing and public lack of interest. Alan Digby&#x27;s attempt to boost sales with the 8-week &quot;Missing Gnasher&quot; plot in &quot;Dennis the Menace&quot; failed, but the story featured in newspapers and on radio broadcasts, causing people of all ages to contact &quot;Beano&quot; offices to voice their concerns. Roughly 31,000–41,000 copies are sold per week in the present day, but an estimated 2 billion &quot;Beano&quot; comic magazines have been sold in its lifetime. A 1997 television poll by the National Comics Awards selected it for the Best British Comic Ever award. Dennis the Menace would represent the comic when Royal Mail launched a special stamp collection in 2012, celebrating Britain&#x27;s rich comic book history. &quot;The Dandy&quot;, &quot;Eagle&quot;, &quot;The Topper&quot;, &quot;Roy of the Rovers&quot;, &quot;Bunty&quot;, &quot;Buster&quot;, &quot;Valiant&quot;, &quot;Twinkle&quot; and &quot;2000 AD&quot; were also featured.

Like &quot;The Dandy&quot;, &quot;The Beano&quot; is a definitive part of British pop culture. &quot;It&#x27;s refreshing to see how the [zany] principles that made it such a hit all those years ago have remained to this day.&quot; writes &quot;Coventry Evening Telegraph&quot;. &quot;Beano&quot; annuals are the most popular Christmas annual sold, and old issues sell for thousands at auctions. Lord Snooty is often used as a pejorative in British politics. DC Thomson considers the 1950s &quot;Beano&quot; golden age possibly because of many commemorations based on the strips that first appeared from that decade: Dennis became the literal and metaphorical mascot of the magazine, his increasing popularity making him the last consistent cover star and his strips spawning three BBC animated adaptations; Minnie and the Bash Street Kids have a statue and a street named after the strip, respectively. The &quot;anarchic&quot; humour is credited as the key to the magazine&#x27;s longevity, as well as its refusal to be condescending to its readers: &quot;&quot;The Beano&quot; may have changed since the &#x27;30s but has always maintained its anti-authoritarian stance and steadfast refusal to treat children like idiots,&quot; theorised Morris Heggie.

The magazine is cited as an inspiration to many readers. &quot;Beano&quot; artists Emily McGorman-Bruce, Zoom Rockman, Jess Bradley, and Barrie Appleby were avid readers of the magazine and/or its annuals before they became creators of its new strips. Meanwhile, &quot;The Beano&quot; inspired comic artists Jay Stephens, Carolyn Edwards (Titan Comics) and webcomic creator Sarah Millman (&quot;NPC Tea&quot;, &quot;The Heart of Time&quot;) to either work in the creative industry or create their own stories. Alan Moore theorised the magazine influenced numerous British comic artists into reimagining American comics in the 1980s by pioneering the Dark Age. Guest chief-editors Nick Park, David Walliams, Joe Sugg, and Harry Hill are also fans of &quot;The Beano&quot;, with Park admitting &quot;My dream job was always to work on &quot;The Beano&quot; and it&#x27;s such an honour for me to be Guest Editor[.]&quot;

Notable famous members of the old Dennis the Menace/Beano Club include Auberon Waugh, Mike Read, and Mark Hamill, as well as honorary members Paul Gascoigne, and Princes William and Harry. Chris Tarrant cited Dennis as his role model when he was a child, and Paul Rudd revealed &quot;Roger the Dodger&quot; was his favourite strip. Stella McCartney created tribute fashion to both &quot;The Beano&quot; and &quot;The Dandy&quot;, explaining they were &quot;a huge part of my childhood&quot; and wanted to celebrate &quot;the next generation of &quot;Beano&quot; fans with a sustainable and practical range for kids who still share that ‘Beano’ spirit of these iconic characters&quot;. In music pop culture, the album &quot;Blues Breakers with Eric Clapton&quot; is nicknamed &quot;The Beano Album&quot; because Eric Clapton is holding issue 1242 on its cover.

===Audience participation===
Interaction with the audience is a historic practice in &quot;The Beano&quot; history. Excluding fan clubs and merchandise, &quot;Comic Idol&quot; is a sporadic election in which readers vote for their favourite strips to keep in the magazine. Cancelled strips with the least votes include &quot;Little Plum&quot;, &quot;Baby Face Finlayson&quot;, &quot;Les Pretend&quot;, &quot;Calamity James&quot;, &quot;Crazy for Daisy&quot;, and &quot;Lord Snooty&quot;. &quot;Super School&quot; and &quot;Meebo and Zuky&quot; were nominees who won polls and became official strips in the following issues. Readers would find a voting slip covered with the candidates printed in an issue that they would fill out and mail to DC Thomson, but the creation of &quot;Beano&quot; websites would allow real-time opinions from readers. &quot;Pets&#x27; Picture Gallery&quot; invited readers to send drawings of their pets to feature in the following issue.

Readers participated in the magazine&#x27;s record-breaking stunts. In 1988, 100 children helped Euan Kerr and &quot;Beano&quot; scriptwriter Al Bernard recreate the front cover of issue 2396 on Scarborough Beach with Hann-Made Productions. It was awarded the Largest Comic Strip at 39950 square feet. &quot;Beano&quot; 2018 comic competition to celebrate the opening of V&amp;A Dundee was awarded the biggest competition to finish a comic strip with 650 participants.

Along with Nick Park&#x27;s guest editor issue, the 70th anniversary coincided with Gnashional Menace Day, a CLIC Sargent-partnered event where readers could be sponsored &quot;behaving like Dennis&quot; for charity.

===Controversy===
&quot;The Beano&quot; has had a few controversies throughout its lifetime, but aspects have either been discontinued, phased out or changed to not cause offence. Its infamous changes are the removal of corporal punishment (e.g. Dennis the Menace often depicted receiving bottom spanks with a slipper by his furious father) and misbehaving characters abandoning slingshots—the latter irritating former readers for being a &quot;politically correct&quot; notion, usually highlighted with claim &quot;Dennis has lost his menace&quot;.

Racist depictions and terminology have been removed through the years as well. &quot;Little Plum&quot; sub-title &quot;Your redskin chum&quot; was not included in its 2002 revival. The first masthead character was a caricatured design of a black boy named Peanut, mascot of the &quot;Little Peanut&#x27;s Page of Fun&quot; joke page (appeared from issues 1 to 112), usually eating watermelon. His last masthead feature was in December 1947, but subsequent reprints of the first issues have removed him. &quot;Hard-Nut the Nigger&quot; and &quot;Musso the Wop&quot; have not had reprints since their last appearances, the latter being printed during World War II when Britain was at war with Fascist Italy.

Some changes were to not convince readers bullying was acceptable. Dennis and Gnasher&#x27;s constant targeting of passive, diligent Walter &quot;the Softy&quot; (who was also a knitting and flower-picking hobbyist) was accused of encouraging playground homophobia, so it was toned down. Walter was also rewritten to be a bit less soft, becoming more antagonistic and stood up to Dennis sometimes, eventually having his first girlfriend. Fatty from the Bash Street Kids was renamed Freddy (his real name) in 2021, causing backlash from former readers, including then government minister Jacob Rees-Mogg who accused the change of being &quot;publicity-seeking&quot;. Former chief-editor Mike Stirling explained it was due to fan letters from young readers asking why he was nicknamed so: &quot;although it&#x27;s always been used affectionately, and never pejoratively, we agreed it&#x27;s time it changed.&quot; A &quot;News of the World&quot; report contained accusations of &quot;Uh Oh, Si Co!&quot; encouraging readers to mock children with anger issues or mental illness, which caused the strip to be cancelled.

==See also==

* &quot;The Beano Summer Special&quot;
* &quot;The Beano Annual&quot;
* List of magazines published in Scotland
*MAD magazine
* British comics
* List of &quot;Beano&quot; comic strips
* List of &quot;Beano&quot; comic strips by annual
* &quot;The Beano&quot; timeline

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*

==External links==
* Official website
* Official Beano shop
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q867242" start="50" end="65" title="anthology comic" label="anthology comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="114" end="124" title="DC Thomson" label="DC Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259097" start="288" end="305" title="Dennis the Menace and Gnasher" label="Dennis the Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509755" start="319" end="334" title="Minnie the Minx" label="Minnie the Minx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715748" start="348" end="368" title="The Bash Street Kids" label="The Bash Street Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359229" start="382" end="398" title="Roger the Dodger" label="Roger the Dodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913462" start="412" end="423" title="Billy Whizz" label="Billy Whizz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679961" start="437" end="448" title="Lord Snooty" label="Lord Snooty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099977" start="475" end="491" title="Ivy the Terrible" label="Ivy the Terrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531988" start="505" end="518" title="General Jumbo" label="General Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271845" start="532" end="537" title="Jonah (comics)" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904758" start="555" end="569" title="Biffo the Bear" label="Biffo the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q25038259" start="724" end="733" title="gag-a-day" label="gag-a-day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620434" start="770" end="781" title="story paper" label="story paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="822" end="838" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1163" end="1190" title="List of best-selling comic series#Comic magazines" label="best-selling comic magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="1391" end="1400" title="The Dandy" label="The Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905638" start="1485" end="1493" title="Big Eggo" label="Big Eggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904758" start="1507" end="1521" title="Biffo the Bear" label="Biffo the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259097" start="1552" end="1581" title="Dennis the Menace and Gnasher" label="Dennis the Menace and Gnasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="1661" end="1671" title="DC Thomson" label="DC Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1724" end="1736" title="British boys&amp;#x27; magazines#The Big Five (Tuppenny Bloods)" label="the big five"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761633" start="1829" end="1838" title="The Rover (story paper)" label="The Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775354" start="1855" end="1865" title="The Wizard (DC Thomson)" label="The Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912497" start="1921" end="1932" title="The Hotspur" label="The Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971301" start="1972" end="1992" title="British boys&amp;#x27; magazines" label="boys&amp;#x27; magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q25038259" start="2479" end="2488" title="gag-a-day" label="gag-a-day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273563" start="2651" end="2660" title="R. D. Low" label="R. D. Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="3153" end="3172" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="3305" end="3314" title="The Dandy" label="The Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583668" start="3512" end="3522" title="Reg Carter" label="Reg Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="3550" end="3556" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905638" start="3783" end="3791" title="Big Eggo" label="Big Eggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432345" start="4008" end="4021" title="Korky the Cat" label="Korky the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195693" start="4139" end="4159" title="Ping the Elastic Man" label="Ping the Elastic Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979294" start="4193" end="4201" title="Wee Peem" label="Wee Peem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730868" start="4209" end="4221" title="Allan Morley" label="Allan Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311846" start="4299" end="4316" title="Dudley D. Watkins" label="Dudley D. Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679961" start="4329" end="4340" title="Lord Snooty" label="Lord Snooty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360198" start="4365" end="4378" title="Roland Davies (comics)" label="Roland Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="4547" end="4561" title="Serial (literature)" label="serial fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912089" start="4632" end="4649" title="Morgyn the Mighty" label="Morgyn the Mighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807716" start="4703" end="4716" title="Tin-Can Tommy" label="Tin-Can Tommy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="4835" end="4836" title="Shilling (British coin)" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q890845" start="5097" end="5102" title="bean-feast" label="Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q686038" start="5425" end="5442" title="Amalgamated Press" label="Amalgamated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885786" start="5540" end="5550" title="Union Jack (magazine)" label="Union Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641905" start="5571" end="5581" title="Halfpenny Marvel" label="The Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749556" start="5595" end="5605" title="The Magnet" label="The Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736030" start="5622" end="5629" title="The Gem" label="The Gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6281" end="6297" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="6361" end="6374" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="6379" end="6388" title="Royal Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="6691" end="6700" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749411" start="6821" end="6836" title="The Magic Comic" label="The Magic Comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993680" start="7010" end="7019" title="fortnight" label="fortnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="7049" end="7058" title="The Dandy" label="The Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="7259" end="7268" title="Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q76532" start="7286" end="7299" title="William Joyce" label="William Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="7394" end="7398" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="7452" end="7461" title="recycling" label="recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="7534" end="7544" title="servicemen" label="servicemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="7552" end="7561" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131610" start="7567" end="7579" title="Pansy Potter" label="Pansy Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="7634" end="7640" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917386" start="7719" end="7728" title="Evacuations of civilians in Britain during World War II" label="evacuated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="7778" end="7785" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="8278" end="8287" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112521" start="8288" end="8298" title="Jack Flash" label="Jack Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904758" start="8313" end="8327" title="Biffo the Bear" label="Biffo the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259097" start="8391" end="8408" title="Dennis the Menace (Beano Character)" label="Dennis the Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509755" start="8410" end="8425" title="Minnie the Minx" label="Minnie the Minx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715748" start="8427" end="8447" title="The Bash Street Kids" label="The Bash Street Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359229" start="8453" end="8469" title="Roger the Dodger" label="Roger the Dodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716300" start="8529" end="8539" title="The Beezer" label="The Beezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769607" start="8556" end="8566" title="The Topper (comics)" label="The Topper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531988" start="8853" end="8866" title="General Jumbo" label="General Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9628" end="9640" title="Allowance (money)#Children" label="pocket money"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734171" start="11548" end="11563" title="Nigel Parkinson" label="Nigel Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21802675" start="11942" end="11959" title="adventure story" label="adventure stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q14466421" start="11997" end="12008" title="text comics" label="text comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="12053" end="12062" title="Dramedy" label="dramedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q939559" start="12272" end="12286" title="photorealistic" label="photorealistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311846" start="12310" end="12327" title="Dudley D. Watkins" label="Dudley D. Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123409" start="12398" end="12411" title="Paddy Brennan" label="Paddy Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q122018" start="12460" end="12477" title="Sinbad the Sailor" label="Sinbad the Sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531988" start="12530" end="12543" title="General Jumbo" label="General Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271845" start="13740" end="13745" title="Jonah (comics)" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="15005" end="15012" title="witches" label="witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131610" start="15356" end="15368" title="Pansy Potter" label="Pansy Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q845799" start="15525" end="15531" title="tomboy" label="tomboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="15618" end="15627" title="Non-White" label="Non-White"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16020" end="16030" title="Stunt Gran" label="Stunt Gran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521030" start="16265" end="16278" title="Simply Smiffy" label="Simply Smiffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115868328" start="16309" end="16315" title="Rasher (comics)" label="Rasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651359" start="16346" end="16357" title="Little Plum" label="Little Plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529891" start="16388" end="16399" title="Les Pretend" label="Les Pretend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838269" start="16430" end="16449" title="Baby Face Finlayson" label="Baby Face Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904758" start="16480" end="16494" title="Biffo the Bear" label="Biffo the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131610" start="16525" end="16537" title="Pansy Potter" label="Pansy Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679961" start="16572" end="16583" title="Lord Snooty" label="Lord Snooty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275581" start="16875" end="16888" title="shared universe" label="same universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679961" start="16900" end="16911" title="Lord Snooty" label="Lord Snooty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841215" start="17243" end="17255" title="Tricky Dicky (Topper)" label="Tricky Dicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q57312331" start="17269" end="17278" title="Bananaman" label="Bananaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172377" start="17295" end="17309" title="Corporal Clott" label="Corporal Clott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574114" start="17466" end="17473" title="Gnasher" label="Gnasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157384" start="17548" end="17575" title="Jackie (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Jackie&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q359665" start="18049" end="18063" title="David Walliams" label="David Walliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="18552" end="18563" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273581" start="19093" end="19105" title="Dick and Dom" label="Dick and Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q336206" start="19203" end="19212" title="Nick Park" label="Nick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127834" start="19288" end="19298" title="Harry Hill" label="Harry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="19340" end="19352" title="Red Nose Day" label="Red Nose Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q10125" start="19363" end="19374" title="Andy Murray" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="19401" end="19410" title="Wimbledon (tennis)" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q359665" start="19421" end="19435" title="David Walliams" label="David Walliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16762380" start="19497" end="19505" title="Joe Sugg" label="Joe Sugg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22951255" start="19584" end="19599" title="Marcus Rashford" label="Marcus Rashford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19666" end="19725" title="Marcus Rashford#Literacy campaign" label="You Can Do It: How to Find Your Voice and Make a Difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q18129271" start="19734" end="19749" title="Leah Williamson" label="Leah Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q257106" start="20454" end="20462" title="licorice" label="licorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="20493" end="20502" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583917" start="21214" end="21225" title="googly eyes" label="googly-eyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q914229" start="21344" end="21354" title="agony aunt" label="agony aunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="22424" end="22444" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721464" start="22486" end="22504" title="The Cartoon Museum" label="The Cartoon Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="22522" end="22527" title="The Dandy" label="Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509755" start="22841" end="22856" title="Minnie the Minx" label="Minnie the Minx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070642" start="23226" end="23257" title="Chessington World of Adventures" label="Chessington World of Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637406" start="23599" end="23623" title="Summer Reading Challenge" label="Summer Reading Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="23859" end="23868" title="phone app" label="phone app"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804884" start="24002" end="24010" title="Sky Kids (TV channel)" label="Sky Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503487" start="24144" end="24159" title="Friday Download" label="Friday Download"/>
<link wikidata="Q19650172" start="24176" end="24186" title="Scrambled!" label="Scrambled!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508681" start="24828" end="24842" title="Fun Size Comics" label="Fun Size Beano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24968" end="24982" title="Beano Specials" label="Beano Specials"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25058" end="25074" title="Beano Superstars" label="Beano Superstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q647659" start="25250" end="25299" title="Dennis the Menace and Gnasher (1996 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Dennis and Gnasher&amp;quot; animated TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="25917" end="25929" title="Comic Relief (charity)" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="25957" end="25966" title="celebrity" label="celebrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715748" start="26186" end="26206" title="The Bash Street Kids" label="The Bash Street Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q635658" start="26316" end="26327" title="rotogravure" label="rotogravure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924867" start="26743" end="26752" title="Vic Neill" label="Vic Neill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26782" end="26794" title="Dave Gudgeon" label="Dave Gudgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716300" start="27203" end="27213" title="The Beezer" label="The Beezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q935802" start="27435" end="27439" title="CBBC (TV channel)" label="CBBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705502" start="27440" end="27456" title="Dennis and Gnasher (2009 TV series)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q87866152" start="27558" end="27566" title="COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns" label="lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="27574" end="27591" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="27707" end="27720" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572712" start="27725" end="27741" title="Dominic Cummings" label="Dominic Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q56434717" start="27767" end="27781" title="Greta Thunberg" label="Greta Thunberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q90561312" start="27783" end="27794" title="Captain Tom" label="Captain Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22951255" start="27811" end="27826" title="Marcus Rashford" label="Marcus Rashford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29557" end="29572" title="Gnasher#&amp;quot;Who&amp;#x27;s Gnicked Gnasher?&amp;quot; publicity stunt" label="Missing Gnasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971640" start="29966" end="29988" title="National Comics Awards" label="National Comics Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="30089" end="30099" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="30203" end="30212" title="The Dandy" label="The Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046338" start="30226" end="30231" title="Eagle (comic)" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769607" start="30245" end="30255" title="The Topper (comics)" label="The Topper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373552" start="30269" end="30286" title="Roy of the Rovers (comic)" label="Roy of the Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997949" start="30300" end="30305" title="Bunty" label="Bunty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002123" start="30319" end="30325" title="Buster (comics)" label="Buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911637" start="30339" end="30346" title="Valiant (comics)" label="Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411708" start="30360" end="30367" title="Twinkle (comics)" label="Twinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="30384" end="30391" title="2000 AD (comics)" label="2000 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679961" start="30815" end="30826" title="Lord Snooty" label="Lord Snooty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30836" end="30840" title="Lord Snooty#&amp;quot;Lord Snooty&amp;quot; as slang" label="used"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="30846" end="30856" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509755" start="31227" end="31233" title="Minnie the Minx" label="Minnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715748" start="31242" end="31258" title="Bash Street Kids" label="Bash Street Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q23772061" start="31782" end="31794" title="Zoom Rockman" label="Zoom Rockman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863489" start="31814" end="31828" title="Barrie Appleby" label="Barrie Appleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167231" start="31985" end="31997" title="Jay Stephens" label="Jay Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q66731094" start="32016" end="32028" title="Titan Comics" label="Titan Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="32034" end="32042" title="webcomic" label="webcomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="32187" end="32197" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594405" start="32327" end="32335" title="Modern Age of Comic Books" label="Dark Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q336206" start="32357" end="32366" title="Nick Park" label="Nick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q359665" start="32368" end="32382" title="David Walliams" label="David Walliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16762380" start="32384" end="32392" title="Joe Sugg" label="Joe Sugg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127834" start="32398" end="32408" title="Harry Hill" label="Harry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870568" start="32668" end="32681" title="Auberon Waugh" label="Auberon Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848513" start="32683" end="32692" title="Mike Read" label="Mike Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q210447" start="32698" end="32709" title="Mark Hamill" label="Mark Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13002" start="32739" end="32753" title="Paul Gascoigne" label="Paul Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36812" start="32767" end="32774" title="Prince William, Duke of Cambridge" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="32779" end="32784" title="Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex" label="Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944522" start="32786" end="32799" title="Chris Tarrant" label="Chris Tarrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q276525" start="32856" end="32865" title="Paul Rudd" label="Paul Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359229" start="32881" end="32897" title="Roger the Dodger" label="Roger the Dodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q232812" start="32929" end="32945" title="Stella McCartney" label="Stella McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q19260" start="33320" end="33352" title="Blues Breakers with Eric Clapton" label="Blues Breakers with Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="33408" end="33420" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151757" start="33617" end="33627" title="Comic Idol" label="Comic Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651359" start="33783" end="33794" title="Little Plum" label="Little Plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838269" start="33808" end="33827" title="Baby Face Finlayson" label="Baby Face Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529891" start="33841" end="33852" title="Les Pretend" label="Les Pretend"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825236" start="33866" end="33880" title="Calamity James" label="Calamity James"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183282" start="33894" end="33909" title="Crazy for Daisy" label="Crazy for Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642738" start="33952" end="33964" title="Super School" label="Super School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933071" start="33981" end="33995" title="Meebo and Zuky" label="Meebo and Zuky"/>
<link wikidata="Q743521" start="34621" end="34638" title="Scarborough, North Yorkshire" label="Scarborough Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q43674688" start="34797" end="34811" title="V&amp;amp;A Dundee" label="V&amp;amp;A Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012753" start="35005" end="35017" title="CLIC Sargent" label="CLIC Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="35334" end="35353" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436248" start="35410" end="35415" title="spanking" label="spank"/>
<link wikidata="Q876824" start="35424" end="35431" title="slipper" label="slipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q13672" start="35493" end="35503" title="slingshots" label="slingshots"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="35559" end="35578" title="politically correct" label="politically correct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651359" start="35750" end="35761" title="Little Plum" label="Little Plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140747" start="35789" end="35796" title="redskin" label="redskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187062" start="35856" end="35864" title="masthead (British publishing)" label="masthead"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="35905" end="35914" title="Black people" label="black boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10903633" start="36039" end="36056" title="Watermelon stereotype" label="eating watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="36187" end="36193" title="Nigger" label="Nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q930918" start="36220" end="36223" title="Wop" label="Wop"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="36314" end="36326" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="36356" end="36369" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966543" start="36505" end="36533" title="Walter the Softy" label="Walter &amp;quot;the Softy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="36626" end="36636" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574980" start="36959" end="36974" title="Jacob Rees-Mogg" label="Jacob Rees-Mogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q190534" start="37292" end="37309" title="News of the World" label="News of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716008" start="37511" end="37535" title="The Beano Summer Special" label="The Beano Summer Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716007" start="37550" end="37566" title="The Beano Annual" label="The Beano Annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626838" start="37575" end="37614" title="List of magazines published in Scotland" label="List of magazines published in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="37616" end="37628" title="MAD magazine" label="MAD magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971317" start="37631" end="37645" title="British comics" label="British comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563515" start="37648" end="37686" title="List of Beano comic strips" label="List of &amp;quot;Beano&amp;quot; comic strips"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563517" start="37689" end="37737" title="List of Beano comic strips by annual" label="List of &amp;quot;Beano&amp;quot; comic strips by annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="37740" end="37770" title="The Beano timeline" label="&amp;quot;The Beano&amp;quot; timeline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4654" wikidata="Q7391" url="?curid=4654" title="Bee">
<text>Bees are winged insects closely related to wasps and ants, known for their roles in pollination and, in the case of the best-known bee species, the western honey bee, for producing honey. Bees are a monophyletic lineage within the superfamily Apoidea. They are currently considered a clade, called Anthophila. There are over 20,000 known species of bees in seven recognized biological families. Some speciesincluding honey bees, bumblebees, and stingless beeslive socially in colonies while most species (&gt;90%)including mason bees, carpenter bees, leafcutter bees, and sweat beesare solitary.

Bees are found on every continent except Antarctica, in every habitat on the planet that contains insect-pollinated flowering plants. The most common bees in the Northern Hemisphere are the Halictidae, or sweat bees, but they are small and often mistaken for wasps or flies. Bees range in size from tiny stingless bee species, whose workers are less than long, to the leafcutter bee &quot;Megachile pluto&quot;, the largest species of bee, whose females can attain a length of .

Bees feed on nectar and pollen, the former primarily as an energy source and the latter primarily for protein and other nutrients. Most pollen is used as food for their larvae. Vertebrate predators of bees include primates and birds such as bee-eaters; insect predators include beewolves and dragonflies.

Bee pollination is important both ecologically and commercially, and the decline in wild bees has increased the value of pollination by commercially managed hives of honey bees. The analysis of 353 wild bee and hoverfly species across Britain from 1980 to 2013 found the insects have been lost from a quarter of the places they inhabited in 1980.

Human beekeeping or apiculture (meliponiculture for stingless bees) has been practiced for millennia, since at least the times of Ancient Egypt and Ancient Greece. Bees have appeared in mythology and folklore, through all phases of art and literature from ancient times to the present day, although primarily focused in the Northern Hemisphere where beekeeping is far more common. In Mesoamerica, the Mayans have practiced large-scale intensive meliponiculture since pre-Columbian times.

== Evolution ==
The immediate ancestors of bees were stinging wasps in the family Crabronidae, which were predators of other insects. The switch from insect prey to pollen may have resulted from the consumption of prey insects which were flower visitors and were partially covered with pollen when they were fed to the wasp larvae. This same evolutionary scenario may have occurred within the vespoid wasps, where the pollen wasps evolved from predatory ancestors.

Based on phylogenetic analysis, bees are thought to have originated during the Early Cretaceous (about 124 million years ago) on the supercontinent of West Gondwana, just prior to its breakup into South America and Africa. The supercontinent is thought to have been a largely xeric environment at this time; modern bee diversity hotspots are also in xeric and seasonal temperate environments, suggesting strong niche conservatism among bees ever since their origins.

Genomic analysis indicates that despite only appearing much later in the fossil record, all modern bee families had already diverged from one another by the end of the Cretaceous. The Melittidae, Apidae, and Megachilidae had already evolved on the supercontinent prior to its fragmentation. Further divergences were facilitated by West Gondwana&#x27;s breakup around 100 million years ago, leading to a deep Africa-South America split within both the Apidae and Megachilidae, the isolation of the Melittidae in Africa, and the origins of the Colletidae, Andrenidae and Halictidae in South America. The rapid radiation of the South American bee families is thought to have followed the concurrent radiation of flowering plants in the same region. Later in the Cretaceous (80 million years ago), colletid bees colonized Australia from South America (with an offshoot lineage evolving into the Stenotritidae), and by the end of the Cretaceous, South American bees had also colonized North America. The North American fossil taxon &quot;Cretotrigona&quot; belongs to a group that is no longer found in North America, suggesting that many bee lineages went extinct during the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event.

Following the K-Pg extinction, surviving bee lineages continued to spread into the Northern Hemisphere, colonizing Europe from Africa by the Paleocene, and then spreading east to Asia. This was facilitated by the warming climate around the same time, allowing bees to move to higher latitudes following the spread of tropical and subtropical habitats. By the Eocene (~45 mya) there was already considerable diversity among eusocial bee lineages. A second extinction event among bees is thought to have occurred due to rapid climatic cooling around the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, leading to the extinction of some bee lineages such as the tribe Melikertini. Over the Paleogene and Neogene, different bee lineages continued to spread all over the world, and the shifting habitats and connectedness of continents led to the isolation and evolution of many new bee tribes.

=== Fossils ===
The oldest non-compression bee fossil is &quot;Cretotrigona prisca&quot;, a corbiculate bee of Late Cretaceous age (~70 mya) found in New Jersey amber. A fossil from the early Cretaceous (~100 mya), &quot;Melittosphex burmensis&quot;, was initially considered &quot;an extinct lineage of pollen-collecting Apoidea sister to the modern bees&quot;, but subsequent research has rejected the claim that &quot;Melittosphex&quot; is a bee, or even a member of the superfamily Apoidea to which bees belong, instead treating the lineage as &quot;incertae sedis&quot; within the Aculeata.

The Allodapini (within the Apidae) appeared around 53 Mya.
The Colletidae appear as fossils only from the late Oligocene (~25 Mya) to early Miocene.
The Melittidae are known from &quot;Palaeomacropis eocenicus&quot; in the Early Eocene.
The Megachilidae are known from trace fossils (characteristic leaf cuttings) from the Middle Eocene.
The Andrenidae are known from the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, around 34 Mya, of the Florissant shale.
The Halictidae first appear in the Early Eocene with species found in amber. The Stenotritidae are known from fossil brood cells of Pleistocene age.

===Coevolution===

The earliest animal-pollinated flowers were shallow, cup-shaped blooms pollinated by insects such as beetles, so the syndrome of insect pollination was well established before the first appearance of bees. The novelty is that bees are specialized as pollination agents, with behavioral and physical modifications that specifically enhance pollination, and are the most efficient pollinating insects. In a process of coevolution, flowers developed floral rewards such as nectar and longer tubes, and bees developed longer tongues to extract the nectar. Bees also developed structures known as scopal hairs and pollen baskets to collect and carry pollen. The location and type differ among and between groups of bees. Most species have scopal hairs on their hind legs or on the underside of their abdomens. Some species in the family Apidae have pollen baskets on their hind legs, while very few lack these and instead collect pollen in their crops. The appearance of these structures drove the adaptive radiation of the angiosperms, and, in turn, bees themselves. Bees coevolved not only with flowers but it is believed that some species coevolved with mites. Some provide tufts of hairs called acarinaria that appear to provide lodgings for mites; in return, it is believed that mites eat fungi that attack pollen, so the relationship in this case may be mutualistic.

===Phylogeny===
====External====
Molecular phylogeny was used by Debevic &quot;et al&quot;, 2012, to demonstrate that the bees (Anthophila) arose from deep within the Crabronidae &quot;sensu lato&quot;, which was thus rendered paraphyletic. In their study, the placement of the monogeneric Heterogynaidae was uncertain. The small family Mellinidae was not included in this analysis.

Further studies by Sann &quot;et al.&quot;, 2018, elevated the subfamilies (plus one tribe and one subtribe) of Crabronidae &quot;sensu lato&quot; to family status. They also recovered the placement of &quot;Heterogyna&quot; within Nyssonini and sunk Heterogynaidae. The newly erected family, Ammoplanidae, formerly a subtribe of Pemphredoninae, was recovered as the most sister family to bees.

====Internal====
This cladogram of the bee families is based on Hedtke et al., 2013, which places the former families Dasypodaidae and Meganomiidae as subfamilies inside the Melittidae. English names, where available, are given in parentheses.

==Characteristics==


Bees differ from closely related groups such as wasps by having branched or plume-like setae (hairs), combs on the forelimbs for cleaning their antennae, small anatomical differences in limb structure, and the venation of the hind wings; and in females, by having the seventh dorsal abdominal plate divided into two half-plates.

Bees have the following characteristics:

* A pair of large compound eyes which cover much of the surface of the head. Between and above these are three small simple eyes (ocelli) which provide information on light intensity.
* The antennae usually have 13 segments in males and 12 in females, and are geniculate, having an elbow joint part way along. They house large numbers of sense organs that can detect touch (mechanoreceptors), smell and taste; and small, hairlike mechanoreceptors that can detect air movement so as to &quot;hear&quot; sounds.
* The mouthparts are adapted for both chewing and sucking by having both a pair of mandibles and a long proboscis for sucking up nectar.
* The thorax has three segments, each with a pair of robust legs, and a pair of membranous wings on the hind two segments. The front legs of corbiculate bees bear combs for cleaning the antennae, and in many species the hind legs bear pollen baskets, flattened sections with incurving hairs to secure the collected pollen. The wings are synchronized in flight, and the somewhat smaller hind wings connect to the forewings by a row of hooks along their margin which connect to a groove in the forewing.
* The abdomen has nine segments, the hindermost three being modified into the sting.

The largest species of bee is thought to be Wallace&#x27;s giant bee &quot;Megachile pluto&quot;, whose females can attain a length of . The smallest species may be dwarf stingless bees in the tribe Meliponini whose workers are less than in length.

==Sociality==
===Haplodiploid breeding system===

According to inclusive fitness theory, organisms can gain fitness not just through increasing their own reproductive output, but also that of close relatives. In evolutionary terms, individuals should help relatives when &quot;Cost &lt; Relatedness * Benefit&quot;. The requirements for eusociality are more easily fulfilled by haplodiploid species such as bees because of their unusual relatedness structure.

In haplodiploid species, females develop from fertilized eggs and males from unfertilized eggs. Because a male is haploid (has only one copy of each gene), his daughters (which are diploid, with two copies of each gene) share 100% of his genes and 50% of their mother&#x27;s. Therefore, they share 75% of their genes with each other. This mechanism of sex determination gives rise to what W. D. Hamilton termed &quot;supersisters&quot;, more closely related to their sisters than they would be to their own offspring. Workers often do not reproduce, but they can pass on more of their genes by helping to raise their sisters (as queens) than they would by having their own offspring (each of which would only have 50% of their genes), assuming they would produce similar numbers. This unusual situation has been proposed as an explanation of the multiple (at least nine) evolutions of eusociality within Hymenoptera.

Haplodiploidy is neither necessary nor sufficient for eusociality. Some eusocial species such as termites are not haplodiploid. Conversely, all bees are haplodiploid but not all are eusocial, and among eusocial species many queens mate with multiple males, creating half-sisters that share only 25% of each other&#x27;s genes. But, monogamy (queens mating singly) is the ancestral state for all eusocial species so far investigated, so it is likely that haplodiploidy contributed to the evolution of eusociality in bees.

===Eusociality===


Bees may be solitary or may live in various types of communities. Eusociality appears to have originated from at least three independent origins in halictid bees. The most advanced of these are species with eusocial colonies; these are characterized by cooperative brood care and a division of labour into reproductive and non-reproductive adults, plus overlapping generations. This division of labour creates specialized groups within eusocial societies which are called castes. In some species, groups of cohabiting females may be sisters, and if there is a division of labour within the group, they are considered semisocial. The group is called eusocial if, in addition, the group consists of a mother (the queen) and her daughters (workers). When the castes are purely behavioural alternatives, with no morphological differentiation other than size, the system is considered primitively eusocial, as in many paper wasps; when the castes are morphologically discrete, the system is considered highly eusocial.

True honey bees (genus &quot;Apis&quot;, of which eight species are currently recognized) are highly eusocial, and are among the best known insects. Their colonies are established by swarms, consisting of a queen and several thousand workers. There are 29 subspecies of one of these species, &quot;Apis mellifera&quot;, native to Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. Africanized bees are a hybrid strain of &quot;A. mellifera&quot; that escaped from experiments involving crossing European and African subspecies; they are extremely defensive.

Stingless bees are also highly eusocial. They practice mass provisioning, with complex nest architecture and perennial colonies also established via swarming.

Many bumblebees are eusocial, similar to the eusocial Vespidae such as hornets in that the queen initiates a nest on her own rather than by swarming. Bumblebee colonies typically have from 50 to 200 bees at peak population, which occurs in mid to late summer. Nest architecture is simple, limited by the size of the pre-existing nest cavity, and colonies rarely last more than a year. In 2011, the International Union for Conservation of Nature set up the Bumblebee Specialist Group to review the threat status of all bumblebee species worldwide using the IUCN Red List criteria.

There are many more species of primitively eusocial than highly eusocial bees, but they have been studied less often. Most are in the family Halictidae, or &quot;sweat bees&quot;. Colonies are typically small, with a dozen or fewer workers, on average. Queens and workers differ only in size, if at all. Most species have a single season colony cycle, even in the tropics, and only mated females hibernate. A few species have long active seasons and attain colony sizes in the hundreds, such as &quot;Halictus hesperus&quot;. Some species are eusocial in parts of their range and solitary in others, or have a mix of eusocial and solitary nests in the same population. The orchid bees (Apidae) include some primitively eusocial species with similar biology. Some allodapine bees (Apidae) form primitively eusocial colonies, with progressive provisioning: a larva&#x27;s food is supplied gradually as it develops, as is the case in honey bees and some bumblebees.

===Solitary and communal bees===
Most other bees, including familiar insects such as carpenter bees, leafcutter bees and mason bees are solitary in the sense that every female is fertile, and typically inhabits a nest she constructs herself. There is no division of labor so these nests lack queens and &quot;worker&quot; bees for these species. Solitary bees typically produce neither honey nor beeswax.
Bees collect pollen to feed their young, and have the necessary adaptations to do this. However, certain wasp species such as pollen wasps have similar behaviours, and a few species of bee scavenge from carcases to feed their offspring. Solitary bees are important pollinators; they gather pollen to provision their nests with food for their brood. Often it is mixed with nectar to form a paste-like consistency. Some solitary bees have advanced types of pollen-carrying structures on their bodies. Very few species of solitary bee are being cultured for commercial pollination. Most of these species belong to a distinct set of genera which are commonly known by their nesting behavior or preferences, namely: carpenter bees, sweat bees, mason bees, plasterer bees, squash bees, dwarf carpenter bees, leafcutter bees, alkali bees and digger bees.

Most solitary bees are fossorial, digging nests in the ground in a variety of soil textures and conditions, while others create nests in hollow reeds or twigs, or holes in wood. The female typically creates a compartment (a &quot;cell&quot;) with an egg and some provisions for the resulting larva, then seals it off. A nest may consist of numerous cells. When the nest is in wood, usually the last (those closer to the entrance) contain eggs that will become males. The adult does not provide care for the brood once the egg is laid, and usually dies after making one or more nests. The males typically emerge first and are ready for mating when the females emerge. Solitary bees are very unlikely to sting (only in self-defense, if ever), and some (esp. in the family Andrenidae) are stingless.

While solitary, females each make individual nests. Some species, such as the European mason bee &quot;Hoplitis anthocopoides&quot;, and the Dawson&#x27;s Burrowing bee, &quot;Amegilla dawsoni,&quot; are gregarious, preferring to make nests near others of the same species, and giving the appearance of being social. Large groups of solitary bee nests are called &quot;aggregations&quot;, to distinguish them from colonies. In some species, multiple females share a common nest, but each makes and provisions her own cells independently. This type of group is called &quot;communal&quot; and is not uncommon. The primary advantage appears to be that a nest entrance is easier to defend from predators and parasites when multiple females use that same entrance regularly.

==Biology==

===Life cycle===
The life cycle of a bee, be it a solitary or social species, involves the laying of an egg, the development through several moults of a legless larva, a pupation stage during which the insect undergoes complete metamorphosis, followed by the emergence of a winged adult. The number of eggs laid by a female during her lifetime can vary from eight or less in some solitary bees, to more than a million in highly social species. Most solitary bees and bumble bees in temperate climates overwinter as adults or pupae and emerge in spring when increasing numbers of flowering plants come into bloom. The males usually emerge first and search for females with which to mate. Like the other members of Hymenoptera bees are haplodiploid; the sex of a bee is determined by whether or not the egg is fertilized. After mating, a female stores the sperm, and determines which sex is required at the time each individual egg is laid, fertilized eggs producing female offspring and unfertilized eggs, males. Tropical bees may have several generations in a year and no diapause stage.

The egg is generally oblong, slightly curved and tapering at one end. Solitary bees, lay each egg in a separate cell with a supply of mixed pollen and nectar next to it. This may be rolled into a pellet or placed in a pile and is known as mass provisioning. Social bee species provision progressively, that is, they feed the larva regularly while it grows. The nest varies from a hole in the ground or in wood, in solitary bees, to a substantial structure with wax combs in bumblebees and honey bees.

In most species, larvae are whitish grubs, roughly oval and bluntly-pointed at both ends. They have 15 segments and spiracles in each segment for breathing. They have no legs but move within the cell, helped by tubercles on their sides. They have short horns on the head, jaws for chewing food and an appendage on either side of the mouth tipped with a bristle. There is a gland under the mouth that secretes a viscous liquid which solidifies into the silk they use to produce a cocoon. The cocoon is semi-transparent and the pupa can be seen through it. Over the course of a few days, the larva undergoes metamorphosis into a winged adult. When ready to emerge, the adult splits its skin dorsally and climbs out of the exuviae and breaks out of the cell.

===Flight===

Antoine Magnan&#x27;s 1934 book says that he and André Sainte-Laguë had applied the equations of air resistance to insects and found that their flight could not be explained by fixed-wing calculations, but that &quot;One shouldn&#x27;t be surprised that the results of the calculations don&#x27;t square with reality&quot;. This has led to a common misconception that bees &quot;violate aerodynamic theory&quot;. In fact it merely confirms that bees do not engage in fixed-wing flight, and that their flight is explained by other mechanics, such as those used by helicopters. In 1996 it was shown that vortices created by many insects&#x27; wings helped to provide lift. High-speed cinematography and robotic mock-up of a bee wing showed that lift was generated by &quot;the unconventional combination of short, choppy wing strokes, a rapid rotation of the wing as it flops over and reverses direction, and a very fast wing-beat frequency&quot;. Wing-beat frequency normally increases as size decreases, but as the bee&#x27;s wing beat covers such a small arc, it flaps approximately 230 times per second, faster than a fruitfly (200 times per second) which is 80 times smaller.
===Navigation, communication, and finding food===

The ethologist Karl von Frisch studied navigation in the honey bee. He showed that honey bees communicate by the waggle dance, in which a worker indicates the location of a food source to other workers in the hive. He demonstrated that bees can recognize a desired compass direction in three different ways: by the Sun, by the polarization pattern of the blue sky, and by the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field. He showed that the Sun is the preferred or main compass; the other mechanisms are used under cloudy skies or inside a dark beehive. Bees navigate using spatial memory with a &quot;rich, map-like organization&quot;.

=== Digestion ===
The gut of bees is relatively simple, but multiple metabolic strategies exist in the gut microbiota. Pollinating bees consume nectar and pollen, which require different digestion strategies by somewhat specialized bacteria. While nectar is a liquid of mostly monosaccharide sugars and so easily absorbed, pollen contains complex polysaccharides: branching pectin and hemicellulose. Approximately five groups of bacteria are involved in digestion. Three groups specialize in simple sugars (&quot;Snodgrassella&quot; and two groups of &quot;Lactobacillus&quot;), and two other groups in complex sugars (&quot;Gilliamella&quot; and &quot;Bifidobacterium&quot;). Digestion of pectin and hemicellulose is dominated by bacterial clades &quot;Gilliamella&quot; and &quot;Bifidobacterium&quot; respectively. Bacteria that cannot digest polysaccharides obtain enzymes from their neighbors, and bacteria that lack certain amino acids do the same, creating multiple ecological niches.

Although most bee species are nectarivorous and palynivorous, some are not. Particularly unusual are vulture bees in the genus &quot;Trigona,&quot; which consume carrion and wasp brood, turning meat into a honey-like substance. Drinking guttation drops from leaves is also a source of energy and nutrients.

==Ecology==
=== Floral relationships ===

Most bees are polylectic (generalist) meaning they collect pollen from a range of flowering plants, but some are oligoleges (specialists), in that they only gather pollen from one or a few species or genera of closely related plants. In Melittidae and Apidae we also find a few genera that are highly specialized for collecting plant oils both in addition to, and instead of, nectar, which is mixed with pollen as larval food. Male orchid bees in some species gather aromatic compounds from orchids, which is one of the few cases where male bees are effective pollinators. Bees are able to sense the presence of desirable flowers through ultraviolet patterning on flowers, floral odors, and even electromagnetic fields. Once landed, a bee then uses nectar quality and pollen taste to determine whether to continue visiting similar flowers.

In rare cases, a plant species may only be effectively pollinated by a single bee species, and some plants are endangered at least in part because their pollinator is also threatened. But, there is a pronounced tendency for oligolectic bees to be associated with common, widespread plants visited by multiple pollinator species. For example, the creosote bush in the arid parts of the United States southwest is associated with some 40 oligoleges.

===As mimics and models===


Many bees are aposematically colored, typically orange and black, warning of their ability to defend themselves with a powerful sting. As such they are models for Batesian mimicry by non-stinging insects such as bee-flies, robber flies and hoverflies, all of which gain a measure of protection by superficially looking and behaving like bees.

Bees are themselves Müllerian mimics of other aposematic insects with the same color scheme, including wasps, lycid and other beetles, and many butterflies and moths (Lepidoptera) which are themselves distasteful, often through acquiring bitter and poisonous chemicals from their plant food. All the Müllerian mimics, including bees, benefit from the reduced risk of predation that results from their easily recognized warning coloration.

Bees are also mimicked by plants such as the bee orchid which imitates both the appearance and the scent of a female bee; male bees attempt to mate (pseudocopulation) with the furry lip of the flower, thus pollinating it.

===As brood parasites===

Brood parasites occur in several bee families including the apid subfamily Nomadinae. Females of these species lack pollen collecting structures (the scopa) and do not construct their own nests. They typically enter the nests of pollen collecting species, and lay their eggs in cells provisioned by the host bee. When the &quot;cuckoo&quot; bee larva hatches, it consumes the host larva&#x27;s pollen ball, and often the host egg also. In particular, the Arctic bee species, &quot;Bombus hyperboreus&quot; is an aggressive species that attacks and enslaves other bees of the same subgenus. However, unlike many other bee brood parasites, they have pollen baskets and often collect pollen.

In Southern Africa, hives of African honeybees (&quot;A. mellifera scutellata&quot;) are being destroyed by parasitic workers of the Cape honeybee, &quot;A. m. capensis&quot;. These lay diploid eggs (&quot;thelytoky&quot;), escaping normal worker policing, leading to the colony&#x27;s destruction; the parasites can then move to other hives.

The cuckoo bees in the &quot;Bombus&quot; subgenus &quot;Psithyrus&quot; are closely related to, and resemble, their hosts in looks and size. This common pattern gave rise to the ecological principle &quot;Emery&#x27;s rule&quot;. Others parasitize bees in different families, like &quot;Townsendiella&quot;, a nomadine apid, two species of which are cleptoparasites of the dasypodaid genus &quot;Hesperapis&quot;, while the other species in the same genus attacks halictid bees.

=== Nocturnal bees ===
Four bee families (Andrenidae, Colletidae, Halictidae, and Apidae) contain some species that are crepuscular. Most are tropical or subtropical, but some live in arid regions at higher latitudes. These bees have greatly enlarged ocelli, which are extremely sensitive to light and dark, though incapable of forming images. Some have refracting superposition compound eyes: these combine the output of many elements of their compound eyes to provide enough light for each retinal photoreceptor. Their ability to fly by night enables them to avoid many predators, and to exploit flowers that produce nectar only or also at night.

===Predators, parasites and pathogens===

Vertebrate predators of bees include bee-eaters, shrikes and flycatchers, which make short sallies to catch insects in flight. Swifts and swallows fly almost continually, catching insects as they go. The honey buzzard attacks bees&#x27; nests and eats the larvae. The greater honeyguide interacts with humans by guiding them to the nests of wild bees. The humans break open the nests and take the honey and the bird feeds on the larvae and the wax. Among mammals, predators such as the badger dig up bumblebee nests and eat both the larvae and any stored food.

Specialist ambush predators of visitors to flowers include crab spiders, which wait on flowering plants for pollinating insects; predatory bugs, and praying mantises, some of which (the flower mantises of the tropics) wait motionless, aggressive mimics camouflaged as flowers. Beewolves are large wasps that habitually attack bees; the ethologist Niko Tinbergen estimated that a single colony of the beewolf &quot;Philanthus triangulum&quot; might kill several thousand honeybees in a day: all the prey he observed were honeybees. Other predatory insects that sometimes catch bees include robber flies and dragonflies. Honey bees are affected by parasites including tracheal and &quot;Varroa&quot; mites. However, some bees are believed to have a mutualistic relationship with mites.

Some mites of genus &quot;Tarsonemus&quot; are associated with bees. They live in bee nests and ride on adult bees for dispersal. They are presumed to feed on fungi, nest materials or pollen. However, the impact they have on bees remains uncertain.

==Relationship with humans==
===In mythology and folklore===

Homer&#x27;s &quot;Hymn to Hermes&quot; describes three bee-maidens with the power of divination and thus speaking truth, and identifies the food of the gods as honey. Sources associated the bee maidens with Apollo and, until the 1980s, scholars followed Gottfried Hermann (1806) in incorrectly identifying the bee-maidens with the Thriae. Honey, according to a Greek myth, was discovered by a nymph called Melissa (&quot;Bee&quot;); and honey was offered to the Greek gods from Mycenean times. Bees were also associated with the Delphic oracle and the prophetess was sometimes called a bee.

The image of a community of honey bees has been used from ancient to modern times, in Aristotle and Plato; in Virgil and Seneca; in Erasmus and Shakespeare; Tolstoy, and by political and social theorists such as Bernard Mandeville and Karl Marx as a model for human society. In English folklore, bees would be told of important events in the household, in a custom known as &quot;Telling the bees&quot;.

===In art and literature===

Some of the oldest examples of bees in art are rock paintings in Spain which have been dated to 15,000 BC.

W. B. Yeats&#x27;s poem &quot;The Lake Isle of Innisfree&quot; (1888) contains the couplet &quot;Nine bean rows will I have there, a hive for the honey bee, / And live alone in the bee loud glade.&quot; At the time he was living in Bedford Park in the West of London. Beatrix Potter&#x27;s illustrated book &quot;The Tale of Mrs Tittlemouse&quot; (1910) features Babbity Bumble and her brood &quot;(pictured)&quot;. Kit Williams&#x27; treasure hunt book &quot;The Bee on the Comb&quot; (1984) uses bees and beekeeping as part of its story and puzzle. Sue Monk Kidd&#x27;s &quot;The Secret Life of Bees&quot; (2004), and the 2009 film starring Dakota Fanning, tells the story of a girl who escapes her abusive home and finds her way to live with a family of beekeepers, the Boatwrights.

Bees have appeared in films such as Jerry Seinfeld&#x27;s animated &quot;Bee Movie&quot;, or Eugene Schlusser&#x27;s &quot;A Sting in the Tale&quot; (2014). The playwright Laline Paull&#x27;s fantasy &quot;The Bees&quot; (2015) tells the tale of a hive bee named Flora 717 from hatching onwards.

===Beekeeping===



Humans have kept honey bee colonies, commonly in hives, for millennia. Depictions of humans collecting honey from wild bees date to 15,000 years ago; efforts to domesticate them are shown in Egyptian art around 4,500 years ago. Simple hives and smoke were used.

Among Classical Era authors, beekeeping with the use of smoke is described in Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;History of Animals&quot; Book 9. The account mentions that bees die after stinging; that workers remove corpses from the hive, and guard it; castes including workers and non-working drones, but &quot;kings&quot; rather than queens; predators including toads and bee-eaters; and the waggle dance, with the &quot;irresistible suggestion&quot; of (&quot;, it waggles) and (&quot;, they watch). Beekeeping is described in detail by Virgil in his &quot;Georgics&quot;; it is mentioned in his &quot;Aeneid&quot;, and in Pliny&#x27;s &quot;Natural History&quot;.

From the 18th century, European understanding of the colonies and biology of bees allowed the construction of the moveable comb hive so that honey could be harvested without destroying the colony.

=== As commercial pollinators ===

Bees play an important role in pollinating flowering plants, and are the major type of pollinator in many ecosystems that contain flowering plants. It is estimated that one third of the human food supply depends on pollination by insects, birds and bats, most of which is accomplished by bees, whether wild or domesticated.

Since the 1970s, there has been a general decline in the species richness of wild bees and other pollinators, probably attributable to stress from increased parasites and disease, the use of pesticides, and a decrease in the number of wild flowers. Climate change probably exacerbates the problem. This is a major cause of concern, as it can cause biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation as well as increase climate change.

Contract pollination has overtaken the role of honey production for beekeepers in many countries. After the introduction of Varroa mites, feral honey bees declined dramatically in the US, though their numbers have since recovered. The number of colonies kept by beekeepers declined slightly, through urbanization, systematic pesticide use, tracheal and &quot;Varroa&quot; mites, and the closure of beekeeping businesses. In 2006 and 2007 the rate of attrition increased, and was described as colony collapse disorder. In 2010 invertebrate iridescent virus and the fungus &quot;Nosema ceranae&quot; were shown to be in every killed colony, and deadly in combination. Winter losses increased to about 1/3. &quot;Varroa&quot; mites were thought to be responsible for about half the losses.

Apart from colony collapse disorder, losses outside the US have been attributed to causes including pesticide seed dressings, using neonicotinoids such as clothianidin, imidacloprid and thiamethoxam. From 2013 the European Union restricted some pesticides to stop bee populations from declining further. In 2014 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report warned that bees faced increased risk of extinction because of global warming. In 2018 the European Union decided to ban field use of all three major neonicotinoids; they remain permitted in veterinary, greenhouse, and vehicle transport usage.

Farmers have focused on alternative solutions to mitigate these problems. By raising native plants, they provide food for native bee pollinators like &quot;Lasioglossum vierecki&quot; and &quot;L. leucozonium&quot;, leading to less reliance on honey bee populations.

=== As food producers ===

Honey is a natural product produced by bees and stored for their own use, but its sweetness has always appealed to humans. Before domestication of bees was even attempted, humans were raiding their nests for their honey. Smoke was often used to subdue the bees and such activities are depicted in rock paintings in Spain dated to 15,000 BC. 
Honey bees are used commercially to produce honey.

===As food===

Bees are considered edible insects. People in some countries eat insects, including the larvae and pupae of bees, mostly stingless species. They also gather larvae, pupae and surrounding cells, known as bee brood, for consumption. In the Indonesian dish &quot;botok tawon&quot; from Central and East Java, bee larvae are eaten as a companion to rice, after being mixed with shredded coconut, wrapped in banana leaves, and steamed.

Bee brood (pupae and larvae) although low in calcium, has been found to be high in protein and carbohydrate, and a useful source of phosphorus, magnesium, potassium, and trace minerals iron, zinc, copper, and selenium. In addition, while bee brood was high in fat, it contained no fat soluble vitamins (such as A, D, and E) but it was a good source of most of the water-soluble B vitamins including choline as well as vitamin C. The fat was composed mostly of saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids with 2.0% being polyunsaturated fatty acids.

=== As alternative medicine ===

Apitherapy is a branch of alternative medicine that uses honey bee products, including raw honey, royal jelly, pollen, propolis, beeswax and apitoxin (Bee venom). The claim that apitherapy treats cancer, which some proponents of apitherapy make, remains unsupported by evidence-based medicine.

=== Stings ===

The painful stings of bees are mostly associated with the poison gland and the Dufour&#x27;s gland which are abdominal exocrine glands containing various chemicals. In &quot;Lasioglossum leucozonium&quot;, the Dufour&#x27;s Gland mostly contains octadecanolide as well as some eicosanolide. There is also evidence of n-triscosane, n-heptacosane, and 22-docosanolide.

== See also ==

* Australian native bees
* Fear of bees (apiphobia)
* Superorganism
* World Bee Day

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==External links==

* &quot;Apoidea&quot; at All Living Thingsimages, identification guides, and maps of bees
* Bee Genera of the World
* Anthophila (Apoidea) – BeesNorth American species of bees at BugGuide
* Native Bees of North America at BugGuide
* &quot;Bee declines driven by combined stress from parasites, pesticides, and lack of flowers&quot;&quot;Science&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="0" end="4" title="Bee" label="Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="16" end="22" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="43" end="47" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="53" end="56" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="84" end="95" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q30034" start="148" end="165" title="western honey bee" label="western honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="181" end="186" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="199" end="211" title="monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q324132" start="243" end="250" title="Apoidea" label="Apoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="284" end="289" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="298" end="308" title="Bee" label="Anthophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="374" end="393" title="Family (biology)" label="biological families"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="417" end="426" title="honey bee" label="honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25407" start="429" end="438" title="bumblebee" label="bumblebee"/>
<link wikidata="Q127768" start="445" end="458" title="stingless bee" label="stingless bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="464" end="472" title="eusociality" label="socially"/>
<link wikidata="Q975164" start="523" end="532" title="mason bee" label="mason bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165550" start="535" end="548" title="carpenter bee" label="carpenter bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q261844" start="551" end="566" title="Megachile" label="leafcutter bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276661" start="572" end="582" title="Halictidae" label="sweat bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="638" end="648" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="713" end="728" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="759" end="778" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276661" start="787" end="797" title="Halictidae" label="Halictidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134348" start="986" end="1001" title="Megachile pluto" label="Megachile pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="1090" end="1096" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="1101" end="1107" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1179" end="1186" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="1246" end="1251" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="1291" end="1299" title="primates" label="primates"/>
<link wikidata="Q183147" start="1318" end="1327" title="bee-eater" label="bee-eater"/>
<link wikidata="Q141958" start="1355" end="1364" title="beewolf" label="beewolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="1369" end="1380" title="dragonfly" label="dragonflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225687" start="1387" end="1398" title="Pollination management" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303496" start="1434" end="1446" title="List of crop plants pollinated by bees" label="commercially"/>
<link wikidata="Q176353" start="1737" end="1747" title="beekeeping" label="beekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746067" start="1763" end="1778" title="meliponiculture" label="meliponiculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1861" end="1874" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1879" end="1893" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="2055" end="2074" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="2115" end="2126" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="2132" end="2138" title="Mayans" label="Mayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251421" start="2273" end="2286" title="Aculeata" label="stinging wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q133302" start="2302" end="2313" title="Crabronidae" label="Crabronidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="2326" end="2335" title="Predation" label="predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="2562" end="2571" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q425636" start="2613" end="2620" title="vespoidea" label="vespoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q523631" start="2638" end="2649" title="pollen wasp" label="pollen wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="2765" end="2781" title="Early Cretaceous" label="Early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="2837" end="2850" title="Gondwana" label="West Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2883" end="2896" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="2901" end="2907" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246061" start="2962" end="2967" title="Deserts and xeric shrublands" label="xeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964275" start="3097" end="3115" title="Phylogenetic niche conservatism" label="niche conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006091" start="3338" end="3348" title="Melittidae" label="Melittidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q756082" start="3350" end="3356" title="Apidae" label="Apidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q530200" start="3362" end="3374" title="Megachilidae" label="Megachilidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132340" start="3696" end="3706" title="Colletidae" label="Colletidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q853287" start="3708" end="3718" title="Andrenidae" label="Andrenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276661" start="3723" end="3733" title="Halictidae" label="Halictidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="3863" end="3878" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3972" end="3981" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="3987" end="4000" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930702" start="4045" end="4058" title="Stenotritidae" label="Stenotritidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4187" end="4199" title="Cretotrigona" label="Cretotrigona"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="4325" end="4362" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4480" end="4486" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="4506" end="4515" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="4544" end="4548" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="4724" end="4730" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542955" start="4917" end="4942" title="Eocene–Oligocene extinction event" label="Eocene-Oligocene boundary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5009" end="5020" title="Melikertini" label="Melikertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="5045" end="5052" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5298" end="5317" title="Cretotrigona prisca" label="Cretotrigona prisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q37204" start="5327" end="5342" title="Apinae" label="corbiculate bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="5346" end="5361" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q26369555" start="5385" end="5401" title="New Jersey amber" label="New Jersey amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946486" start="5456" end="5478" title="Melittosphex burmensis" label="Melittosphex burmensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="5565" end="5571" title="Cladistics" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q324132" start="5721" end="5728" title="Apoidea" label="Apoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q235536" start="5789" end="5803" title="incertae sedis" label="incertae sedis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251421" start="5821" end="5829" title="Aculeata" label="Aculeata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733037" start="5836" end="5846" title="Allodapini" label="Allodapini"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="5943" end="5952" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="5972" end="5979" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q508691" start="6055" end="6067" title="Ypresian" label="Early Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="6155" end="6168" title="Eocene" label="Middle Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="6403" end="6414" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="6511" end="6521" title="pollination" label="pollinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="6541" end="6547" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q508499" start="6557" end="6587" title="Pollination syndrome" label="syndrome of insect pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="6856" end="6867" title="coevolution" label="coevolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="6910" end="6916" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816644" start="7032" end="7044" title="scopa (biology)" label="scopal hairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311786" start="7049" end="7063" title="pollen baskets" label="pollen baskets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311786" start="7284" end="7298" title="pollen baskets" label="pollen baskets"/>
<link wikidata="Q216818" start="7433" end="7451" title="adaptive radiation" label="adaptive radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="7459" end="7470" title="Flowering plant" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="7508" end="7517" title="Coevolution" label="coevolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033231" start="7634" end="7644" title="acarinaria" label="acarinaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="7795" end="7806" title="mutualism (biology)" label="mutualistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133302" start="7976" end="7987" title="Crabronidae" label="Crabronidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="7994" end="8004" title="sensu lato" label="sensu lato"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="8036" end="8048" title="paraphyly" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933488" start="8099" end="8113" title="Heterogyna" label="Heterogynaidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813123" start="8146" end="8156" title="Mellinidae" label="Mellinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133302" start="8305" end="8316" title="Crabronidae" label="Crabronidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285110" start="8425" end="8434" title="Nyssonini" label="Nyssonini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933488" start="8444" end="8458" title="Heterogynaidae" label="Heterogynaidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21349205" start="8486" end="8498" title="Ammoplanidae" label="Ammoplanidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q146703" start="8523" end="8537" title="Pemphredonidae" label="Pemphredoninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q126780" start="8943" end="8947" title="seta" label="seta"/>
<link wikidata="Q942537" start="9246" end="9259" title="compound eyes" label="compound eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364287" start="9358" end="9364" title="ocelli" label="ocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q204664" start="9418" end="9426" title="Antenna (biology)" label="antennae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9488" end="9498" title="Insect morphology#Antennae" label="geniculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324240" start="9744" end="9754" title="insect mouthparts" label="mouthparts"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="9821" end="9830" title="Mandible (insect mouthpart)" label="mandibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q899348" start="9842" end="9851" title="proboscis" label="proboscis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134348" start="10538" end="10553" title="Megachile pluto" label="Megachile pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q127768" start="10662" end="10672" title="Meliponini" label="Meliponini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="10776" end="10793" title="inclusive fitness" label="inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098692" start="11091" end="11103" title="haplodiploid" label="haplodiploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="11288" end="11295" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="11355" end="11362" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="11563" end="11577" title="W. D. Hamilton" label="W. D. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="12078" end="12089" title="Hymenoptera" label="Hymenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="12189" end="12197" title="termites" label="termites"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="12700" end="12711" title="Eusociality" label="Eusociality"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="12841" end="12849" title="Eusociality" label="eusocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="12916" end="12934" title="division of labour" label="division of labour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13106" end="13112" title="Eusociality#In insects" label="castes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307505" start="13251" end="13261" title="semisocial" label="semisocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q816345" start="13345" end="13350" title="Queen bee" label="queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q627153" start="13371" end="13378" title="Worker bee" label="workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152488" start="13547" end="13557" title="paper wasp" label="paper wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="13678" end="13682" title="Apis (genus)" label="Apis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549094" start="13832" end="13838" title="Swarming (honey bee)" label="swarms"/>
<link wikidata="Q30034" start="13947" end="13961" title="Apis mellifera" label="Apis mellifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q387728" start="14016" end="14031" title="Africanized bee" label="Africanized bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q127768" start="14194" end="14207" title="Stingless bee" label="Stingless bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="14225" end="14233" title="eusocial" label="eusocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784080" start="14249" end="14266" title="mass provisioning" label="mass provisioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037230" start="14408" end="14416" title="Vespidae" label="Vespidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q334422" start="14425" end="14431" title="hornet" label="hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="14752" end="14798" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="14910" end="14923" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276661" start="15076" end="15086" title="Halictidae" label="Halictidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15436" end="15453" title="Halictus hesperus" label="Halictus hesperus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521051" start="15608" end="15618" title="orchid bee" label="orchid bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733037" start="15698" end="15708" title="Allodapini" label="allodapine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248859" start="15764" end="15788" title="progressive provisioning" label="progressive provisioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165550" start="15984" end="15997" title="carpenter bee" label="carpenter bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q261844" start="16000" end="16015" title="leafcutter bees" label="leafcutter bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q975164" start="16020" end="16030" title="mason bees" label="mason bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="16295" end="16302" title="beeswax" label="beeswax"/>
<link wikidata="Q523631" start="16430" end="16441" title="pollen wasp" label="pollen wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="16493" end="16501" title="Scavenger" label="scavenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="16933" end="16939" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276661" start="17031" end="17041" title="Halictidae" label="sweat bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062683" start="17055" end="17069" title="Colletes inaequalis" label="plasterer bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582148" start="17071" end="17081" title="squash bee" label="squash bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938968" start="17084" end="17104" title="Ceratina" label="dwarf carpenter bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184225" start="17123" end="17133" title="alkali bee" label="alkali bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q665840" start="17139" end="17150" title="Anthophorini" label="digger bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="17176" end="17185" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976487" start="17297" end="17302" title="Phragmites" label="reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="17325" end="17329" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q853287" start="17923" end="17933" title="Andrenidae" label="Andrenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867245" start="18054" end="18076" title="Hoplitis anthocopoides" label="Hoplitis anthocopoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600261" start="18092" end="18119" title="Amegilla dawsoni" label="Dawson&amp;#x27;s Burrowing bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q354341" start="18365" end="18373" title="colony (biology)" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="18897" end="18902" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="18906" end="18910" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048559" start="18955" end="18977" title="Holometabolism" label="complete metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098692" start="19470" end="19482" title="Haplodiploidy" label="haplodiploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q913288" start="19808" end="19816" title="diapause" label="diapause"/>
<link wikidata="Q31060267" start="20443" end="20451" title="Spiracle (arthropods)" label="spiracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q776682" start="21047" end="21053" title="exuvia" label="exuvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668465" start="21098" end="21112" title="Antoine Magnan" label="Antoine Magnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q522666" start="21147" end="21165" title="André Sainte-Laguë" label="André Sainte-Laguë"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="21195" end="21209" title="air resistance" label="air resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="21213" end="21219" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="21661" end="21671" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="21780" end="21794" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="22154" end="22157" title="arc (geometry)" label="arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054318" start="22218" end="22226" title="Drosophilidae" label="fruitfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q60060" start="22343" end="22358" title="Karl von Frisch" label="Karl von Frisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086918" start="22367" end="22377" title="animal navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q655280" start="22441" end="22453" title="waggle dance" label="waggle dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="22655" end="22667" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q165107" start="22856" end="22863" title="beehive" label="beehive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560550" start="22885" end="22899" title="spatial memory" label="spatial memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q104117645" start="23056" end="23066" title="microbiota" label="microbiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q133516" start="23226" end="23240" title="monosaccharide" label="monosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="23296" end="23310" title="polysaccharide" label="polysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q188154" start="23323" end="23329" title="pectin" label="pectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407490" start="23334" end="23347" title="hemicellulose" label="hemicellulose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23462" end="23475" title="Snodgrassella" label="Snodgrassella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061596" start="23506" end="23519" title="Lactobacillus" label="Lactobacillus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23574" end="23585" title="Gilliamella" label="Gilliamella"/>
<link wikidata="Q132656" start="23602" end="23617" title="Bifidobacterium" label="Bifidobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="23690" end="23695" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q132656" start="23731" end="23746" title="Bifidobacterium" label="Bifidobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="23922" end="23938" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q120880" start="23972" end="23985" title="Nectarivore" label="nectarivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805698" start="23990" end="24002" title="Palynivore" label="palynivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q64987625" start="24043" end="24054" title="vulture bee" label="vulture bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938037" start="24075" end="24082" title="Trigona" label="Trigona"/>
<link wikidata="Q623379" start="24179" end="24188" title="guttation" label="guttation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131293185" start="24306" end="24316" title="polylectic" label="polylectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350564" start="24405" end="24414" title="oligolege" label="oligolege"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="24783" end="24789" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="25150" end="25155" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="25244" end="25254" title="endangered species" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q965954" start="25479" end="25492" title="Larrea tridentata" label="creosote bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q619751" start="25625" end="25635" title="aposematic" label="aposematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111075" start="25774" end="25790" title="Batesian mimicry" label="Batesian mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q676390" start="25823" end="25832" title="bee-flies" label="bee-flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q837089" start="25834" end="25846" title="Asilidae" label="robber flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q217905" start="25851" end="25861" title="hoverflies" label="hoverflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892944" start="25975" end="25991" title="Müllerian mimicry" label="Müllerian mimics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="26058" end="26062" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q248608" start="26065" end="26070" title="Lycidae" label="lycid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="26122" end="26133" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q159291" start="26440" end="26450" title="Ophrys apifera" label="bee orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254703" start="26544" end="26560" title="pseudocopulation" label="pseudocopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q647144" start="26644" end="26658" title="Brood parasite" label="Brood parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q756082" start="26704" end="26708" title="apidae" label="apid"/>
<link wikidata="Q902392" start="26719" end="26728" title="Nomadinae" label="Nomadinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816644" start="26794" end="26799" title="scopa (biology)" label="scopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932953" start="27125" end="27143" title="Bombus hyperboreus" label="Bombus hyperboreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="27520" end="27527" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291674" start="27540" end="27549" title="thelytoky" label="thelytoky"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034690" start="27574" end="27589" title="worker policing" label="worker policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073531" start="27682" end="27692" title="cuckoo bee" label="cuckoo bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q195382" start="27707" end="27713" title="List of bumblebee species" label="Bombus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375911" start="27884" end="27901" title="Emery&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Emery&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535965" start="27966" end="27979" title="Townsendiella" label="Townsendiella"/>
<link wikidata="Q902392" start="27989" end="27997" title="nomadinae" label="nomadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q756082" start="27998" end="28002" title="apidae" label="apid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405346" start="28052" end="28062" title="Dasypodaidae" label="dasypodaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14456095" start="28075" end="28085" title="Hesperapis" label="Hesperapis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276661" start="28143" end="28151" title="halictidae" label="halictid"/>
<link wikidata="Q853287" start="28201" end="28211" title="Andrenidae" label="Andrenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132340" start="28213" end="28223" title="Colletidae" label="Colletidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276661" start="28225" end="28235" title="Halictidae" label="Halictidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q756082" start="28241" end="28247" title="Apidae" label="Apidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255068" start="28279" end="28290" title="crepuscular" label="crepuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364287" start="28410" end="28416" title="ocellus" label="ocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q183147" start="28888" end="28897" title="bee-eater" label="bee-eater"/>
<link wikidata="Q171052" start="28900" end="28907" title="shrikes" label="shrikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q200989" start="28912" end="28922" title="Old World flycatcher" label="flycatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377551" start="29055" end="29068" title="Pernis (bird)" label="honey buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q593582" start="29119" end="29137" title="greater honeyguide" label="greater honeyguide"/>
<link wikidata="Q638105" start="29337" end="29343" title="badger" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q12023" start="29472" end="29484" title="crab spiders" label="crab spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q26371" start="29542" end="29556" title="Hemiptera" label="predatory bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="29562" end="29576" title="praying mantis" label="praying mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462219" start="29599" end="29612" title="flower mantis" label="flower mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692283" start="29648" end="29665" title="aggressive mimicry" label="aggressive mimics"/>
<link wikidata="Q141958" start="29690" end="29699" title="Beewolf" label="Beewolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="29749" end="29759" title="ethologist" label="ethologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153890" start="29760" end="29774" title="Niko Tinbergen" label="Niko Tinbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q301297" start="29827" end="29848" title="Philanthus triangulum" label="Philanthus triangulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q837089" start="30002" end="30014" title="Asilidae" label="robber flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="30019" end="30030" title="dragonfly" label="dragonflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q337959" start="30079" end="30087" title="Acarapis woodi" label="tracheal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766457" start="30098" end="30104" title="Varroa" label="Varroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="30111" end="30115" title="mite" label="mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357591" start="30224" end="30234" title="Tarsonemus" label="Tarsonemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="30510" end="30515" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="30529" end="30543" title="Homeric Hymns" label="Hymn to Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="30596" end="30606" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="30718" end="30724" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302504" start="30842" end="30848" title="Thriae" label="Thriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q830357" start="30917" end="30924" title="Melissa" label="Melissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q937774" start="30989" end="31003" title="Helladic period" label="Mycenean times"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="31040" end="31054" title="Delphic oracle" label="Delphic oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="31189" end="31198" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="31203" end="31208" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="31213" end="31219" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="31224" end="31230" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="31235" end="31242" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="31247" end="31258" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="31260" end="31267" title="Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q379912" start="31315" end="31333" title="Bernard Mandeville" label="Bernard Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="31338" end="31347" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="31369" end="31376" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934204" start="31483" end="31499" title="Telling the bees" label="Telling the bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="31584" end="31598" title="Cave painting" label="rock paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="31602" end="31607" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="31645" end="31656" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241318" start="31675" end="31701" title="The Lake Isle of Innisfree" label="The Lake Isle of Innisfree"/>
<link wikidata="Q83290" start="31877" end="31889" title="Bedford Park, London" label="Bedford Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="31913" end="31927" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275331" start="31958" end="31985" title="The Tale of Mrs Tittlemouse" label="The Tale of Mrs Tittlemouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417490" start="32061" end="32073" title="Kit Williams" label="Kit Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053933" start="32080" end="32093" title="Treasure hunt (game)" label="treasure hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q24255778" start="32105" end="32124" title="The Bee on the Comb" label="The Bee on the Comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q291774" start="32196" end="32209" title="Sue Monk Kidd" label="Sue Monk Kidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435184" start="32223" end="32246" title="The Secret Life of Bees (novel)" label="The Secret Life of Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q940387" start="32269" end="32278" title="The Secret Life of Bees (film)" label="2009 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q115541" start="32288" end="32302" title="Dakota Fanning" label="Dakota Fanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q215506" start="32468" end="32482" title="Jerry Seinfeld" label="Jerry Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q275167" start="32505" end="32514" title="Bee Movie" label="Bee Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128161" start="32555" end="32574" title="A Sting in the Tale" label="A Sting in the Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638849" start="32604" end="32616" title="Laline Paull" label="Laline Paull"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="32624" end="32631" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165107" start="32798" end="32803" title="beehive" label="hives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620799" start="33113" end="33131" title="History of Animals" label="History of Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q650665" start="33295" end="33300" title="drone (bee)" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q655280" start="33395" end="33407" title="waggle dance" label="waggle dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="33541" end="33547" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q674439" start="33561" end="33569" title="Georgics" label="Georgics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="33606" end="33612" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="33627" end="33639" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="33646" end="33661" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="33934" end="33945" title="pollination" label="pollinating"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="33946" end="33961" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="33990" end="34000" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="34009" end="34018" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="34118" end="34129" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225687" start="34657" end="34677" title="pollination management" label="Contract pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q852389" start="34725" end="34734" title="beekeeper" label="beekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q48564" start="34781" end="34793" title="Varroa mites" label="Varroa mites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="34795" end="34800" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="34957" end="34969" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q337959" start="34997" end="35005" title="Acarapis woodi" label="tracheal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766457" start="35016" end="35022" title="Varroa" label="Varroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q497841" start="35149" end="35173" title="colony collapse disorder" label="colony collapse disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700718" start="35234" end="35248" title="Nosema ceranae" label="Nosema ceranae"/>
<link wikidata="Q902225" start="35577" end="35590" title="neonicotinoid" label="neonicotinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419355" start="35600" end="35612" title="clothianidin" label="clothianidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420098" start="35614" end="35626" title="imidacloprid" label="imidacloprid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040678" start="35631" end="35643" title="thiamethoxam" label="thiamethoxam"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="35659" end="35673" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="35761" end="35802" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="35873" end="35887" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295583" start="36211" end="36232" title="Lasioglossum vierecki" label="Lasioglossum vierecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601088" start="36249" end="36263" title="Lasioglossum leucozonium" label="L. leucozonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="36647" end="36661" title="Cave painting" label="rock paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="36736" end="36741" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38117921" start="36779" end="36793" title="edible insects" label="edible insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046284" start="36820" end="36831" title="entomophagy" label="eat insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q994747" start="36962" end="36971" title="bee brood" label="bee brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="36997" end="37006" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197759" start="37019" end="37030" title="botok" label="botok tawon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="37059" end="37063" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="37104" end="37108" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="37142" end="37149" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="37162" end="37168" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="37236" end="37243" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="37274" end="37281" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="37286" end="37298" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="37323" end="37333" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="37335" end="37344" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="37346" end="37355" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="37376" end="37380" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="37382" end="37386" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="37388" end="37394" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="37400" end="37408" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183206" start="37569" end="37579" title="B vitamins" label="B vitamins"/>
<link wikidata="Q193166" start="37590" end="37597" title="choline" label="choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q970537" start="37651" end="37660" title="Saturated fat" label="saturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q61738980" start="37665" end="37692" title="monounsaturated fatty acids" label="monounsaturated fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="37709" end="37736" title="polyunsaturated fatty acids" label="polyunsaturated fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q618690" start="37772" end="37782" title="Apitherapy" label="Apitherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="37798" end="37818" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="37859" end="37868" title="raw honey" label="raw honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q202501" start="37870" end="37881" title="royal jelly" label="royal jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q184398" start="37891" end="37899" title="propolis" label="propolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="37901" end="37908" title="beeswax" label="beeswax"/>
<link wikidata="Q423888" start="37913" end="37921" title="apitoxin" label="apitoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386847" start="37927" end="37932" title="venom" label="venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="38041" end="38064" title="evidence-based medicine" label="evidence-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523834" start="38095" end="38109" title="Bee sting" label="stings of bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126786" start="38162" end="38181" title="Dufour&amp;#x27;s gland" label="Dufour&amp;#x27;s gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601088" start="38257" end="38281" title="Lasioglossum leucozonium" label="Lasioglossum leucozonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82359699" start="38329" end="38343" title="octadecanolide" label="octadecanolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q120212574" start="38360" end="38372" title="eicosanolide" label="eicosanolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409829" start="38416" end="38427" title="heptacosane" label="heptacosane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825063" start="38469" end="38491" title="Australian native bees" label="Australian native bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160101" start="38494" end="38518" title="Fear of bees" label="Fear of bees (apiphobia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q916139" start="38521" end="38534" title="Superorganism" label="Superorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47008694" start="38537" end="38550" title="World Bee Day" label="World Bee Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986057" start="38790" end="38798" title="BugGuide" label="BugGuide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986057" start="38833" end="38841" title="BugGuide" label="BugGuide"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="38948" end="38955" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4660" wikidata="Q126756" url="?curid=4660" title="Basques">
<text>The Basques ( or ; ; ; ) are a Southwestern European ethnic group, characterised by the Basque language, a common culture and shared genetic ancestry to the ancient Vascones and Aquitanians. Basques are indigenous to, and primarily inhabit, an area traditionally known as the Basque Country ()—a region that is located around the western end of the Pyrenees on the coast of the Bay of Biscay and straddles parts of north-central Spain and south-western France.
==Etymology==
The English word &quot;Basque&quot; may be pronounced or and derives from the French &quot;Basque&quot; (), itself derived from Gascon &quot;Basco&quot; (pronounced ), cognate with Spanish &quot;Vasco &quot;(pronounced ). Those, in turn, come from Latin &quot;Vascō&quot; (pronounced ; plural &quot;Vascōnēs&quot;—see history section below). The Latin generally evolved into the bilabials and in Gascon and Spanish, probably under the influence of Basque and the related Aquitanian (the Latin /w/ instead evolved into in French, Italian and other Romance languages).

Several coins from the 2nd and the 1st centuries BC found in the Basque Country bear the inscription &quot;barscunes&quot;. The place in which they were minted is not certain but is thought to be somewhere near Pamplona, in the heartland of the area that historians believe was inhabited by the &quot;Vascones&quot;. Some scholars have suggested a Celtic etymology based on &quot;bhar-s-&quot;, meaning &quot;summit&quot;, &quot;point&quot; or &quot;leaves&quot;, according to which &quot;barscunes&quot; may have meant &quot;the mountain people&quot;, &quot;the tall ones&quot; or &quot;the proud ones&quot;, and others have posited a relationship to a Proto-Indo-European root &quot;*bar-&quot; meaning &quot;border&quot;, &quot;frontier&quot;, &quot;march&quot;.

In Basque, people call themselves the &quot;euskaldunak&quot;, singular &quot;euskaldun&quot;, formed from &quot;euskal-&quot; (i.e. &quot;Basque (language)&quot;) and &quot;-dun&quot; (i.e. &quot;one who has&quot;); &quot;euskaldun&quot; literally means a Basque-speaker. Not all Basques are Basque-speakers. Therefore, the neologism &quot;euskotar&quot;, plural &quot;euskotarrak&quot;, was coined in the 19th century to mean a Basque person, whether Basque-speaking or not. Alfonso Irigoyen posits that the word &quot;euskara&quot; is derived from an ancient Basque verb &quot;enautsi&quot; &quot;to say&quot; (compare modern Basque &quot;esan&quot;) and the suffix &quot;-(k)ara&quot; (&quot;way (of doing something)&quot;). Thus, &quot;euskara&quot; would mean literally &quot;way of saying&quot; or &quot;way of speaking&quot;. One item of evidence in favour of that hypothesis is found in the Spanish book &quot;Compendio Historial&quot;, written in 1571 by the Basque writer Esteban de Garibay. He records the name of the Basque language as &quot;enusquera&quot;. That may, however, be a writing mistake.

In the 19th century, the Basque nationalist activist Sabino Arana posited an original root &quot;euzko&quot;, which he thought came from &quot;eguzkiko&quot; (&quot;of the sun&quot;, related to the assumption of an original solar religion). On the basis of that putative root, Arana proposed the name Euzkadi for an independent Basque nation, composed of seven Basque historical territories. Arana&#x27;s neologism &quot;Euzkadi&quot; (in the regularized spelling &quot;Euskadi&quot;) is still widely used in both Basque and Spanish since it is now the official name of the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country.

==Genetic origins==

The distinctiveness noted by studies of classical genetic markers (such as blood groups) and the pre-Indo-European of the Basque language has resulted in a popular and long-held view that Basques are &quot;living fossils&quot; of the earliest modern humans who colonised Europe. Partly for these reasons, anthropological and genetic studies from the beginning and the end of the 20th century theorized that the Basques are the descendants of the original Cro-Magnons. 

But although they are genetically distinctive in some ways due to isolation, the Basques are still very typically European in their Y-DNA and mtDNA sequences, and in some other genetic loci. These same sequences are widespread throughout the Western half of Europe, especially along the Western fringe of the continent.

==History==

Basque tribes were mentioned in Roman times by Strabo and Pliny, including the Vascones, Aquitani, and others. There is enough evidence to support the hypothesis that at that time and later they spoke old varieties of the Basque language (see: Aquitanian language).

In the Early Middle Ages, the territory between the Ebro and Garonne rivers was known as Vasconia, a vaguely defined ethnic area and political entity struggling to fend off pressure from the Iberian Visigothic kingdom and Arab rule to the south, as well as the Frankish push from the north. By the turn of the first millennium, the territory of Vasconia had fragmented into different feudal regions, such as Soule and Labourd, while south of the Pyrenees the Castile, Pamplona and the Pyrenean counties of Aragon, Sobrarbe, Ribagorça (later Kingdom of Aragon), and Pallars emerged as the main regional entities with Basque population in the 9th and 10th centuries.

The Kingdom of Pamplona, a central Basque realm, later known as Navarre, underwent a process of feudalization and was subject to the influence of its much larger Aragonese, Castilian and French neighbours. Castile deprived Navarre of its coastline by conquering key western territories (1199–1201), leaving the kingdom landlocked. The Basques were ravaged by the War of the Bands, bitter partisan wars between local ruling families. Weakened by the Navarrese civil war, the bulk of the realm eventually fell before the onslaught of the Spanish armies (1512–1524). However, the Navarrese territory north of the Pyrenees remained beyond the reach of an increasingly powerful Spain. Lower Navarre became a province of France in 1620.

Nevertheless, the Basques enjoyed a great deal of self-government until the French Revolution (1790) and the Carlist Wars (1839, 1876), when the Basques supported heir apparent Carlos V and his descendants. On either side of the Pyrenees, the Basques lost their native institutions and laws held during the &quot;Ancien régime&quot;. Since then, despite the current limited self-governing status of the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre as settled by the Spanish Constitution, many Basques have attempted higher degrees of self-empowerment (see Basque nationalism), sometimes by acts of violence. Labourd, Lower Navarre, and Soule were integrated into the French department system (starting 1790), with Basque efforts to establish a region-specific political-administrative entity failing to take off to date. However, in January 2017, a single agglomeration community was established for the Basque Country in France.

==Geography==

===Political and administrative divisions===

The Basque region is divided into at least three administrative units, namely the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre in Spain, and the arrondissement of Bayonne and the cantons of Mauléon-Licharre and Tardets-Sorholus in the &quot;département&quot; of Pyrénées Atlantiques, France.

The autonomous community (a concept established in the Spanish Constitution of 1978) known as &quot;Euskal Autonomia Erkidegoa&quot; or EAE in Basque and as &quot;Comunidad Autónoma Vasca&quot; or CAV in Spanish (in English: &quot;Basque Autonomous Community&quot; or BAC), is made up of the three Spanish provinces of Álava, Biscay and Gipuzkoa. The corresponding Basque names of these territories are &quot;Araba&quot;, &quot;Bizkaia&quot; and &quot;Gipuzkoa&quot;, and their Spanish names are &quot;Álava&quot;, &quot;Vizcaya&quot; and &quot;Guipúzcoa&quot;.

The BAC only includes three of the seven provinces of the currently called historical territories. It is sometimes referred to simply as &quot;the Basque Country&quot; (or &quot;Euskadi&quot;) by writers and public agencies only considering those three western provinces, but also on occasions merely as a convenient abbreviation when this does not lead to confusion in the context. Others reject this usage as inaccurate and are careful to specify the BAC (or an equivalent expression such as &quot;the three provinces&quot;, up to 1978 referred to as &quot;Provincias Vascongadas&quot; in Spanish) when referring to this entity or region. Likewise, terms such as &quot;the Basque Government&quot; for &quot;the government of the BAC&quot; are commonly though not universally employed. In particular in common usage the French term &quot;Pays Basque&quot; (&quot;Basque Country&quot;), in the absence of further qualification, refers either to the whole Basque Country (&quot;Euskal Herria&quot; in Basque), or not infrequently to the northern (or &quot;French&quot;) Basque Country specifically.

Under Spain&#x27;s present constitution, Navarre (&quot;Nafarroa&quot; in present-day Basque, &quot;Navarra&quot; historically in Spanish) constitutes a separate entity, called in present-day Basque &quot;Nafarroako Foru Erkidegoa&quot;, in Spanish &quot;Comunidad Foral de Navarra&quot; (the autonomous community of Navarre). The government of this autonomous community is the Government of Navarre. In historical contexts Navarre may refer to a wider area, and that the present-day northern Basque province of Lower Navarre may also be referred to as (part of) &quot;Nafarroa&quot;, while the term &quot;High Navarre&quot; (&quot;Nafarroa Garaia&quot; in Basque, &quot;Alta Navarra&quot; in Spanish) is also encountered as a way of referring to the territory of the present-day autonomous community.

There are three other historic provinces parts of the Basque Country: Labourd, Lower Navarre and Soule (&quot;Lapurdi, Nafarroa Beherea&quot; and &quot;Zuberoa&quot; in Basque; &quot;Labourd, Basse-Navarre&quot; and &quot;Soule&quot; in French), devoid of official status within France&#x27;s present-day political and administrative territorial organization, and only minor political support to the Basque nationalists. A large number of regional and local nationalist and non-nationalist representatives have waged a campaign for years advocating for the creation of a separate Basque département, while these demands have gone unheard by the French administration.

===Population, main cities, and languages===
There are 2,123,000 people living in the Basque Autonomous Community (279,000 in Alava, 1,160,000 in Biscay and 684,000 in Gipuzkoa). The most important cities in this region, which serve as the provinces&#x27; administrative centers, are Bilbao (in Biscay), San Sebastián (in Gipuzkoa), and Vitoria-Gasteiz (in Álava). The official languages are Basque and Spanish. Knowledge of Spanish is compulsory under the Spanish constitution (article no. 3), and knowledge and usage of Basque is a right under the Statute of Autonomy (article no. 6), so only knowledge of Spanish is virtually universal. Knowledge of Basque, after declining for many years during Franco&#x27;s dictatorship owing to official persecution, is again on the rise due to favorable official language policies and popular support. Currently about 33 percent of the population in the Basque Autonomous Community speaks Basque.

Navarre has a population of 601,000; its administrative capital and main city, also regarded by many nationalist Basques as the Basques&#x27; historical capital, is Pamplona (&quot;Iruñea&quot; in modern Basque). Only Spanish is an official language of Navarre, and the Basque language is only co-official in the province&#x27;s northern region, where most Basque-speaking Navarrese are concentrated.

About a quarter of a million people live in the French Basque Country. Nowadays Basque-speakers refer to this region as &quot;Iparralde&quot; (Basque for North), and to the Spanish provinces as &quot;Hegoalde&quot; (South). Much of this population lives in or near the Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz (BAB) urban belt on the coast (in Basque these are &quot;Baiona&quot;, &quot;Angelu&quot; and &quot;Miarritze&quot;). The Basque language, which was traditionally spoken by most of the region&#x27;s population outside the BAB urban zone, is today rapidly losing ground to French. The French Basque Country&#x27;s lack of self-government within the French state is coupled with the absence of official status for the Basque language in the region. Attempts to introduce bilingualism in local administration have so far met direct refusal from French officials.

==Basque diaspora==


Large numbers of Basques have left the Basque Country to settle in the rest of Spain, France or other parts of the world in different historical periods, often for economic or political reasons. Historically the Basques abroad were often employed in shepherding and ranching and by maritime fisheries and merchants. Millions of Basque descendants (see Basque American and Basque Canadian) live in North America (the United States; Canada, mainly in the provinces of Newfoundland and Quebec), all over Latin America, South Africa, and Australia.

===Latin America===
Miguel de Unamuno said: &quot;There are at least two things that clearly can be attributed to Basques: the Society of Jesus and the Republic of Chile.&quot; Chilean historian Luis Thayer Ojeda estimated that 48 percent of immigrants to Chile in the 17th and 18th centuries were Basque. Estimates range between 2.5 and 5 million Basque descendants live in Chile; the Basque have been a major if not the strongest influence in the country&#x27;s cultural and economic development.

Basque place names are to be found, such as Nueva Vizcaya (now Chihuahua and Durango, Mexico), New Navarre (now Sonora and Sinaloa, Mexico), Biscayne Bay (United States), and Aguereberry Point (United States). Nueva Vizcaya was the first province in the north of the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico) to be explored and settled by the Spanish. It consisted mostly of the area which is today the states of Chihuahua and Durango (the original Durango is a known city in Biscay).

In Mexico most descendants of Basque emigrees are concentrated in the cities of Monterrey, Saltillo, Reynosa, Camargo, and the states of Jalisco, Durango, Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, Coahuila, and Sonora. The Basques were important in the mining industry; many were ranchers and vaqueros (cowboys), and the rest opened small shops in major cities such as Mexico City, Guadalajara and Puebla. In Guatemala, most Basques have been concentrated in Sacatepequez Department, Antigua Guatemala, Jalapa for six generations now, while some have migrated to Guatemala City.

In Colombia, a large number of Basques settled mainly in Antioquia and the Coffee Axis. In 1955, Joaquín Ospina said: &quot;Is there something more similar to the Basque people than the &quot;&quot;antioqueños&quot;. Also, writer Arturo Escobar Uribe said in his book &quot;Mitos de Antioquia&quot;&quot; (Myths of Antioquia) (1950): &quot;Antioquia, which in its clean ascendance predominates the peninsular farmer of the Basque provinces, inherited the virtues of its ancestors. ... Despite the predominance of the white race, its extension in the mountains ... has projected over Colombia&#x27;s map the prototype of its race; in Medellín with the industrial paisa, entrepreneur, strong and steady ... in its towns, the adventurer, arrogant, world-explorer. ... Its myths, which are an evidence of their deep credulity and an indubitable proof of their Iberian ancestor, are the sequel of the conqueror&#x27;s blood which runs through their veins&quot;. Bambuco, a Colombian folk music, has Basque roots.

===United States===

The largest of several important Basque communities in the United States is in the area around Boise, Idaho, home to the Basque Museum and Cultural Center, host to an annual Basque festival, as well as a festival for the Basque diaspora every five years. Reno, Nevada, where the Center for Basque Studies and the Basque Studies Library are located at the University of Nevada, is another significant nucleus of Basque population. Elko, Nevada, sponsors an annual Basque festival that celebrates the dance, cuisine and cultures of the Basque peoples of Spanish, French and Mexican nationalities who have arrived in Nevada since the late 19th century.

Texas has a large percentage of Hispanics descended from Basques who participated in the conquest of New Spain. Many of the original Tejanos had Basque blood, including those who fought in the Battle of the Alamo alongside many of the other Texans. Along the Mexican/Texan border, many Basque surnames can be found. The largest concentration of Basques who settled on Mexico&#x27;s north-eastern &quot;frontera&quot;, including the states of Chihuahua, Durango, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas, also settled along Texas&#x27; Rio Grande from South Texas to West Texas. Many of the historic &quot;hidalgos&quot;, or noble families from this area, had gained their titles and land grants from Spain and Mexico; they still value their land. Some of North America&#x27;s largest ranches, which were founded under these colonial land grants, can be found in this region.

California has a major concentration of Basques, most notably in the San Joaquin Valley between Stockton, Fresno and Bakersfield. The city of Bakersfield has a large Basque community and the city has several Basque restaurants, including Noriega&#x27;s which won the 2011 James Beard Foundation America&#x27;s Classic Award. There is a history of Basque culture in Chino, California. In Chino, two annual Basque festivals celebrate the dance, cuisine, and culture of the peoples. The surrounding area of San Bernardino County has many Basque descendants as residents. They are mostly descendants of settlers from Spain and Mexico. These Basques in California are grouped in the group known as &quot;Californios&quot;.

Basques of European Spanish-French and Latin American nationalities also settled throughout the western U.S. in states like Louisiana, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, Oregon, and Washington.

==Culture==


===Language===
The identifying language of the Basques is called Basque or &quot;Euskara&quot;, spoken today by 25%-30% of the region&#x27;s population. An idea of the central place the language has in cultural terms is given by the fact that Basques identify themselves by the term &quot;euskaldun&quot; and their country as &quot;Euskal Herria&quot;, literally &quot;Basque speaker&quot; and &quot;Country of the Basque Language&quot; respectively. The language has been made a political issue by official Spanish and French policies restricting its use either historically or currently; however, this has not stopped the teaching, speaking, writing, and cultivating of this increasingly vibrant minority language. This sense of Basque identity tied to the local language does not only exist in isolation. For many Basques, it is juxtaposed with a sense of either Spanish or French identity tied with the use of the Spanish and French languages among other Basques, especially in the French Basque Country. Regarding the Spanish Basque Country, Basques that don&#x27;t have a sense of Spanish identity make up an important part of the population. As with many European states, a regional identity, be it linguistically derived or otherwise, is not mutually exclusive with the broader national one. For example, Basque rugby union player for France, Imanol Harinordoquy, has said about his national identity:&quot;I am French and Basque. There is no conflict, I am proud of both. ... I have friends who are involved in the political side of things but that is not for me. My only interest is the culture, the Euskera language, the people, our history and ways.&quot;

As a result of state language promotion, school policies, the effects of mass media and migration, today virtually all Basques (except for some children below school age) speak the official language of their state (Spanish or French). There are extremely few Basque monolingual speakers: essentially all Basque speakers are bilingual on both sides of the border. Spanish or French is typically the first language of citizens from other regions (who often feel no need to learn Basque), and Spanish or French is also the first language of many Basques, all of which maintains the dominance of the state tongues of both France and Spain. Recent Basque Government policies aim to change this pattern, as they are viewed as potential threats against mainstream usage of the minority tongue.

The Basque language is thought to be a genetic language isolate in contrast with other European languages, vast majority of which belong to the broad Indo-European language family. Another peculiarity of Basque is that it has probably been spoken continuously &quot;in situ&quot;, in and around its present territorial location, for longer than most other modern European languages, which are typically thought to have been introduced in historic or prehistoric times through population migrations or other processes of cultural transmission.

However, popular stereotypes characterizing Basque as &quot;the oldest language in Europe&quot; and &quot;unique among the world&#x27;s languages&quot; may be misunderstood and lead to erroneous assumptions. Over the centuries, Basque has remained in continuous contact with neighboring western European languages with which it has come to share numerous lexical properties and typological features; it is therefore misleading to exaggerate the &quot;outlandish&quot; character of Basque. Basque is also a modern language, and is established as a written and printed one used in present-day forms of publication and communication, as well as a language spoken and used in a very wide range of social and cultural contexts, styles, and registers.

===Land and inheritance===

Basques have a close attachment to their home (&quot;etxe(a)&quot; &#x27;house, home&#x27;), especially when this consists of the traditional self-sufficient, family-run farm or &quot;baserri(a)&quot;. Home in this context is synonymous with family roots. Some Basque surnames were adapted from old &quot;baserri&quot; or habitation names. They typically related to a geographical orientation or other locally meaningful identifying features. Such surnames provide even those Basques whose families may have left the land generations ago with an important link to their rural family origins: &quot;Bengoetxea&quot; &quot;the house of further down&quot;, &quot;Goikoetxea&quot; &quot;the house above&quot;, &quot;Landaburu&quot; &quot;top of the field&quot;, &quot;Errekondo&quot; &quot;next to the stream&quot;, &quot;Elizalde&quot; &quot;by the church&quot;, &quot;Mendizabal&quot; &quot;wide hill&quot;, &quot;Usetxe&quot; &quot;house of birds&quot; &quot;Ibarretxe&quot; &quot;house in the valley&quot;, &quot;Etxeberria&quot; &quot;the new house&quot;, and so on.

In contrast to surrounding regions, ancient Basque inheritance patterns, recognised in the &quot;fueros,&quot; favoured survival of the unity of inherited land holdings. In a kind of primogeniture, these usually were inherited by the eldest male or female child. As in other cultures, the fate of other family members depended on the assets of a family: wealthy Basque families tended to provide for all children in some way, while less-affluent families may have had only one asset to provide to one child. However, this heir often provided for the rest of the family (unlike in England, with strict primogeniture, where the eldest son inherited everything and often did not provide for others). Even though they were provided for in some way, younger siblings had to make much of their living by other means. Mostly after the advent of industrialisation, this system resulted in the emigration of many rural Basques to Spain, France or the Americas. Harsh by modern standards, this custom resulted in a great many enterprising figures of Basque origin who went into the world to earn their way, from Spanish conquistadors such as Lope de Aguirre and Francisco Vásquez de Coronado, to explorers, missionaries and saints of the Catholic Church, such as Francis Xavier.

A widespread belief that Basque society was originally matriarchal is at odds with the current, clearly patrilineal kinship system and inheritance structures. Some scholars and commentators have attempted to reconcile these points by assuming that patrilineal kinship represents an innovation. In any case, the social position of women in both traditional and modern Basque society is somewhat better than in neighbouring cultures, and women have a substantial influence in decisions about the domestic economy. In the past, some women participated in collective magical ceremonies. They were key participants in a rich folklore, today largely forgotten.

===Cuisine===
Basque cuisine is at the heart of Basque culture, influenced by the neighboring communities and produce from the sea and the land. A 20th-century feature of Basque culture is the phenomenon of gastronomical societies (called &quot;txoko&quot; in Basque), food clubs where men gather to cook and enjoy their own food. Until recently, women were allowed entry only one day in the year. Cider houses (Sagardotegiak) are popular restaurants in Gipuzkoa open for a few months while the cider is in season.

===Cultural production===
At the end of the 20th century, despite ETA violence (ended in 2010) and the crisis of heavy industries, the Basque economic condition recovered remarkably. They emerged from the Franco regime with a revitalized language and culture. The Basque language expanded geographically led by large increases in the major urban centers of Pamplona, Bilbao, and Bayonne, where only a few decades ago the Basque language had all but disappeared. Nowadays, the number of Basque speakers is maintaining its level or increasing slightly.

===Music===

===Religion===
Traditionally Basques have been mostly Catholics. In the 19th century and well into the 20th, Basques as a group remained notably devout and churchgoing. In recent years church attendance has fallen off, as in most of Western Europe. The region has been a source of missionaries like Francis Xavier and Michel Garicoïts. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus, was a Basque. California Franciscan Fermín Lasuén was born in Vitoria. Lasuén was the successor to Franciscan Padre Junípero Serra and founded 9 of the 21 extant California Missions along the coast.

A sprout of Protestantism in the continental Basque Country produced the first translation of the new Testament into Basque by Joanes Leizarraga. Queen Jeanne III of Navarre, a devout Huguenot, commissioned the translation of the New Testament into Basque and Béarnese for the benefit of her subjects. By the time Henry III of Navarre converted to Catholicism in order to become king of France, Protestantism virtually disappeared from the Basque community.

Bayonne held a Jewish community composed mainly of Sephardi Jews fleeing from the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions. There were also important Jewish and Muslim communities in Navarre before the Castilian invasion of 1512–21.

Nowadays, according to one single opinion poll, only slightly more than 50% of Basques profess some kind of belief in God, while the rest are either agnostic or atheist. The number of religious skeptics increases noticeably for the younger generations, while the older ones are more religious. Catholicism is, by far, the largest religion in Basque Country. In 2019, the proportion of Basques that identify themselves as Roman Catholic was 60%, while it is one of the most secularized communities of Spain: 24.6% were non-religious and 12.3% of Basques were atheist.

====Pre-Christian religion and mythology====


The Christianisation of the Basque Country has been the topic of some discussion. There are, broadly speaking, two views. According to one, Christianity arrived in the Basque Country during the 4th and 5th centuries but according to the other, it did not take place until the 12th and 13th centuries. The &quot;Encyclopaedia Britannica&quot; says that the Basques were not Christianized until the tenth century, however, and that their earlier animism survives in their folklore. The main issue lies in the different interpretations of what is considered Christianisation. Early traces of Christianity can be found in the major urban areas from the 4th century onwards, a bishopric from 589 in Pamplona and three hermit cave concentrations (two in Álava, one in Navarre) that were in use from the 6th century onwards. In this sense, Christianity arrived &quot;early&quot;.

Pre-Christian belief seems to have focused on a goddess called Mari. A number of place-names contain her name, which would suggest these places were related to worship of her such as &quot;Anbotoko Mari&quot; who appears to have been related to the weather. According to one tradition, she travelled every seven years between a cave on Mount Anboto and one on another mountain (the stories vary); the weather would be wet when she was in Anboto, dry when she was in Aloña, or Supelegor, or Gorbea. One of her names, &quot;Mari Urraca&quot; possibly ties her to an historical Navarrese princess of the 11th and 12th century, with other legends giving her a brother or cousin who was a Roman Catholic priest. So far the discussions about whether the name Mari is original and just happened to coincide closely with the Christian name María or if Mari is an early Basque attempt to give a Christian veneer to pagan worship have remained speculative. At any rate, Mari (Andramari) is one of the oldest worshipped Christian icons in Basque territories.

Mari&#x27;s consort is Sugaar. This chthonic couple seems to bear the superior ethical power and the power of creation and destruction. It&#x27;s said that when they gathered in the high caves of the sacred peaks, they engendered the storms. These meetings typically happened on Friday nights, the day of historical akelarre or coven. Mari was said to reside in Mount Anboto; periodically she crossed the skies as a bright light to reach her other home at Mount Txindoki.

Legends also speak of many and abundant genies, like &quot;jentilak&quot; (equivalent to giants), &quot;lamiak&quot; (equivalent to nymphs), &quot;mairuak&quot; (builders of the cromlechs or stone circles, literally Moors), &quot;iratxoak&quot; (imps), &quot;sorginak&quot; (witches, priestess of Mari), and so on. Basajaun is a Basque version of the Woodwose. There is a trickster named &quot;San Martin Txiki&quot; (&quot;St Martin the Lesser&quot;).

It is unclear whether Neolithic stone structures called dolmens have a religious significance or were built to house animals or resting shepherds. Some of the dolmens and cromlechs are burial sites serving also as border markers.
 The &quot;jentilak&quot; (&#x27;Giants&#x27;), on the other hand, are a legendary people which explains the disappearance of a people of Stone Age culture that used to live in the high lands and with no knowledge of iron. Many legends about them tell that they were bigger and taller, with a great force, but were displaced by the &quot;ferrons&quot;, or workers of ironworks foundries, until their total fade-out. They were pagans, but one of them, Olentzero, accepted Christianity and became a sort of Basque Santa Claus. They gave name to several toponyms, as &quot;Jentilbaratza&quot;.

===Society===
Historically, Basque society can be described as being somewhat at odds with Roman and later European societal norms. Strabo&#x27;s account of the north of Spain in his &quot;Geographica&quot; (written between approximately 20 BC and 20 AD) makes a mention of &quot;a sort of woman-rule—not at all a mark of civilization&quot; (Hadington 1992), a first mention of the—for the period—unusual position of women: &quot;Women could inherit and control property as well as officiate in churches.&quot; The evidence for this assertion is rather sparse however.

This preference for female dominance existed well into the 20th century:
... matrilineal inheritance laws, and agricultural work performed by women continued in Basque country until the early twentieth century. For more than a century, scholars have widely discussed the high status of Basque women in law codes, as well as their positions as judges, inheritors, and arbitrators through ante-Roman, medieval, and modern times. The system of laws governing succession in the French Basque region reflected total equality between the sexes. Up until the eve of the French Revolution, the Basque woman was truly &#x27;the mistress of the house&#x27;, hereditary guardian, and head of the lineage.

While women continued to have a higher position in Basque than other western European societies, it is highly unlikely that any point the society was &#x27;matriarchal&#x27;, as is often falsely claimed about pre-Indo-European peoples in general. The &#x27;Basque matriarchy&#x27; argument is typically tied to 20th century nationalism and is at odds with earlier accounts of the society.

Although the Kingdom of Navarre did adopt feudalism, most Basques also possessed unusual social institutions different from those of the rest of feudal Europe. Some aspects of this include the elizate tradition where local house-owners met in front of the church to elect a representative to send to the &quot;juntas&quot; and &quot;Juntas Generales&quot; (such as the &quot;Juntas Generales de Vizcaya&quot; or &quot;Guipúzcoa&quot;) which administered much larger areas. Another example was that in the medieval period most land was owned by the farmers, not the Church or a king.

==Sports in the Basque Country==
===Pelota===
The great family of ball games has its unique offspring among Basque ball games, known generically as pilota (Spanish: &quot;pelota&quot;). Some variants have been exported to the United States and Macau under the name of Jai Alai.

===Rural sports===


There are several sports derived by Basques from everyday chores. Heavy workers were challenged and bets placed upon them. Examples are:
* &quot;estropadak&quot; rowing regattas: from fishermen activities.
* &quot;sokatira&quot;: tug-of-war.
* &quot;harri-jasotzea&quot;: stone-lifting, from quarry works.
* &quot;aizkolaritza&quot; and &quot;trontzalaritza&quot;: wood-chopping and log sawing.
* &quot;sega jokoa&quot;: cutting grass with a scythe.
* &quot;Giza-abere probak&quot;: stone block pulling, from construction works:
** &quot;idi probak&quot; with teams of oxen.
** &quot;asto probak&quot; with donkeys.
** &quot;zaldi probak&quot; with horses.
** &quot;gizon probak&quot; with human teams.
* &quot;txinga eramatea&quot;: carrying of weights, one in each hand, representing milk canisters.
* &quot;ahari topaketa&quot;: ram fights.
* &quot;harri zulaketa&quot; competitions: drilling stone blocks with a metal bar, only in the former mining areas of West Biscay.
* Basque sheepdog trials competitions.

===Bull runs and bullock games===
The encierro (bull run) in Pamplona&#x27;s fiestas &quot;Sanfermines&quot; started as a transport of bulls to the ring. These encierros, as well as other bull and bullock related activities are not exclusive to Pamplona but are traditional in many towns and villages of the Basque country.

===Football===
There are several clubs within the Basque Country, such as Athletic Bilbao, Real Sociedad, Deportivo Alavés, SD Eibar and, as Navarre club, the CA Osasuna (the only club in La Liga that has a Basque name—&quot;osasuna&quot; means &quot;health&quot;). In the 2016–17 season these five clubs played together in La Liga, the first instance where five Basque clubs have reached that level at the same time. Athletic&#x27;s recruitment policy has meant the club refuses to sign any non-Basque players, with &quot;Basque&quot; currently defined to include either ethnic Basques or players of any ethnicity trained by a Basque club. Real Sociedad also previously employed such a policy.

===Basketball===
The Basque Country also features several professional basketball teams, the most notable of which is Saski Baskonia from Vitoria-Gasteiz, one of the 11 clubs that own stakes in Euroleague Basketball, the company that operates the continent-wide EuroLeague and EuroCup. They are currently joined in the Spanish top flight, Liga ACB, by Bilbao Basket, with the two clubs involved in a longstanding rivalry. Another club from the Basque Country, Gipuzkoa Basket from Donostia, currently plays in the second-level LEB Oro.

===Rugby union===
Rugby union is a popular sport among French Basques, with major clubs Biarritz Olympique and Aviron Bayonnais traditional powerhouses in the premier division of French Rugby (the Top 14). Biarritz regularly play Champions Cup matches, especially knockout matches, at Estadio Anoeta in San Sebastian. Games between the Basque clubs and Catalan club USA Perpignan are always hard fought.

===Professional cycling===
Cycling is popular and the professional cycling team, partly sponsored by the Basque Government participated in the UCI World Tour division until 2014. Known for their orange tops and hill-climbing ability, their fans were famous for lining the famous Pyrenean climbs in the Tour de France, in support of their compatriots.

Each April the week-long Tour of the Basque Country showcases the beautiful rolling Basque countryside. Miguel Indurain, born in Villava is one of the most celebrated cyclists in the world having won 5 consecutive Tours de France.

==Politics==

While there is no independent Basque state, Spain&#x27;s autonomous community of the Basque Country, made up of the provinces of Álava (Araba), Biscay (Bizkaia) and Gipuzkoa, is primarily a historical consequence and an answer to the wide autonomy claim of its population.

Navarre has a separate statute of autonomy, a contentious arrangement designed during Spanish transition to democracy (the &quot;Amejoramiento&quot;, an &#x27;upgrade&#x27; of its previous status during dictatorship). It refers back to the kingdom status of Navarre (up to 1841) and their traditional institutional and legal framework (charters). Basque, the original and main language of Navarre up to the late 18th century, has kept family transmission especially in the northern part of Navarre and central areas to a lesser extent, designated as Basque speaking or mixed area in Navarrese law. Questions of political, linguistic and cultural allegiance and identity are highly complex in Navarre. Politically some Basque nationalists would like to integrate with the Basque Autonomous Community.

The French Basque Country today does not exist as a formal political entity and is officially simply part of the French department of Pyrénées Atlantiques, centered in Béarn. In recent years the number of mayors of the region supporting the creation of a separate Basque department has grown to 63.87%. So far, their attempts have been unsuccessful.

===Political conflicts===

====Language====

Both the Spanish and French governments have, at times, suppressed Basque linguistic and cultural identity. The French Republics, the epitome of the nation-state, have a long history of attempting the complete cultural absorption of cultural minority groups. Spain has, at most points in its history, granted some degree of linguistic, cultural, and even political autonomy to its Basques, but under the regime of Francisco Franco, the Spanish government reversed the advances of Basque nationalism, as it had fought in the opposite side of the Spanish Civil War: cultural activity in Basque was limited to folkloric issues and the Catholic Church.

Today, the Southern Basque Country within Spain enjoys an extensive cultural and political autonomy. The majority of schools under the jurisdiction of the Basque education system use Basque as the primary medium of teaching. However, the situation is more delicate in the Northern Basque Country within France, where Basque is not officially recognized, and where lack of autonomy and monolingual public schooling in French exert great pressure on the Basque language.

In Navarre, Basque has been declared an endangered language, since the anti-Basque and conservative government of Navarrese People&#x27;s Union opposes the symbols of Basque culture, highlighting a Spanish identity for Navarre.

Basque is also spoken by immigrants in the major cities of Spain and France, in Australia, in many parts of Latin America, and in the United States, especially in Nevada, Idaho, and California.

====Political status and violence====
Since its articulation by Sabino Arana in the late 19th century, the more radical currents of Basque nationalism have demanded the right of self-determination and even independence. Within the Basque country, this element of Basque politics is often in balance with the conception of the Basque Country as just another part of the Spanish state, a view more commonly espoused on the right of the political spectrum. In contrast, the desire for greater autonomy or independence is particularly common among leftist Basque nationalists. The right of self-determination was asserted by the Basque Parliament in 2002 and 2006. Since self-determination is not recognized in the Spanish Constitution of 1978, a wide majority of Basques abstained (55%) and some even voted against it (23.5%) in the ratification referendum of 6 December that year. However, it was approved by clear majority overall in Spain (87%). The autonomous regime for the Basque Country was approved in a 1979 referendum but the autonomy of Navarre (&quot;Amejoramiento del Fuero&quot;: &quot;improvement of the charter&quot;) was never subject to a referendum but only approved by the Navarrese Cortes (parliament).

====Political violence====


==Classification==
As with their language, the Basques are clearly a distinct cultural group in their region. They regard themselves as culturally and especially linguistically distinct from their surrounding neighbours. Some Basques identify themselves as Basques only whereas others identify themselves both as Basque and Spanish. Many Basques regard the designation as a &quot;cultural minority&quot; as incomplete, favouring instead the definition as a nation, the commonly accepted designation for the Basque people up to the rise of the nation-states and the definition imposed by the 1812 Spanish Constitution.

In modern times, as a European people living in a highly industrialized area, cultural differences from the rest of Europe are inevitably blurred, although a conscious cultural identity as a people or nation remains very strong, as does an identification with their homeland, even among many Basques who have emigrated to other parts of Spain or France, or to other parts of the world.

The strongest distinction between the Basques and their traditional neighbours is linguistic. Surrounded by Romance-language speakers, the Basques traditionally spoke (and many still speak) a language that was not only non-Romance but non-Indo-European. The prevailing belief amongst Basques, and forming part of their national identity, is that their language has continuity with the people who were in this region since not only pre-Roman and pre-Celtic times, but since the Stone Age.

==Notable Basques==
Among the most notable Basque people are Juan Sebastián Elcano (who led the first successful expedition to circumnavigate the globe after Ferdinand Magellan died mid-journey); Sancho III of Navarre; and Ignatius of Loyola and Francis Xavier, founders of the Society of Jesus.

Don Diego María de Gardoqui y Arriquibar (1735–1798) was also a Basque who became Spain&#x27;s first Ambassador to the United States, and Miguel de Unamuno was a noted novelist and philosopher of the late 19th and the 20th century, was also a Basque.

Another well-known Basque was Father Alberto Hurtado, S.J. (1901–1952), a Jesuit priest who founded the charitable housing system Hogar de Cristo, meaning hearth, or home, of Christ, in Chile. El Hogar provided a home-like milieu for the homeless. Hurtado also founded the Chilean Trade Union Association to promote a union movement based on the social teachings of the Catholic Church. He was a friend and savior to all the poor and homeless, and was beatified by Pope John Paul II on 16 October 1994. He was canonized by Pope Benedict XVI on 23 October 2005.

==See also==

* Aberri Eguna
* Aquitani
* Basque code talkers
* Duchy of Vasconia
* Genetic history of Europe
* Iberians
* Late Basquisation
* List of Basques
* National and regional identity in Spain
* Spanish people
* Vascones

==Footnotes==
==References==
* Allières, Jacques. &quot;The Basques&quot; 1977; online 2016 reprint.
* &quot;The Basques, the Catalans and Spain&quot;, Daniele Conversi, 2000, .
* &quot;The Basque History of the World&quot;, Mark Kurlansky, 1999, .
* &quot;The Oldest Europeans&quot;, J. F. del Giorgio, A. J. Place, 2006, .
* Ethnologue report for France for population statistics in France.
* &quot;Euskal Herria en la Prehistoria&quot;, Xabier Peñalver Iribarren, 1996, .
* Gimbutas, Marija, &quot;The Living Goddesses&quot; (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001).
* 

==External links==

* Basque Autonomous Government
* 8 Probintziak. Non profit association working with the basques in the world
* Oroitzapenak Voices From Basque America, University of Nevada, Reno, Special Collections.
* Basque Digital Collection, University of Nevada, Reno Special Collections
* Sheepherders of Northern Nevada, University of Nevada, Reno, Special Collections
* Basque Posters, University of Nevada, Reno, Special Collections
* Voices from Basque America University of Nevada, Reno Libraries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="4" end="11" title="Basques" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470668" start="31" end="50" title="Southwestern Europe" label="Southwestern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="53" end="65" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="88" end="103" title="Basque language" label="Basque language"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="107" end="121" title="Basque culture" label="common culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q913584" start="133" end="149" title="genetic ancestry" label="genetic ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246837" start="165" end="173" title="Vascones" label="Vascones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255605" start="178" end="189" title="Aquitanians" label="Aquitanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="203" end="213" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="276" end="290" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="349" end="357" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="378" end="391" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="429" end="434" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="453" end="459" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q35735" start="603" end="609" title="Gascon language" label="Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="723" end="728" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246837" start="774" end="782" title="Vascones" label="Vascōnēs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="793" end="808" title="#History" label="history section"/>
<link wikidata="Q602076" start="837" end="849" title="betacism" label="evolved into"/>
<link wikidata="Q146878" start="854" end="862" title="bilabial" label="bilabial"/>
<link wikidata="Q500522" start="946" end="956" title="Aquitanian language" label="Aquitanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="996" end="1002" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1004" end="1011" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="1022" end="1039" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="1254" end="1262" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252171" start="1573" end="1588" title="mountain people" label="mountain people"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1697" end="1716" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="2135" end="2144" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890252" start="2793" end="2811" title="Esteban de Garibay" label="Esteban de Garibay"/>
<link wikidata="Q332663" start="2977" end="2989" title="Sabino Arana" label="Sabino Arana"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="3148" end="3162" title="solar deity" label="solar religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="3225" end="3232" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Euzkadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="3498" end="3518" title="Autonomous Community" label="Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="3526" end="3540" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q47657" start="3639" end="3651" title="Blood type" label="blood groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q536187" start="3661" end="3678" title="Pre-Indo-European languages" label="pre-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="3807" end="3820" title="Anatomically modern humans" label="modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="4019" end="4030" title="Cro-Magnons" label="Cro-Magnons"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="4166" end="4171" title="Y-DNA" label="Y-DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="4176" end="4181" title="mtDNA" label="mtDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="4219" end="4223" title="Locus (genetics)" label="loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246837" start="4447" end="4455" title="Vascones" label="Vascones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255605" start="4457" end="4465" title="Aquitani" label="Aquitani"/>
<link wikidata="Q500522" start="4612" end="4631" title="Aquitanian language" label="Aquitanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="4642" end="4659" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="4687" end="4691" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077" start="4696" end="4703" title="Garonne" label="Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295939" start="4724" end="4732" title="Duchy of Vasconia" label="Vasconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="4834" end="4844" title="Visigoths" label="Visigothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="4857" end="4879" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Arab rule to the south"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="4896" end="4904" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="4980" end="4988" title="Gascony" label="Vasconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q673040" start="5043" end="5048" title="Soule" label="Soule"/>
<link wikidata="Q671023" start="5053" end="5060" title="Labourd" label="Labourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="5094" end="5101" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="5103" end="5111" title="Kingdom of Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235737" start="5141" end="5147" title="County of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340288" start="5149" end="5157" title="Sobrarbe" label="Sobrarbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11945494" start="5159" end="5168" title="Ribagorça" label="Ribagorça"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="5176" end="5193" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541787" start="5200" end="5207" title="County of Pallars" label="Pallars"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="5365" end="5372" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="5563" end="5586" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="key western territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119165" start="5664" end="5680" title="War of the Bands" label="War of the Bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312328" start="5775" end="5808" title="Spanish conquest of Iberian Navarre" label="bulk of the realm eventually fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="5874" end="5919" title="Lower Navarre" label="the Navarrese territory north of the Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="5981" end="5994" title="Lower Navarre" label="Lower Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969928" start="6099" end="6133" title="End of Basque home rule in France" label="until the French Revolution (1790)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178424" start="6142" end="6154" title="Carlist Wars" label="Carlist Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q343621" start="6210" end="6218" title="Infante Carlos of Spain, Count of Molina" label="Carlos V"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936310" start="6284" end="6323" title="End of Basque home rule in Spain" label="lost their native institutions and laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="6346" end="6359" title="Ancien régime" label="Ancien régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="6436" end="6463" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="6584" end="6602" title="Basque nationalism" label="Basque nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q671023" start="6636" end="6643" title="Labourd" label="Labourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="6645" end="6658" title="Lower Navarre" label="Lower Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q673040" start="6664" end="6669" title="Soule" label="Soule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="6695" end="6719" title="Departments of France" label="French department system"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="6932" end="6956" title="French Basque Country" label="Basque Country in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="7102" end="7129" title="Basque Autonomous Community" label="Basque Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="7134" end="7141" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q194203" start="7160" end="7174" title="Arrondissements of France" label="arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="7178" end="7185" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q184188" start="7194" end="7201" title="cantons of France" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q236528" start="7205" end="7221" title="Mauléon-Licharre" label="Mauléon-Licharre"/>
<link wikidata="Q366359" start="7226" end="7242" title="Tardets-Sorholus" label="Tardets-Sorholus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="7256" end="7267" title="département" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q12703" start="7277" end="7297" title="Pyrénées Atlantiques" label="Pyrénées Atlantiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="7363" end="7391" title="Spanish Constitution of 1978" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q81801" start="7627" end="7632" title="Álava" label="Álava"/>
<link wikidata="Q93366" start="7634" end="7640" title="Biscay" label="Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q95010" start="7645" end="7653" title="Gipuzkoa" label="Gipuzkoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="8826" end="8840" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="8907" end="8954" title="Northern Basque Country" label="northern (or &amp;quot;French&amp;quot;) Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="9482" end="9495" title="Lower Navarre" label="Lower Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q671023" start="9843" end="9850" title="Labourd" label="Labourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="9852" end="9865" title="Lower Navarre" label="Lower Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q673040" start="9870" end="9875" title="Soule" label="Soule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="10360" end="10371" title="département" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="10726" end="10732" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10313" start="10746" end="10759" title="San Sebastián" label="San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q14318" start="10779" end="10794" title="Vitoria-Gasteiz" label="Vitoria-Gasteiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="11141" end="11167" title="Spain under Franco" label="Franco&amp;#x27;s dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="11831" end="11852" title="French Basque Country" label="French Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886395" start="13011" end="13026" title="Basque American" label="Basque American"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838454" start="13031" end="13046" title="Basque Canadian" label="Basque Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="13125" end="13137" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="13142" end="13148" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q185085" start="13225" end="13242" title="Miguel de Unamuno" label="Miguel de Unamuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="13332" end="13348" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="13357" end="13374" title="Republic of Chile" label="Republic of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867848" start="13553" end="13571" title="Basque Chilean" label="Basque descendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="13580" end="13585" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="13669" end="13677" title="cultural" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="13682" end="13690" title="economic" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q118121" start="13749" end="13762" title="Nueva Vizcaya, New Spain" label="Nueva Vizcaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="13768" end="13777" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q79918" start="13782" end="13789" title="Durango" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010587" start="13800" end="13811" title="New Navarre" label="New Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="13817" end="13823" title="Sonora (state)" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q80252" start="13828" end="13835" title="Sinaloa" label="Sinaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q954659" start="13846" end="13858" title="Biscayne Bay" label="Biscayne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q126687722" start="13880" end="13897" title="Aguereberry Point" label="Aguereberry Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="14263" end="14272" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q53077" start="14274" end="14282" title="Saltillo" label="Saltillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q738303" start="14284" end="14291" title="Reynosa" label="Reynosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528602" start="14293" end="14300" title="Camargo, Chihuahua" label="Camargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="14320" end="14327" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q79918" start="14329" end="14336" title="Durango" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="14338" end="14348" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="14350" end="14360" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="14362" end="14370" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="14376" end="14382" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="14468" end="14474" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="14534" end="14545" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="14547" end="14558" title="Guadalajara, Mexico" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q79923" start="14563" end="14569" title="Puebla" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="14574" end="14583" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q508804" start="14624" end="14647" title="Sacatepequez Department" label="Sacatepequez Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q212773" start="14649" end="14666" title="Antigua Guatemala" label="Antigua Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q795441" start="14668" end="14674" title="Jalapa Department" label="Jalapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555" start="14728" end="14742" title="Guatemala City" label="Guatemala City"/>
<link wikidata="Q123304" start="14802" end="14811" title="Antioquia Department" label="Antioquia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27960" start="14820" end="14831" title="Colombian coffee growing axis" label="Coffee Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="15378" end="15386" title="Medellín" label="Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968015" start="15407" end="15412" title="Paisa region" label="paisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q527675" start="15702" end="15709" title="Bambuco" label="Bambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q35775" start="15870" end="15882" title="Boise, Idaho" label="Boise, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="16030" end="16042" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185955" start="16130" end="16150" title="University of Nevada, Reno" label="University of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q945084" start="16205" end="16217" title="Elko, Nevada" label="Elko, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="16389" end="16395" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="16426" end="16431" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="16527" end="16536" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45321045" start="16559" end="16565" title="Tejano" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="16619" end="16638" title="Battle of the Alamo" label="Battle of the Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="16868" end="16877" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q79918" start="16879" end="16886" title="Durango" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="16888" end="16896" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="16898" end="16908" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="16914" end="16924" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="16957" end="16967" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="16973" end="16984" title="South Texas" label="South Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="16988" end="16998" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="17298" end="17308" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q964198" start="17367" end="17385" title="San Joaquin Valley" label="San Joaquin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="17394" end="17402" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="17404" end="17410" title="Fresno, California" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="17415" end="17426" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q506395" start="17663" end="17680" title="Chino, California" label="Chino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q108053" start="17802" end="17823" title="San Bernardino County, California" label="San Bernardino County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="17997" end="18007" title="Californio" label="Californio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="18141" end="18150" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="18152" end="18162" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="18164" end="18171" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="18173" end="18177" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="18179" end="18187" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="18189" end="18196" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="18198" end="18205" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="18207" end="18213" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="18219" end="18229" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="19176" end="19191" title="French language" label="French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q518116" start="19566" end="19577" title="France national rugby union team" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q389714" start="19597" end="19616" title="Imanol Harinordoquy" label="Imanol Harinordoquy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="20742" end="20749" title="genetic (linguistics)" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="20750" end="20766" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="20853" end="20882" title="Indo-European language family" label="Indo-European language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="20969" end="20976" title="in situ" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735929" start="22206" end="22213" title="baserri" label="baserri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342913" start="22283" end="22298" title="Basque surnames" label="Basque surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143070" start="22344" end="22359" title="habitation name" label="habitation name"/>
<link wikidata="Q21451116" start="22620" end="22630" title="Bengoetxea" label="Bengoetxea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15812510" start="22682" end="22692" title="Goicoechea (disambiguation)" label="Goikoetxea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22734" end="22743" title="Landaburu" label="Landaburu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22786" end="22795" title="Errekondo" label="Errekondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331353" start="22840" end="22848" title="Elizalde (disambiguation)" label="Elizalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q37201374" start="22888" end="22898" title="Mendizabal" label="Mendizabal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22934" end="22940" title="Usetxe" label="Usetxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q351738" start="22980" end="22989" title="Ibarretxe" label="Ibarretxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21489132" start="23035" end="23045" title="Etxeberria" label="Etxeberria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123550" start="23188" end="23194" title="fueros" label="fueros"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="24201" end="24213" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q529197" start="24223" end="24238" title="Lope de Aguirre" label="Lope de Aguirre"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="24243" end="24272" title="Francisco Vásquez de Coronado" label="Francisco Vásquez de Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="24344" end="24358" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q185681" start="24416" end="24427" title="matriarchal" label="matriarchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="24465" end="24476" title="patrilineal" label="patrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q521179" start="25031" end="25045" title="Basque cuisine" label="Basque cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171141" start="25224" end="25247" title="gastronomical society" label="gastronomical societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045380" start="25262" end="25267" title="txoko" label="txoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461355" start="25429" end="25440" title="Sagardotegi" label="Sagardotegi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="25599" end="25602" title="ETA (separatist group)" label="ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="25738" end="25744" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="26152" end="26161" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="26397" end="26411" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q977986" start="26416" end="26432" title="Michel Garicoïts" label="Michel Garicoïts"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="26434" end="26449" title="Ignatius Loyola" label="Ignatius Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="26466" end="26482" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="26498" end="26508" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="26509" end="26519" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444431" start="26520" end="26533" title="Fermín Lasuén" label="Fermín Lasuén"/>
<link wikidata="Q14318" start="26546" end="26553" title="Vitoria-Gasteiz" label="Vitoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="26600" end="26614" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="26646" end="26665" title="California Missions" label="California Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="26696" end="26709" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746075" start="26811" end="26828" title="Joanes Leizarraga" label="Joanes Leizarraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q229286" start="26836" end="26857" title="Jeanne III of Navarre" label="Jeanne III of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="26868" end="26876" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736556" start="26944" end="26952" title="Béarnese dialect" label="Béarnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="26998" end="27018" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry III of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="27143" end="27150" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="27158" end="27164" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="27194" end="27207" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="27225" end="27232" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="27237" end="27259" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="27299" end="27305" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="27321" end="27328" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="27490" end="27493" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="27521" end="27529" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="27533" end="27540" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="27714" end="27728" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="27930" end="27937" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="27991" end="28007" title="Christianization" label="Christianisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="28681" end="28689" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q81801" start="28735" end="28740" title="Álava" label="Álava"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="28749" end="28756" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087837" start="28924" end="28928" title="Mari (goddess)" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087837" start="29050" end="29063" title="Anbotoko Mari" label="Anbotoko Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q458478" start="29203" end="29209" title="Anboto" label="Anboto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29327" end="29332" title="Aloña" label="Aloña"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29337" end="29346" title="Supelegor" label="Supelegor"/>
<link wikidata="Q557374" start="29351" end="29357" title="Gorbea" label="Gorbea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552475" start="29388" end="29394" title="Urraca" label="Urraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339241" start="29933" end="29939" title="Sugaar" label="Sugaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="29946" end="29954" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977863" start="30226" end="30234" title="Akelarre (witchcraft)" label="akelarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q29710" start="30238" end="30243" title="coven" label="coven"/>
<link wikidata="Q458478" start="30278" end="30284" title="Anboto" label="Anboto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750385" start="30372" end="30380" title="Txindoki" label="Txindoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724375" start="30442" end="30450" title="jentilak" label="jentilak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707571" start="30472" end="30478" title="giant (mythology)" label="giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="30515" end="30520" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639561" start="30530" end="30535" title="mairu" label="mairu"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="30599" end="30604" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266278" start="30629" end="30632" title="imp" label="imp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780827" start="30642" end="30650" title="sorginak" label="sorginak"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="30658" end="30663" title="witch" label="witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571442" start="30698" end="30706" title="Basajaun" label="Basajaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071580" start="30734" end="30742" title="Woodwose" label="Woodwose"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="30755" end="30764" title="trickster" label="trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754081" start="30777" end="30793" title="San Martin Txiki" label="San Martin Txiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="30859" end="30868" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="30893" end="30899" title="dolmen" label="dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935728" start="31008" end="31017" title="Stone circles" label="cromlechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707571" start="31100" end="31106" title="Giant (mythology)" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="31205" end="31214" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194367" start="31518" end="31527" title="Olentzero" label="Olentzero"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="31579" end="31590" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31637" end="31650" title="Jentilbaratza" label="Jentilbaratza"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="31791" end="31797" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q690653" start="31848" end="31859" title="Geographica" label="Geographica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="32306" end="32317" title="matrilineal" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="33327" end="33345" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731185" start="33507" end="33514" title="elizate" label="elizate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919175" start="33647" end="33663" title="Juntas Generales" label="Juntas Generales"/>
<link wikidata="Q212845" start="34046" end="34052" title="Basque pelota" label="pilota"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="34142" end="34147" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193361" start="34166" end="34174" title="Jai Alai" label="Jai Alai"/>
<link wikidata="Q542198" start="34343" end="34353" title="estropadak" label="estropadak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34412" end="34420" title="Basque rural sports#Sokatira (tug-of-war)" label="sokatira"/>
<link wikidata="Q627165" start="34448" end="34462" title="Harri-jasotzaileak" label="harri-jasotzea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497700" start="34512" end="34524" title="aizkolaritza" label="aizkolaritza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34541" end="34555" title="Basque rural sports#Trontza (sawing)" label="trontzalaritza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34601" end="34611" title="Basque rural sports#Sega jokoa (scything)" label="sega jokoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q130912" start="34640" end="34646" title="scythe" label="scythe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34656" end="34673" title="Basque rural sports#Giza-abere probak (dragging games)" label="Giza-abere probak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026777" start="34736" end="34746" title="idi probak" label="idi probak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34909" end="34924" title="Basque rural sports#Txinga eramatea (weight carrying)" label="txinga eramatea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35008" end="35022" title="Basque rural sports#Ahari topeka (ram fighting)" label="ahari topaketa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35050" end="35064" title="Basque rural sports#Harri zulaketa (hole drilling)" label="harri zulaketa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35175" end="35197" title="Basque rural sports#Txakur probak (sheepdog trials)" label="Basque sheepdog trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160214" start="35251" end="35259" title="encierro" label="encierro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="35274" end="35282" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="35290" end="35297" title="festival" label="fiestas"/>
<link wikidata="Q829919" start="35304" end="35315" title="Festival of San Fermín" label="Sanfermines"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="35410" end="35417" title="Cattle" label="bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8687" start="35612" end="35627" title="Athletic Bilbao" label="Athletic Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="35629" end="35642" title="Real Sociedad" label="Real Sociedad"/>
<link wikidata="Q223620" start="35644" end="35660" title="Deportivo Alavés" label="Deportivo Alavés"/>
<link wikidata="Q770740" start="35662" end="35670" title="SD Eibar" label="SD Eibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286" start="35697" end="35707" title="CA Osasuna" label="CA Osasuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="35726" end="35733" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134904" start="35972" end="35990" title="Athletic Bilbao signing policy" label="recruitment policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54927" start="36352" end="36366" title="Saski Baskonia" label="Saski Baskonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411943" start="36428" end="36449" title="Euroleague Basketball" label="Euroleague Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q185982" start="36496" end="36506" title="EuroLeague" label="EuroLeague"/>
<link wikidata="Q456092" start="36511" end="36518" title="EuroCup Basketball" label="EuroCup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126104" start="36573" end="36581" title="Liga ACB" label="Liga ACB"/>
<link wikidata="Q54894" start="36586" end="36599" title="Bilbao Basket" label="Bilbao Basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977898" start="36634" end="36654" title="Basque basketball derby" label="longstanding rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q54924" start="36694" end="36709" title="Gipuzkoa Basket" label="Gipuzkoa Basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824570" start="36761" end="36768" title="Liga Española de Baloncesto" label="LEB Oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="36789" end="36800" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q855496" start="36859" end="36877" title="Biarritz Olympique" label="Biarritz Olympique"/>
<link wikidata="Q630112" start="36882" end="36898" title="Aviron Bayonnais" label="Aviron Bayonnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5798" start="36968" end="36974" title="Top 14" label="Top 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="37001" end="37014" title="European Rugby Champions Cup" label="Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q917845" start="37056" end="37070" title="Estadio Anoeta" label="Estadio Anoeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10313" start="37074" end="37087" title="San Sebastián" label="San Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471265" start="37137" end="37150" title="USA Perpignan" label="USA Perpignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181266" start="37553" end="37579" title="Tour of the Basque Country" label="Tour of the Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q105542" start="37632" end="37647" title="Miguel Indurain" label="Miguel Indurain"/>
<link wikidata="Q600671" start="37657" end="37664" title="Villava" label="Villava"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="37742" end="37757" title="Tour de France" label="Tours de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="37831" end="37851" title="autonomous communities of Spain" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38384" end="38392" title="Fuero#Basque and Pyrenean fueros" label="charters"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="38853" end="38874" title="French Basque Country" label="French Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q643589" start="38969" end="38979" title="department (country subdivision)" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q12703" start="38983" end="39003" title="Pyrénées Atlantiques" label="Pyrénées Atlantiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q213763" start="39017" end="39022" title="Béarn" label="Béarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="39319" end="39329" title="natural language" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677074" start="39357" end="39373" title="French Republics (disambiguation)" label="French Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="39394" end="39406" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="39649" end="39675" title="Spain under Franco" label="regime of Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="39790" end="39807" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="39877" end="39892" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151943" start="39906" end="39929" title="Southern Basque Country" label="Southern Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867860" start="40050" end="40073" title="Basque education system" label="Basque education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="40167" end="40190" title="French Basque Country" label="Northern Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432791" start="40479" end="40508" title="Navarrese People&amp;#x27;s Union" label="Navarrese People&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="40674" end="40683" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="40702" end="40715" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="40728" end="40741" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="40921" end="40939" title="Basque nationalism" label="Basque nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="40967" end="40985" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="40995" end="41007" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="41333" end="41340" title="left-wing politics" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253965" start="41414" end="41431" title="Basque Parliament" label="Basque Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="41500" end="41528" title="Spanish Constitution of 1978" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="41702" end="41710" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42631" end="42656" title="History of the Basque people#Revolution and war" label="1812 Spanish Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="43154" end="43170" title="Romance languages" label="Romance-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q201510" start="43596" end="43617" title="Juan Sebastián Elcano" label="Juan Sebastián Elcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="43693" end="43711" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q296652" start="43731" end="43752" title="Sancho III of Navarre" label="Sancho III of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="43758" end="43776" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="43781" end="43795" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="43813" end="43829" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292519" start="43832" end="43872" title="Diego de Gardoqui" label="Don Diego María de Gardoqui y Arriquibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185085" start="43970" end="43987" title="Miguel de Unamuno" label="Miguel de Unamuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q554150" start="44114" end="44142" title="Alberto Hurtado" label="Father Alberto Hurtado, S.J."/>
<link wikidata="Q18396895" start="44214" end="44229" title="Hogar de Cristo" label="Hogar de Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="44549" end="44566" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="44607" end="44624" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821585" start="44662" end="44674" title="Aberri Eguna" label="Aberri Eguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255605" start="44677" end="44685" title="Aquitani" label="Aquitani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44688" end="44707" title="Code talker#Basque code talkers (disputed)" label="Basque code talkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295939" start="44710" end="44727" title="Duchy of Vasconia" label="Duchy of Vasconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974419" start="44730" end="44755" title="Genetic history of Europe" label="Genetic history of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q190992" start="44758" end="44766" title="Iberians" label="Iberians"/>
<link wikidata="Q864486" start="44769" end="44786" title="Late Basquisation" label="Late Basquisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244382" start="44789" end="44804" title="List of Basques" label="List of Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q537890" start="44807" end="44846" title="National and regional identity in Spain" label="National and regional identity in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="44849" end="44863" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246837" start="44866" end="44874" title="Vascones" label="Vascones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051631" start="45101" end="45115" title="Mark Kurlansky" label="Mark Kurlansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q221084" start="45353" end="45369" title="Marija Gimbutas" label="Gimbutas, Marija"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="45415" end="45445" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4661" wikidata="Q187010" url="?curid=4661" title="Blot">
<text>Blot may refer to:

== Surname ==
*Guillaume Blot (born 1985), French racing cyclist
*Harold W. Blot (born 1938), served as United States Deputy Chief of Staff for Aviation
*Jean-François Joseph Blot (1781–1857), French soldier and politician
*Yvan Blot (1948–2018), French conservative political figure, founder and president of the Club de l&#x27;Horloge
*Jean Blot (1923–2019), French writer, translator, and senior civil servant of Russian origin
* (born 1983), French judoka

==Religion==
*Blót, a sacrifice to the gods or other beings in Germanic paganism and modern Germanic paganism
**&quot;Blot&quot; (album), a 2003 album by Einherjer
** &quot;Hefja Blot&quot;, a song by Danheim for his album &quot;Friðr&quot;
** &quot;Blotjarl&quot;, a song by Danheim and Heldom for his album &quot;Skapanir&quot;
** &quot;Vetrnátta Blot&quot;, a song by Danheim and Heldom for his album &quot;Skapanir&quot;

== Other ==
*Blot (biology), method of transferring proteins, DNA, RNA or a protein onto a carrier
*&quot;The Blot&quot;, a 1921 silent film
*Another name of a trick-taking card game Belot
*Blot (Transformers), a character from the Transformers franchise
*Ink blots, as used in the Rorschach test
* &quot;Blot&quot; (1994 film), a 1994 film

==See also==
*Phantom Blot, a character made by the Walt Disney Company
*Saint-Rémy-de-Blot, commune in the Puy-de-Dôme department in Auvergne in central France
*&quot;The Blot on the Shield&quot;, 1915 short film directed by B. Reeves Eason
*Blott (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q187010" start="0" end="4" title="Blot" label="Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q371407" start="35" end="49" title="Guillaume Blot" label="Guillaume Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q19956278" start="86" end="100" title="Harold W. Blot" label="Harold W. Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15973745" start="174" end="199" title="Jean-François Joseph Blot" label="Jean-François Joseph Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573330" start="244" end="253" title="Yvan Blot" label="Yvan Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170801" start="358" end="367" title="Jean Blot" label="Jean Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q180394" start="495" end="499" title="Blót" label="Blót"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928458" start="593" end="617" title="Blot (album)" label="&amp;quot;Blot&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83875287" start="682" end="689" title="Danheim" label="Danheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q83875287" start="757" end="764" title="Danheim" label="Danheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q83875287" start="852" end="859" title="Danheim" label="Danheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q885458" start="920" end="934" title="Blot (biology)" label="Blot (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010048" start="1013" end="1021" title="The Blot" label="The Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433358" start="1090" end="1095" title="Belot" label="Belot"/>
<link wikidata="Q602883" start="1097" end="1116" title="Blot (Transformers)" label="Blot (Transformers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q488532" start="1189" end="1203" title="Rorschach test" label="Rorschach test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758491" start="1206" end="1234" title="Blot (1994 film)" label="&amp;quot;Blot&amp;quot; (1994 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260246" start="1263" end="1275" title="Phantom Blot" label="Phantom Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094750" start="1322" end="1340" title="Saint-Rémy-de-Blot" label="Saint-Rémy-de-Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718707" start="1417" end="1439" title="The Blot on the Shield" label="The Blot on the Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928460" start="1492" end="1514" title="Blott (disambiguation)" label="Blott (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4662" wikidata="Q3707847" url="?curid=4662" title="Bookkeeping">
<text>Bookkeeping is the recording of financial transactions, and is part of the process of accounting in business and other organizations. It involves preparing source documents for all transactions, operations, and other events of a business. Transactions include purchases, sales, receipts and payments by an individual person, organization or corporation. There are several standard methods of bookkeeping, including the single-entry and double-entry bookkeeping systems. While these may be viewed as &quot;real&quot; bookkeeping, any process for recording financial transactions is a bookkeeping process.

The person in an organisation who is employed to perform bookkeeping functions is usually called the bookkeeper (or book-keeper). They usually write the &quot;daybooks&quot; (which contain records of sales, purchases, receipts, and payments), and document each financial transaction, whether cash or credit, into the correct daybook—that is, petty cash book, suppliers ledger, customer ledger, etc.—and the general ledger. Thereafter, an accountant can create financial reports from the information recorded by the bookkeeper. The bookkeeper brings the books to the trial balance stage, from which an accountant may prepare financial reports for the organisation, such as the income statement and balance sheet.

== History ==
The origin of book-keeping is lost in obscurity, but recent research indicates that methods of keeping accounts have existed from the remotest times of human life in cities. Babylonian records written with styli on small slabs of clay have been found dating to 2600 BC. Mesopotamian bookkeepers kept records on clay tablets that may date back as far as 7,000 years. Use of the modern double entry bookkeeping system was described by Luca Pacioli in 1494.

The term &quot;waste book&quot; was used in colonial America, referring to the documenting of daily transactions of receipts and expenditures. Records were made in chronological order, and for temporary use only. Daily records were then transferred to a daybook or account ledger to balance the accounts and to create a permanent journal; then the waste book could be discarded, hence the name.

==Process ==
The primary purpose of bookkeeping is to record the &quot;financial effects&quot; of transactions. An important difference between a manual and an electronic accounting system is the former&#x27;s latency between the recording of a financial transaction and its posting in the relevant account. This delay, which is absent in electronic accounting systems due to nearly instantaneous posting to relevant accounts, is characteristic of manual systems, and gave rise to the primary books of accounts—cash book, purchase book, sales book, etc.—for immediately documenting a financial transaction.

In the normal course of business, a document is produced each time a transaction occurs. Sales and purchases usually have invoices or receipts. Historically, deposit slips were produced when lodgements (deposits) were made to a bank account; and checks (spelled &quot;cheques&quot; in the UK and several other countries) were written to pay money out of the account. Nowadays such transactions are mostly made electronically. Bookkeeping first involves recording the details of all of these &quot;source documents&quot; into multi-column &quot;journals&quot; (also known as &quot;books of first entry&quot; or &quot;daybooks&quot;). For example, all credit sales are recorded in the sales journal; all cash payments are recorded in the cash payments journal. Each column in a journal normally corresponds to an account. In the single entry system, each transaction is recorded only once. Most individuals who balance their check-book each month are using such a system, and most personal-finance software follows this approach.

After a certain period, typically a month, each column in each journal is totalled to give a summary for that period. Using the rules of double-entry, these journal summaries are then transferred to their respective accounts in the ledger, or &quot;account book&quot;. For example, the entries in the Sales Journal are taken and a debit entry is made in each customer&#x27;s account (showing that the customer now owes us money), and a credit entry might be made in the account for &quot;Sale of class 2 widgets&quot; (showing that this activity has generated revenue for us). This process of transferring summaries or individual transactions to the ledger is called &quot;posting&quot;. Once the posting process is complete, accounts kept using the &quot;T&quot; format (debits on the left side of the &quot;T&quot; and credits on the right side) undergo &quot;balancing&quot;, which is simply a process to arrive at the balance of the account.

As a partial check that the posting process was done correctly, a working document called an &quot;unadjusted trial balance&quot; is created. In its simplest form, this is a three-column list. Column One contains the names of those accounts in the ledger which have a non-zero balance. If an account has a &quot;debit&quot; balance, the balance amount is copied into Column Two (the &quot;debit column&quot;); if an account has a &quot;credit&quot; balance, the amount is copied into Column Three (the &quot;credit column&quot;). The debit column is then totalled, and then the credit column is totalled. The two totals must agree—which is not by chance—because under the double-entry rules, whenever there is a posting, the debits of the posting equal the credits of the posting. If the two totals do not agree, an error has been made, either in the journals or during the posting process. The error must be located and rectified, and the totals of the debit column and the credit column recalculated to check for agreement before any further processing can take place.

Once the accounts balance, the accountant makes a number of adjustments and changes the balance amounts of some of the accounts. These adjustments must still obey the double-entry rule: for example, the &quot;inventory&quot; account and asset account might be changed to bring them into line with the actual numbers counted during a stocktake. At the same time, the &quot;expense&quot; account associated with use of inventory is adjusted by an equal and opposite amount. Other adjustments such as posting depreciation and prepayments are also done at this time. This results in a listing called the &quot;adjusted trial balance&quot;. It is the accounts in this list, and their corresponding debit or credit balances, that are used to prepare the financial statements.

Finally financial statements are drawn from the trial balance, which may include:
* the income statement, also known as the &quot;statement of financial results&quot;, &quot;profit and loss account&quot;, or &quot;P&amp;L&quot;
* the balance sheet, also known as the &quot;statement of financial position&quot;
* the cash flow statement
* the statement of changes in equity, also known as the &quot;statement of total recognised gains and losses&quot;

===Single-entry system===

The primary bookkeeping record in single-entry bookkeeping is the &quot;cash book&quot;, which is similar to a checking account register (in UK: cheque account, current account), except all entries are allocated among several categories of income and expense accounts. Separate account records are maintained for petty cash, accounts payable and accounts receivable, and other relevant transactions such as inventory and travel expenses. To save time and avoid the errors of manual calculations, single-entry bookkeeping can be done today with do-it-yourself bookkeeping software.

===Double-entry system===

A &quot;double-entry bookkeeping system&quot; is a set of rules for recording financial information in a financial accounting system in which every transaction or event changes at least two different ledger accounts.

==Daybooks==
A &quot;daybook&quot; is a descriptive and chronological (diary-like) record of day-to-day financial transactions; it is also called a &quot;book of original entry&quot;. The daybook&#x27;s details must be transcribed formally into journals to enable posting to ledgers. Daybooks include:

*Sales daybook, for recording sales invoices.
*Sales credits daybook, for recording sales credit notes.
*Purchases daybook, for recording purchase invoices.
*Purchases debits daybook, for recording purchase debit notes.
*Cash daybook, usually known as the cash book, for recording all monies received and all monies paid out. It may be split into two daybooks: a receipts daybook documenting every money-amount received, and a payments daybook recording every payment made.
*General Journal daybook, for recording journal entries.

==Petty cash book==
A &quot;petty cash&quot; book is a record of small-value purchases before they are later transferred to the ledger and final accounts; it is maintained by a petty or junior cashier. This type of cash book usually uses the imprest system: a certain amount of money is provided to the petty cashier by the senior cashier. This money is to cater for minor expenditures (hospitality, minor stationery, casual postage, and so on) and is reimbursed periodically on satisfactory explanation of how it was spent.
The balance of petty cash book is Asset.

==Journals==
&quot;Journals&quot; are recorded in the general journal daybook. A journal is a formal and chronological record of financial transactions before their values are accounted for in the general ledger as debits and credits. A company can maintain one journal for all transactions, or keep several journals based on similar activity (e.g., sales, cash receipts, revenue, etc.), making transactions easier to summarize and reference later. For every debit journal entry recorded, there must be an equivalent credit journal entry to maintain a balanced accounting equation.

==Ledgers==
A &quot;ledger&quot; is a record of accounts. The ledger is a permanent summary of all amounts entered in supporting Journals which list individual transactions by date. These accounts are recorded separately, showing their beginning/ending balance. A journal lists financial transactions in chronological order, without showing their balance but showing how much is going to be entered in each account. A ledger takes each financial transaction from the journal and records it into the corresponding accounts. The ledger also determines the balance of every account, which is transferred into the balance sheet or the income statement. There are three different kinds of ledgers that deal with book-keeping:
*Sales ledger, which deals mostly with the accounts receivable account. This ledger consists of the records of the financial transactions made by customers to the business.
*Purchase ledger is the record of the company&#x27;s purchasing transactions; it goes hand in hand with the Accounts Payable account.
*General ledger, representing the original five, main accounts: assets, liabilities, equity, income, and expenses.

==Abbreviations used in bookkeeping==
==Chart of accounts==
A chart of accounts is a list of the accounts codes that can be identified with numeric, alphabetical, or alphanumeric codes allowing the account to be located in the general ledger. The equity section of the chart of accounts is based on the fact that the legal structure of the entity is of a particular legal type. Possibilities include &quot;sole trader&quot;, &quot;partnership&quot;, &quot;trust&quot;, and &quot;company&quot;.

==Computerized bookkeeping==
Computerized bookkeeping removes many of the paper &quot;books&quot; that are used to record the financial transactions of a business entity; instead, relational databases are used today, but typically, these still enforce the norms of bookkeeping including the single-entry and double-entry bookkeeping systems. Certified Public Accountants (CPAs) supervise the internal controls for computerized bookkeeping systems, which serve to minimize errors in documenting the numerous activities a business entity may initiate or complete over an accounting period.

==See also==
* Accounting
* Comparison of accounting software
* POS system: records sales and updates stock levels
* Bookkeeping Associations

==References==
==External links==
* Guide to the Account Book from Italy </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="0" end="11" title="Bookkeeping" label="Bookkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="86" end="96" title="accounting" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="100" end="108" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363492" start="419" end="431" title="single-entry bookkeeping system" label="single-entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192803" start="436" end="448" title="double-entry bookkeeping system" label="double-entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="706" end="716" title="Bookkeeping" label="bookkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="764" end="771" title="#Daybooks" label="daybook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977520" start="1012" end="1026" title="general ledger" label="general ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q192907" start="1065" end="1082" title="financial reports" label="financial reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192485" start="1171" end="1184" title="trial balance" label="trial balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="1281" end="1297" title="income statement" label="income statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q46834" start="1302" end="1315" title="balance sheet" label="balance sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647209" start="1538" end="1543" title="Stylus" label="styli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1602" end="1614" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q87620" start="1765" end="1777" title="Luca Pacioli" label="Luca Pacioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363145" start="1803" end="1813" title="waste book" label="waste book"/>
<link wikidata="Q190581" start="2914" end="2921" title="invoice" label="invoice"/>
<link wikidata="Q330190" start="2926" end="2933" title="receipt" label="receipt"/>
<link wikidata="Q676459" start="3020" end="3032" title="bank account" label="bank account"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565148" start="3289" end="3304" title="source document" label="source document"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363492" start="3619" end="3638" title="single-entry accounting system" label="single entry system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935376" start="3884" end="3891" title="Journal entry" label="journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732056" start="4053" end="4059" title="ledger" label="ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732056" start="5016" end="5022" title="ledger" label="ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q815410" start="6049" end="6058" title="inventory" label="inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643006" start="6173" end="6182" title="Stock-taking" label="stocktake"/>
<link wikidata="Q114403" start="6346" end="6358" title="depreciation" label="depreciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192907" start="6619" end="6638" title="financial statement" label="financial statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="6699" end="6715" title="income statement" label="income statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q46834" start="6845" end="6858" title="balance sheet" label="balance sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q460184" start="6928" end="6947" title="cash flow statement" label="cash flow statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186451" start="6954" end="6984" title="statement of changes in equity" label="statement of changes in equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q250058" start="7416" end="7432" title="accounts payable" label="accounts payable"/>
<link wikidata="Q328554" start="7437" end="7456" title="accounts receivable" label="accounts receivable"/>
<link wikidata="Q815410" start="7498" end="7507" title="inventory" label="inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q949180" start="7805" end="7825" title="financial accounting" label="financial accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166072" start="8022" end="8044" title="financial transactions" label="financial transactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523818" start="8781" end="8791" title="petty cash" label="petty cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007645" start="8995" end="9009" title="imprest system" label="imprest system"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="9312" end="9317" title="Asset" label="Asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935376" start="9339" end="9347" title="Journal entry" label="Journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166072" start="9449" end="9471" title="financial transactions" label="financial transactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120961" start="9535" end="9553" title="debits and credits" label="debits and credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120961" start="9779" end="9784" title="debits and credits" label="debit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120961" start="9837" end="9843" title="debits and credits" label="credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732056" start="9923" end="9929" title="ledger" label="ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q508295" start="9951" end="9959" title="Account (accountancy)" label="accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365641" start="10156" end="10163" title="Balance (accounting)" label="balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166072" start="10181" end="10203" title="financial transactions" label="financial transactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q46834" start="10513" end="10526" title="balance sheet" label="balance sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="10534" end="10550" title="income statement" label="income statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="10995" end="11000" title="asset" label="asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q96776939" start="11003" end="11014" title="Liability (financial accounting)" label="liabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="11016" end="11022" title="Equity (finance)" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="11024" end="11030" title="income" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516686" start="11036" end="11043" title="expense" label="expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406649" start="11109" end="11126" title="chart of accounts" label="chart of accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q508295" start="11144" end="11152" title="Account (accountancy)" label="accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363492" start="11833" end="11845" title="single-entry bookkeeping system" label="single-entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192803" start="11850" end="11862" title="double-entry bookkeeping system" label="double-entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056337" start="11884" end="11911" title="Certified Public Accountant" label="Certified Public Accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="12146" end="12156" title="Accounting" label="Accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155815" start="12159" end="12192" title="Comparison of accounting software" label="Comparison of accounting software"/>
<link wikidata="Q386147" start="12195" end="12205" title="POS system" label="POS system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943235" start="12248" end="12272" title="Bookkeeping_association" label="Bookkeeping Associations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4664" wikidata="Q214728" url="?curid=4664" title="Bézier curve">
<text>A Bézier curve ( , ) is a parametric curve used in computer graphics and related fields. A set of discrete &quot;control points&quot; defines a smooth, continuous curve by means of a formula. Usually the curve is intended to approximate a real-world shape that otherwise has no mathematical representation or whose representation is unknown or too complicated. The Bézier curve is named after French engineer Pierre Bézier (1910–1999), who used it in the 1960s for designing curves for the bodywork of Renault cars. Other uses include the design of computer fonts and animation. Bézier curves can be combined to form a Bézier spline, or generalized to higher dimensions to form Bézier surfaces. The Bézier triangle is a special case of the latter.

In vector graphics, Bézier curves are used to model smooth curves that can be scaled indefinitely. &quot;Paths&quot;, as they are commonly referred to in image manipulation programs, are combinations of linked Bézier curves. Paths are not bound by the limits of rasterized images and are intuitive to modify.

Bézier curves are also used in the time domain, particularly in animation, user interface design and smoothing cursor trajectory in eye gaze controlled interfaces. For example, a Bézier curve can be used to specify the velocity over time of an object such as an icon moving from A to B, rather than simply moving at a fixed number of pixels per step. When animators or interface designers talk about the &quot;physics&quot; or &quot;feel&quot; of an operation, they may be referring to the particular Bézier curve used to control the velocity over time of the move in question.

This also applies to robotics where the motion of a welding arm, for example, should be smooth to avoid unnecessary wear.

==Invention==
The mathematical basis for Bézier curves—the Bernstein polynomials—was established in 1912, but the polynomials were not applied to graphics until some 50 years later when mathematician Paul de Casteljau in 1959 developed de Casteljau&#x27;s algorithm, a numerically stable method for evaluating the curves, and became the first to apply them to computer-aided design at French automaker Citroën. De Casteljau&#x27;s method was patented in France but not published until the 1980s while the Bézier polynomials were widely publicised in the 1960s by the French engineer Pierre Bézier, who discovered them independently and used them to design automobile bodies at Renault.

==Specific cases==
A Bézier curve is defined by a set of &quot;control points&quot; P0 through P&quot;n&quot;, where &quot;n&quot; is called the order of the curve (&quot;n&quot; = 1 for linear, 2 for quadratic, 3 for cubic, etc.). The first and last control points are always the endpoints of the curve; however, the intermediate control points generally do not lie on the curve. The sums in the following sections are to be understood as affine combinations – that is, the coefficients sum to 1.

===Linear Bézier curves===
Given distinct points P0 and P1, a linear Bézier curve is simply a line between those two points. The curve is given by

:formula_1

This is the simplest and is equivalent to linear interpolation. The quantity formula_2 represents the displacement vector from the start point to the end point.

===Quadratic Bézier curves===

A quadratic Bézier curve is the path traced by the function B(&quot;t&quot;), given points P0, P1, and P2,

: formula_3,

which can be interpreted as the linear interpolant of corresponding points on the linear Bézier curves from P0 to P1 and from P1 to P2 respectively. Rearranging the preceding equation yields:

: formula_4

This can be written in a way that highlights the symmetry with respect to P1:

: formula_5

Which immediately gives the derivative of the Bézier curve with respect to &quot;t&quot;:

: formula_6

from which it can be concluded that the tangents to the curve at P0 and P2 intersect at P1. As &quot;t&quot; increases from 0 to 1, the curve departs from P0 in the direction of P1, then bends to arrive at P2 from the direction of P1.

The second derivative of the Bézier curve with respect to &quot;t&quot; is

: formula_7

===Cubic Bézier curves===
Four points P0, P1, P2 and P3 in the plane or in higher-dimensional space define a cubic Bézier curve.
The curve starts at P0 going toward P1 and arrives at P3 coming from the direction of P2. Usually, it will not pass through P1 or P2; these points are only there to provide directional information. The distance between P1 and P2 determines &quot;how far&quot; and &quot;how fast&quot; the curve moves towards P1 before turning towards P2.

Writing BP&quot;i&quot;,P&quot;j&quot;,P&quot;k&quot;(&quot;t&quot;) for the quadratic Bézier curve defined by points P&quot;i&quot;, P&quot;j&quot;, and P&quot;k&quot;, the cubic Bézier curve can be defined as an affine combination of two quadratic Bézier curves:

:formula_8

The explicit form of the curve is:

:formula_9

For some choices of P1 and P2 the curve may intersect itself, or contain a cusp.

Any series of 4 distinct points can be converted to a cubic Bézier curve that goes through all 4 points in order.
Given the starting and ending point of some cubic Bézier curve, and the points along the curve corresponding to &quot;t&quot; = 1/3 and &quot;t&quot; = 2/3, the control points for the original Bézier curve can be recovered.

The derivative of the cubic Bézier curve with respect to &quot;t&quot; is
: formula_10

The second derivative of the Bézier curve with respect to &quot;t&quot; is
: formula_11

==General definition==
Bézier curves can be defined for any degree &quot;n&quot;.

===Recursive definition===
A recursive definition for the Bézier curve of degree &quot;n&quot; expresses it as a point-to-point linear combination (linear interpolation) of a pair of corresponding points in two Bézier curves of degree &quot;n&quot; − 1.

Let formula_12 denote the Bézier curve determined by any selection of points P0, P1, ..., P&quot;k&quot;. Then to start,

:formula_13

:formula_14

This recursion is elucidated in the animations below.

===Explicit definition===
The formula can be expressed explicitly as follows (where t0 and (1-t)0 are extended continuously to be 1 throughout [0,1]):

:formula_15

where formula_16 are the binomial coefficients.

For example, when &quot;n&quot; = 5:

:formula_17

===Terminology===
Some terminology is associated with these parametric curves. We have

:formula_18

where the polynomials

:formula_19

are known as Bernstein basis polynomials of degree &quot;n&quot;.

&quot;t&quot;0 = 1, (1 − &quot;t&quot;)0 = 1, and the binomial coefficient, formula_16, is:

:formula_21

The points P&quot;i&quot; are called &quot;control points&quot; for the Bézier curve. The polygon formed by connecting the Bézier points with lines, starting with P0 and finishing with P&quot;n&quot;, is called the &quot;Bézier polygon&quot; (or &quot;control polygon&quot;). The convex hull of the Bézier polygon contains the Bézier curve.

===Polynomial form===
Sometimes it is desirable to express the Bézier curve as a polynomial instead of a sum of less straightforward Bernstein polynomials. Application of the binomial theorem to the definition of the curve followed by some rearrangement will yield

:formula_22
where
:formula_23

This could be practical if formula_24 can be computed prior to many evaluations of formula_25; however one should use caution as high order curves may lack numeric stability (de Casteljau&#x27;s algorithm should be used if this occurs). Note that the empty product is 1.

===Properties===

* The curve begins at formula_26 and ends at formula_27; this is the so-called &quot;endpoint interpolation&quot; property.
* The curve is a line if and only if all the control points are collinear.
* The start and end of the curve is tangent to the first and last section of the Bézier polygon, respectively.
* A curve can be split at any point into two subcurves, or into arbitrarily many subcurves, each of which is also a Bézier curve.
* Some curves that seem simple, such as the circle, cannot be described exactly by a Bézier or piecewise Bézier curve; though a four-piece cubic Bézier curve can approximate a circle (see composite Bézier curve), with a maximum radial error of less than one part in a thousand, when each inner control point (or offline point) is the distance formula_28 horizontally or vertically from an outer control point on a unit circle. More generally, an &quot;n&quot;-piece cubic Bézier curve can approximate a circle, when each inner control point is the distance formula_29 from an outer control point on a unit circle, where formula_30 (i.e. formula_31), and formula_32.
* Every quadratic Bézier curve is also a cubic Bézier curve, and more generally, every degree &quot;n&quot; Bézier curve is also a degree &quot;m&quot; curve for any &quot;m&quot; &gt; &quot;n&quot;. In detail, a degree &quot;n&quot; curve with control points formula_33 is equivalent (including the parametrization) to the degree &quot;n&quot; + 1 curve with control points formula_34, where formula_35, formula_36 and define formula_37, formula_38.
* Bézier curves have the variation diminishing property. What this means in intuitive terms is that a Bézier curve does not &quot;undulate&quot; more than the polygon of its control points, and may actually &quot;undulate&quot; less than that.
* There is no local control in degree &quot;n&quot; Bézier curves—meaning that any change to a control point requires recalculation of and thus affects the aspect of the entire curve, &quot;although the further that one is from the control point that was changed, the smaller is the change in the curve&quot;.
* A Bézier curve of order higher than two may intersect itself or have a cusp for certain choices of the control points.

===Second-order curve is a parabolic segment===
A quadratic Bézier curve is also a segment of a parabola. As a parabola is a conic section, some sources refer to quadratic Béziers as &quot;conic arcs&quot;. With reference to the figure on the right, the important features of the parabola can be derived as follows:

# Tangents to the parabola at the endpoints of the curve (A and B) intersect at its control point (C).
# If D is the midpoint of AB, the tangent to the curve which is perpendicular to CD (dashed cyan line) defines its vertex (V). Its axis of symmetry (dash-dot cyan) passes through V and is perpendicular to the tangent.
# E is either point on the curve with a tangent at 45° to CD (dashed green). If G is the intersection of this tangent and the axis, the line passing through G and perpendicular to CD is the directrix (solid green).
# The focus (F) is at the intersection of the axis and a line passing through E and perpendicular to CD (dotted yellow). The latus rectum is the line segment within the curve (solid yellow).

===Derivative===
The derivative for a curve of order &quot;n&quot; is

:formula_39

==Constructing Bézier curves==
===Linear curves===
Let &quot;t&quot; denote the fraction of progress (from 0 to 1) the point B(&quot;t&quot;) has made along its traversal from P0 to P1. For example, when &quot;t&quot;=0.25, B(&quot;t&quot;) is one quarter of the way from point P0 to P1. As &quot;t&quot; varies from 0 to 1, B(&quot;t&quot;) draws a line from P0 to P1.
===Quadratic curves===
For quadratic Bézier curves one can construct intermediate points Q0 and Q1 such that as &quot;t&quot; varies from 0 to 1:
* Point Q0(&quot;t&quot;) varies from P0 to P1 and describes a linear Bézier curve.
* Point Q1(&quot;t&quot;) varies from P1 to P2 and describes a linear Bézier curve.
* Point B(&quot;t&quot;) is interpolated linearly between Q0(&quot;t&quot;) to Q1(&quot;t&quot;) and describes a quadratic Bézier curve.

===Higher-order curves===
For higher-order curves one needs correspondingly more intermediate points. For cubic curves one can construct intermediate points Q0, Q1, and Q2 that describe linear Bézier curves, and points R0 and R1 that describe quadratic Bézier curves:

For fourth-order curves one can construct intermediate points Q0, Q1, Q2 and Q3 that describe linear Bézier curves, points R0, R1 and R2 that describe quadratic Bézier curves, and points S0 and S1 that describe cubic Bézier curves:

For fifth-order curves, one can construct similar intermediate points.
These representations rest on the process used in De Casteljau&#x27;s algorithm to calculate Bézier curves.

===Offsets (or stroking) of Bézier curves===
The curve at a fixed offset from a given Bézier curve, called an offset or parallel curve in mathematics (lying &quot;parallel&quot; to the original curve, like the offset between rails in a railroad track), cannot be exactly formed by a Bézier curve (except in some trivial cases). In general, the two-sided offset curve of a cubic Bézier is a 10th-order algebraic curve and more generally for a Bézier of degree &quot;n&quot; the two-sided offset curve is an algebraic curve of degree 4&quot;n&quot; − 2. However, there are heuristic methods that usually give an adequate approximation for practical purposes.

In the field of vector graphics, painting two symmetrically distanced offset curves is called &quot;stroking&quot; (the Bézier curve or in general a path of several Bézier segments). The conversion from offset curves to filled Bézier contours is of practical importance in converting fonts defined in Metafont, which require stroking of Bézier curves, to the more widely used PostScript type 1 fonts, which only require (for efficiency purposes) the mathematically simpler operation of filling a contour defined by (non-self-intersecting) Bézier curves.

==Degree elevation==
A Bézier curve of degree &quot;n&quot; can be converted into a Bézier curve of degree &quot;n&quot; + 1 &quot;with the same shape&quot;. This is useful if software supports Bézier curves only of specific degree. For example, systems that can only work with cubic Bézier curves can implicitly work with quadratic curves by using their equivalent cubic representation.

To do degree elevation, we use the equality formula_40 Each component formula_41 is multiplied by (1 − &quot;t&quot;) and &quot;t&quot;, thus increasing a degree by one, without changing the value. Here is the example of increasing degree from 2 to 3.

:formula_42

In other words, the original start and end points are unchanged. The new control points are formula_43 and formula_44.

For arbitrary &quot;n&quot; we use equalities

:formula_45

Therefore:

:formula_46

introducing arbitrary formula_47 and formula_48.

Therefore, new control points are

: formula_49

===Repeated degree elevation===
The concept of degree elevation can be repeated on a control polygon R to get a sequence of control polygons R, R1, R2, and so on. After &quot;r&quot; degree elevations, the polygon R&quot;r&quot; has the vertices P0,&quot;r&quot;, P1,&quot;r&quot;, P2,&quot;r&quot;, ..., P&quot;n&quot;+&quot;r&quot;,&quot;r&quot; given by 

:formula_50

It can also be shown that for the underlying Bézier curve &quot;B&quot;,

:formula_51

===Degree reduction===
Degree reduction can only be done exactly when the curve in question is originally elevated from a lower degree. A number of approximation algorithms have been proposed and used in practice.

==Rational Bézier curves==

The rational Bézier curve adds adjustable weights to provide closer approximations to arbitrary shapes. The numerator is a weighted Bernstein-form Bézier curve and the denominator is a weighted sum of Bernstein polynomials. Rational Bézier curves can, among other uses, be used to represent segments of conic sections exactly, including circular arcs.

Given &quot;n&quot; + 1 control points P0, ..., P&quot;n&quot;, the rational Bézier curve can be described by
:formula_52
or simply
:formula_53
The expression can be extended by using number systems besides reals for the weights. In the complex plane the points {1}, {-1}, and {1} with weights {formula_54}, {1}, and {formula_55} generate a full circle with radius one. For curves with points and weights on a circle, the weights can be scaled without changing the curve&#x27;s shape. Scaling the central weight of the above curve by 1.35508 gives a more uniform parameterization.

==Applications==
===Computer graphics===

Bézier curves are widely used in computer graphics to model smooth curves. As the curve is completely contained in the convex hull of its control points, the points can be graphically displayed and used to manipulate the curve intuitively. Affine transformations such as translation and rotation can be applied on the curve by applying the respective transform on the control points of the curve.

Quadratic and cubic Bézier curves are most common. Higher degree curves are more computationally expensive to evaluate. When more complex shapes are needed, low order Bézier curves are patched together, producing a composite Bézier curve. A composite Bézier curve is commonly referred to as a &quot;path&quot; in vector graphics languages (like PostScript), vector graphics standards (like SVG) and vector graphics programs (like Artline, Timeworks Publisher, Adobe Illustrator, CorelDraw, Inkscape, and Allegro). In order to join Bézier curves into a composite Bézier curve without kinks, a property called &quot;G1 continuity&quot; suffices to force the control point at which two constituent Bézier curves meet to lie on the line defined by the two control points on either side.
The simplest method for scan converting (rasterizing) a Bézier curve is to evaluate it at many closely spaced points and scan convert the approximating sequence of line segments. However, this does not guarantee that the rasterized output looks sufficiently smooth, because the points may be spaced too far apart. Conversely it may generate too many points in areas where the curve is close to linear. A common adaptive method is recursive subdivision, in which a curve&#x27;s control points are checked to see if the curve approximates a line to within a small tolerance. If not, the curve is subdivided parametrically into two segments, 0 ≤ &quot;t&quot; ≤ 0.5 and 0.5 ≤ &quot;t&quot; ≤ 1, and the same procedure is applied recursively to each half. There are also forward differencing methods, but great care must be taken to analyse error propagation.

Analytical methods where a Bézier is intersected with each scan line involve finding roots of cubic polynomials (for cubic Béziers) and dealing with multiple roots, so they are not often used in practice.

The rasterisation algorithm used in Metafont is based on discretising the curve, so that it is approximated by a sequence of &quot;rook moves&quot; that are purely vertical or purely horizontal, along the pixel boundaries. To that end, the plane is first split into eight 45° sectors (by the coordinate axes and the two lines formula_56), then the curve is decomposed into smaller segments such that the &quot;direction&quot; of a curve segment stays within one sector; since the curve velocity is a second degree polynomial, finding the formula_57 values where it is parallel to one of these lines can be done by solving quadratic equations. Within each segment, either horizontal or vertical movement dominates, and the total number of steps in either direction can be read off from the endpoint coordinates; in for example the 0–45° sector horizontal movement to the right dominates, so it only remains to decide between which steps to the right the curve should make a step up.

There is also a modified curve form of Bresenham&#x27;s line drawing algorithm by Zingl that performs this rasterization by subdividing the curve into rational pieces and calculating the error at each pixel location such that it either travels at a 45° angle or straight depending on compounding error as it iterates through the curve. This reduces the next step calculation to a series of integer additions and subtractions.

===Animation===
In animation applications, such as Adobe Flash and Synfig, Bézier curves are used to outline, for example, movement. Users outline the wanted path in Bézier curves, and the application creates the needed frames for the object to move along the path.

In 3D animation, Bézier curves are often used to define 3D paths as well as 2D curves for keyframe interpolation. Bézier curves are now very frequently used to control the animation easing in CSS, JavaScript, JavaFx and Flutter SDK.

===Fonts===
TrueType fonts use composite Bézier curves composed of quadratic Bézier curves. Other languages and imaging tools (such as PostScript, Asymptote, Metafont, and SVG) use composite Béziers composed of cubic Bézier curves for drawing curved shapes. OpenType fonts can use either kind of curve, depending on which font technology underlies the OpenType wrapper.

Font engines, like FreeType, draw the font&#x27;s curves (and lines) on a pixellated surface using a process known as font rasterization. Typically font engines and vector graphics engines render Bézier curves by splitting them recursively up to the point where the curve is flat enough to be drawn as a series of linear or circular segments. The exact splitting algorithm is implementation dependent, only the flatness criteria must be respected to reach the necessary precision and to avoid non-monotonic local changes of curvature. The &quot;smooth curve&quot; feature of charts in Microsoft Excel also uses this algorithm.

Because arcs of circles and ellipses cannot be exactly represented by Bézier curves, they are first approximated by Bézier curves, which are in turn approximated by arcs of circles. This is inefficient as there exists also approximations of all Bézier curves using arcs of circles or ellipses, which can be rendered incrementally with arbitrary precision. Another approach, used by modern hardware graphics adapters with accelerated geometry, can convert exactly all Bézier and conic curves (or surfaces) into NURBS, that can be rendered incrementally without first splitting the curve recursively to reach the necessary flatness condition. This approach also preserves the curve definition under all linear or perspective 2D and 3D transforms and projections.

===Robotics===
Because the control polygon allows to tell whether or not the path collides with any obstacles, Bézier curves are used in producing trajectories of the end effectors. Furthermore, joint space trajectories can be accurately differentiated using Bézier curves. Consequently, the derivatives of joint space trajectories are used in the calculation of the dynamics and control effort (torque profiles) of the robotic manipulator.

==See also==
* Bézier surface
* B-spline
* GEM/4 and GEM/5
* Hermite curve
* NURBS
* String art – Bézier curves are also formed by many common forms of string art, where strings are looped across a frame of nails.
* Variation diminishing property of Bézier curves

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* Excellent discussion of implementation details; available for free as part of the TeX distribution.
* 


==Further reading==
* A Primer on Bézier Curves an open source online book explaining Bézier curves and associated graphics algorithms, with interactive graphics
* Cubic Bezier Curves – Under the Hood (video) video showing how computers render a cubic Bézier curve, by Peter Nowell
* From Bézier to Bernstein Feature Column from American Mathematical Society
* 
* This book is out of print and freely available from the author.
* 
* (60 pages)
* 
* Hovey, Chad (2022). Formulation and Python Implementation of Bézier and B-Spline Geometry. SAND2022-7702C. (153 pages)

==External links==
; Computer code
*TinySpline: Open source C-library for NURBS, B-splines and Bézier curves with bindings for various languages
* C++ library to generate Bézier functions at compile time
*Simple Bézier curve implementation via recursive method in Python</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="2" end="14" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q35889" start="26" end="42" title="parametric equation" label="parametric curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="51" end="68" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="393" end="399" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q372584" start="409" end="422" title="Pierre Bézier" label="Pierre Bézier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="502" end="509" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="558" end="562" title="font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005075" start="619" end="632" title="Composite Bézier curve" label="Bézier spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q926066" start="678" end="692" title="Bézier surface" label="Bézier surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q612409" start="699" end="714" title="Bézier triangle" label="Bézier triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="752" end="767" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="1011" end="1021" title="raster graphics" label="rasterized"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="1123" end="1132" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="1134" end="1148" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="1428" end="1437" title="Graphical user interface" label="interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q826841" start="1820" end="1840" title="Bernstein polynomial" label="Bernstein polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="1875" end="1885" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396450" start="1961" end="1978" title="Paul de Casteljau" label="Paul de Casteljau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179419" start="1997" end="2026" title="de Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="de Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430640" start="2030" end="2048" title="numerical stability" label="numerically stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746" start="2163" end="2170" title="Citroën" label="Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2328" end="2334" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q372584" start="2344" end="2357" title="Pierre Bézier" label="Pierre Bézier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="2417" end="2427" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="2438" end="2445" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="2498" end="2501" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q16945110" start="2511" end="2525" title="Control point (mathematics)" label="control points"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2888" end="2907" title="Affine space#Affine combinations and barycenter" label="affine combinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="3041" end="3045" title="straight line" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266329" start="3149" end="3169" title="linear interpolation" label="linear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190291" start="3209" end="3228" title="displacement vector" label="displacement vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="3351" end="3359" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266329" start="3454" end="3472" title="Linear interpolation" label="linear interpolant"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="3748" end="3758" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="3864" end="3871" title="tangent" label="tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q655275" start="5019" end="5023" title="Cusp (singularity)" label="cusp"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628" start="5753" end="5771" title="linear combination" label="linear combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266329" start="5773" end="5793" title="linear interpolation" label="linear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6064" end="6080" title="#Constructing Bézier curves" label="animations below"/>
<link wikidata="Q209875" start="6273" end="6293" title="binomial coefficient" label="binomial coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q826841" start="6498" end="6525" title="Bernstein polynomial" label="Bernstein basis polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q209875" start="6606" end="6626" title="binomial coefficient" label="binomial coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="6748" end="6755" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="6800" end="6805" title="line (mathematics)" label="lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138624" start="6938" end="6949" title="convex hull" label="convex hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="7081" end="7091" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q826841" start="7133" end="7153" title="Bernstein polynomial" label="Bernstein polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="7175" end="7191" title="binomial theorem" label="binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430640" start="7453" end="7470" title="numeric stability" label="numeric stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179419" start="7472" end="7501" title="de Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="de Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812172" start="7548" end="7561" title="empty product" label="empty product"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="7733" end="7747" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419761" start="7775" end="7784" title="collinear" label="collinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="7822" end="7829" title="tangent" label="tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="8071" end="8077" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037833" start="8122" end="8131" title="piecewise" label="piecewise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005075" start="8215" end="8237" title="composite Bézier curve" label="composite Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915786" start="9169" end="9199" title="variation diminishing property" label="variation diminishing property"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9402" end="9415" title="local control" label="local control"/>
<link wikidata="Q655275" start="9771" end="9775" title="cusp (singularity)" label="cusp"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="9916" end="9924" title="parabola" label="parabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="9945" end="9958" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="10304" end="10317" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179419" start="12394" end="12423" title="De Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="De Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975075" start="12563" end="12587" title="parallel curve" label="offset or parallel curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="12689" end="12703" title="railroad track" label="railroad track"/>
<link wikidata="Q266237" start="12854" end="12869" title="algebraic curve" label="algebraic curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="13024" end="13033" title="heuristic" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="13127" end="13142" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="13395" end="13399" title="font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457000" start="13412" end="13420" title="Metafont" label="Metafont"/>
<link wikidata="Q785247" start="13487" end="13509" title="PostScript fonts" label="PostScript type 1 font"/>
<link wikidata="Q826841" start="15528" end="15548" title="Bernstein polynomial" label="Bernstein polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="15630" end="15643" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="15887" end="15892" title="real number" label="reals"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="15917" end="15930" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138624" start="16423" end="16434" title="convex hull" label="convex hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q16945110" start="16442" end="16456" title="Control point (mathematics)" label="control points"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="16544" end="16565" title="Affine transformation" label="Affine transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211459" start="16575" end="16586" title="translation (geometry)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="16591" end="16599" title="rotation" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50695" start="16702" end="16711" title="Quadratic function" label="Quadratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16667694" start="16716" end="16721" title="Cubic function" label="cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q333464" start="16783" end="16808" title="computationally expensive" label="computationally expensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005075" start="16917" end="16939" title="composite Bézier curve" label="composite Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="17015" end="17030" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="17047" end="17057" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078" start="17092" end="17095" title="Scalable vector graphics" label="SVG"/>
<link wikidata="Q849246" start="17132" end="17139" title="Artline (program)" label="Artline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806624" start="17141" end="17160" title="Timeworks Publisher" label="Timeworks Publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="17162" end="17179" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Adobe Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q142371" start="17181" end="17190" title="CorelDraw" label="CorelDraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041" start="17192" end="17200" title="Inkscape" label="Inkscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503415" start="17206" end="17213" title="Allegro (software library)" label="Allegro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17310" end="17335" title="Smoothness#Geometric continuity" label="&amp;quot;G1 continuity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524612" start="17526" end="17537" title="Rasterisation" label="rasterizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="18427" end="18432" title="zero of a function" label="roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457000" start="18584" end="18592" title="Metafont" label="Metafont"/>
<link wikidata="Q137" start="18679" end="18683" title="rook (chess)" label="rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q41299" start="19170" end="19188" title="quadratic equation" label="quadratic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q549860" start="19570" end="19609" title="Bresenham&amp;#x27;s line algorithm" label="Bresenham&amp;#x27;s line drawing algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="19921" end="19928" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="20009" end="20020" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q599608" start="20025" end="20031" title="Synfig" label="Synfig"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="20417" end="20420" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="20422" end="20432" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270514" start="20434" end="20440" title="JavaFx" label="JavaFx"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072787" start="20445" end="20456" title="Flutter (software)" label="Flutter SDK"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="20471" end="20479" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="20594" end="20604" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q779317" start="20606" end="20615" title="Asymptote (vector graphics language)" label="Asymptote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457000" start="20617" end="20625" title="Metafont" label="Metafont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078" start="20631" end="20634" title="Scalable vector graphics" label="SVG"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="20717" end="20725" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326617" start="20849" end="20857" title="FreeType" label="FreeType"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465095" start="20948" end="20966" title="font rasterization" label="font rasterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11272" start="21415" end="21430" title="Microsoft Excel" label="Microsoft Excel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="21486" end="21493" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q734737" start="21968" end="21973" title="non-uniform rational B-spline" label="NURBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340324" start="22387" end="22399" title="end effector" label="end effector"/>
<link wikidata="Q926066" start="22677" end="22691" title="Bézier surface" label="Bézier surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083109" start="22694" end="22702" title="B-spline" label="B-spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q849246" start="22705" end="22710" title="GEM/4" label="GEM/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q849246" start="22715" end="22720" title="GEM/5" label="GEM/5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537263" start="22723" end="22736" title="Hermite curve" label="Hermite curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q734737" start="22739" end="22744" title="NURBS" label="NURBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q304435" start="22747" end="22757" title="String art" label="String art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915786" start="22878" end="22925" title="Variation diminishing property of Bézier curves" label="Variation diminishing property of Bézier curves"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="23421" end="23450" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4665" wikidata="Q806066" url="?curid=4665" title="Banach algebra">
<text>In mathematics, especially functional analysis, a Banach algebra, named after Stefan Banach, is an associative algebra formula_1 over the real or complex numbers (or over a non-Archimedean complete normed field) that at the same time is also a Banach space, that is, a normed space that is complete in the metric induced by the norm. The norm is required to satisfy
formula_2

This ensures that the multiplication operation is continuous with respect to the metric topology.

A Banach algebra is called &quot;unital&quot; if it has an identity element for the multiplication whose norm is formula_3 and &quot;commutative&quot; if its multiplication is commutative.
Any Banach algebra formula_1 (whether it is unital or not) can be embedded isometrically into a unital Banach algebra formula_5 so as to form a closed ideal of formula_5. Often one assumes &quot;a priori&quot; that the algebra under consideration is unital because one can develop much of the theory by considering formula_5 and then applying the outcome in the original algebra. However, this is not the case all the time. For example, one cannot define all the trigonometric functions in a Banach algebra without identity.

The theory of real Banach algebras can be very different from the theory of complex Banach algebras. For example, the spectrum of an element of a nontrivial complex Banach algebra can never be empty, whereas in a real Banach algebra it could be empty for some elements.

Banach algebras can also be defined over fields of formula_8-adic numbers. This is part of formula_8-adic analysis.

==Examples==

The prototypical example of a Banach algebra is formula_10, the space of (complex-valued) continuous functions, defined on a locally compact Hausdorff space formula_11, that vanish at infinity. formula_10 is unital if and only if formula_11 is compact. The complex conjugation being an involution, formula_10 is in fact a C*-algebra. More generally, every C*-algebra is a Banach algebra by definition.

* The set of real (or complex) numbers is a Banach algebra with norm given by the absolute value.
* The set of all real or complex formula_15-by-formula_15 matrices becomes a unital Banach algebra if we equip it with a sub-multiplicative matrix norm.
* Take the Banach space formula_17 (or formula_18) with norm formula_19 and define multiplication componentwise: formula_20
* The quaternions form a 4-dimensional real Banach algebra, with the norm being given by the absolute value of quaternions.
* The algebra of all bounded real- or complex-valued functions defined on some set (with pointwise multiplication and the supremum norm) is a unital Banach algebra.
* The algebra of all bounded continuous real- or complex-valued functions on some locally compact space (again with pointwise operations and supremum norm) is a Banach algebra.
* The algebra of all continuous linear operators on a Banach space formula_21 (with functional composition as multiplication and the operator norm as norm) is a unital Banach algebra. The set of all compact operators on formula_21 is a Banach algebra and closed ideal. It is without identity if formula_23
* If formula_24 is a locally compact Hausdorff topological group and formula_25 is its Haar measure, then the Banach space formula_26 of all formula_25-integrable functions on formula_24 becomes a Banach algebra under the convolution formula_29 for formula_30
* Uniform algebra: A Banach algebra that is a subalgebra of the complex algebra formula_31 with the supremum norm and that contains the constants and separates the points of formula_11 (which must be a compact Hausdorff space).
* Natural Banach function algebra: A uniform algebra all of whose characters are evaluations at points of formula_33
* C*-algebra: A Banach algebra that is a closed *-subalgebra of the algebra of bounded operators on some Hilbert space.
* Measure algebra: A Banach algebra consisting of all Radon measures on some locally compact group, where the product of two measures is given by convolution of measures.
* The algebra of the quaternions formula_34 is a real Banach algebra, but it is not a complex algebra (and hence not a complex Banach algebra) for the simple reason that the center of the quaternions is the real numbers, which cannot contain a copy of the complex numbers.
* An affinoid algebra is a certain kind of Banach algebra over a nonarchimedean field. Affinoid algebras are the basic building blocks in rigid analytic geometry.

==Properties==

Several elementary functions that are defined via power series may be defined in any unital Banach algebra; examples include the exponential function and the trigonometric functions, and more generally any entire function. (In particular, the exponential map can be used to define abstract index groups.) The formula for the geometric series remains valid in general unital Banach algebras. The binomial theorem also holds for two commuting elements of a Banach algebra.

The set of invertible elements in any unital Banach algebra is an open set, and the inversion operation on this set is continuous (and hence is a homeomorphism), so that it forms a topological group under multiplication.

If a Banach algebra has unit formula_35 then formula_36 cannot be a commutator; that is, formula_37  for any formula_38 This is because formula_39 and formula_40 have the same spectrum except possibly formula_41

The various algebras of functions given in the examples above have very different properties from standard examples of algebras such as the reals. For example:

* Every real Banach algebra that is a division algebra is isomorphic to the reals, the complexes, or the quaternions. Hence, the only complex Banach algebra that is a division algebra is the complexes. (This is known as the Gelfand–Mazur theorem.)
* Every unital real Banach algebra with no zero divisors, and in which every principal ideal is closed, is isomorphic to the reals, the complexes, or the quaternions.
* Every commutative real unital Noetherian Banach algebra with no zero divisors is isomorphic to the real or complex numbers.
* Every commutative real unital Noetherian Banach algebra (possibly having zero divisors) is finite-dimensional.
* Permanently singular elements in Banach algebras are topological divisors of zero, that is, considering extensions formula_42 of Banach algebras formula_1 some elements that are singular in the given algebra formula_1 have a multiplicative inverse element in a Banach algebra extension formula_45 Topological divisors of zero in formula_1 are permanently singular in any Banach extension formula_42 of formula_48

==Spectral theory==
Unital Banach algebras over the complex field provide a general setting to develop spectral theory. The &quot;spectrum&quot; of an element formula_49 denoted by formula_50, consists of all those complex scalars formula_51 such that formula_52 is not invertible in formula_48 The spectrum of any element formula_54 is a closed subset of the closed disc in formula_55 with radius formula_56 and center formula_57 and thus is compact. Moreover, the spectrum formula_50 of an element formula_54 is non-empty and satisfies the spectral radius formula:
formula_60

Given formula_49 the holomorphic functional calculus allows to define formula_62 for any function formula_63 holomorphic in a neighborhood of formula_64 Furthermore, the spectral mapping theorem holds:
formula_65

When the Banach algebra formula_1 is the algebra formula_67 of bounded linear operators on a complex Banach space formula_11 (for example, the algebra of square matrices), the notion of the spectrum in formula_1 coincides with the usual one in operator theory. For formula_70 (with a compact Hausdorff space formula_11), one sees that:
formula_72

The norm of a normal element formula_54 of a C*-algebra coincides with its spectral radius. This generalizes an analogous fact for normal operators.

Let formula_1 be a complex unital Banach algebra in which every non-zero element formula_54 is invertible (a division algebra). For every formula_76 there is formula_77 such that
formula_78 is not invertible (because the spectrum of formula_79 is not empty) hence formula_80 this algebra formula_1 is naturally isomorphic to formula_55 (the complex case of the Gelfand–Mazur theorem).

==Ideals and characters==

Let formula_1 be a unital &quot;commutative&quot; Banach algebra over formula_84 Since formula_1 is then a commutative ring with unit, every non-invertible element of formula_1 belongs to some maximal ideal of formula_48 Since a maximal ideal formula_88 in formula_1 is closed, formula_90 is a Banach algebra that is a field, and it follows from the Gelfand–Mazur theorem that there is a bijection between the set of all maximal ideals of formula_1 and the set formula_92 of all nonzero homomorphisms from formula_1 to formula_84 The set formula_92 is called the &quot;structure space&quot; or &quot;character space&quot; of formula_96 and its members &quot;characters&quot;.

A character formula_97 is a linear functional on formula_1 that is at the same time multiplicative, formula_99 and satisfies formula_100 Every character is automatically continuous from formula_1 to formula_102 since the kernel of a character is a maximal ideal, which is closed. Moreover, the norm (that is, operator norm) of a character is one. Equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence on formula_1 (that is, the topology induced by the weak-* topology of formula_104), the character space, formula_105 is a Hausdorff compact space.

For any formula_49
formula_107
where formula_108 is the Gelfand representation of formula_54 defined as follows: formula_108 is the continuous function from formula_92 to formula_55 given by formula_113 The spectrum of formula_114 in the formula above, is the spectrum as element of the algebra formula_115 of complex continuous functions on the compact space formula_116 Explicitly,
formula_117

As an algebra, a unital commutative Banach algebra is semisimple (that is, its Jacobson radical is zero) if and only if its Gelfand representation has trivial kernel. An important example of such an algebra is a commutative C*-algebra. In fact, when formula_1 is a commutative unital C*-algebra, the Gelfand representation is then an isometric *-isomorphism between formula_1 and formula_120

==Banach *-algebras==

A Banach *-algebra formula_1 is a Banach algebra over the field of complex numbers, together with a map formula_122 that has the following properties:
# formula_123 for all formula_124 (so the map is an involution).
# formula_125 for all formula_38
# formula_127 for every formula_77 and every formula_129 here, formula_130 denotes the complex conjugate of formula_131
# formula_132 for all formula_38

In other words, a Banach *-algebra is a Banach algebra over formula_55 that is also a *-algebra.

In most natural examples, one also has that the involution is isometric, that is, 
formula_135
Some authors include this isometric property in the definition of a Banach *-algebra.

A Banach *-algebra satisfying formula_136 is a C*-algebra.

==See also==
* 
* 

==Notes==
==References==

* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="27" end="46" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q806066" start="50" end="64" title="Banach algebra" label="Banach algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180217" start="78" end="91" title="Stefan Banach" label="Stefan Banach"/>
<link wikidata="Q744960" start="99" end="118" title="associative algebra" label="associative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="138" end="142" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="146" end="153" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q634579" start="173" end="188" title="nonarchimedean field" label="non-Archimedean"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="198" end="210" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="normed field"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="244" end="256" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q726210" start="269" end="281" title="normed space" label="normed space"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="290" end="298" title="complete metric space" label="complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="306" end="312" title="metric (mathematics)" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="427" end="437" title="continuous function (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="535" end="551" title="identity element" label="identity element"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="652" end="663" title="commutative" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q740207" start="740" end="753" title="isometry" label="isometrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="809" end="815" title="closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="816" end="821" title="ideal (algebra)" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="1128" end="1150" title="trigonometric function" label="trigonometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365748" start="1309" end="1317" title="Spectrum (functional analysis)" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="1513" end="1534" title="p-adic number" label="formula_8-adic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845236" start="1553" end="1576" title="p-adic analysis" label="formula_8-adic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="1718" end="1749" title="locally compact Hausdorff space" label="locally compact Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914952" start="1767" end="1785" title="vanish at infinity" label="vanish at infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="1837" end="1844" title="compactness" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="1850" end="1869" title="complex conjugation" label="complex conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="1879" end="1889" title="involution (mathematics)" label="involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q263809" start="1915" end="1925" title="C*-algebra" label="C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="2078" end="2092" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="2152" end="2160" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="2171" end="2177" title="unital algebra" label="unital"/>
<link wikidata="Q939253" start="2234" end="2245" title="matrix norm" label="matrix norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="2377" end="2387" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="2617" end="2625" title="supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="2689" end="2699" title="continuous function (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="2742" end="2763" title="locally compact space" label="locally compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="2858" end="2868" title="continuous function (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="2869" end="2875" title="linear transformation" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q980557" start="2970" end="2983" title="operator norm" label="operator norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780743" start="3036" end="3052" title="compact operator" label="compact operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="3164" end="3179" title="locally compact" label="locally compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="3180" end="3189" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="3190" end="3207" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162676" start="3230" end="3242" title="Haar measure" label="Haar measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q210857" start="3365" end="3376" title="convolution" label="convolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885096" start="3405" end="3420" title="Uniform algebra" label="Uniform algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885096" start="3633" end="3664" title="Uniform algebra" label="Natural Banach function algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q263809" start="3750" end="3760" title="C*-algebra" label="C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="3853" end="3866" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804179" start="3870" end="3885" title="Measure algebra" label="Measure algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126650" start="3922" end="3935" title="Radon measure" label="Radon measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147620" start="3945" end="3966" title="locally compact group" label="locally compact group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4014" end="4037" title="Convolution#Measures" label="convolution of measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="4060" end="4070" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333799" start="4317" end="4333" title="affinoid algebra" label="affinoid algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333799" start="4450" end="4473" title="Rigid analytic space" label="rigid analytic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991505" start="4500" end="4520" title="list of functions" label="elementary functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="4542" end="4554" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="4621" end="4641" title="exponential function" label="exponential function"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="4650" end="4673" title="trigonometric functions" label="trigonometric functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q847600" start="4698" end="4713" title="entire function" label="entire function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669947" start="4773" end="4793" title="abstract index group" label="abstract index group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306887" start="4817" end="4833" title="geometric series" label="geometric series"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="4887" end="4903" title="binomial theorem" label="binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q338057" start="4975" end="4993" title="invertible element" label="invertible element"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="5030" end="5038" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="5145" end="5162" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989763" start="5254" end="5264" title="commutator (ring theory)" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365748" start="5362" end="5370" title="spectrum (functional analysis)" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231309" start="5598" end="5614" title="division algebra" label="division algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226677" start="5784" end="5805" title="Gelfand–Mazur theorem" label="Gelfand–Mazur theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="5851" end="5863" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44382" start="5885" end="5900" title="principal ideal" label="principal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="5904" end="5910" title="closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q582271" start="6007" end="6017" title="Noetherian ring" label="Noetherian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443467" start="6269" end="6297" title="topological divisor of zero" label="topological divisors of zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289248" start="6853" end="6859" title="scalar (mathematics)" label="scalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="7073" end="7080" title="Compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="7144" end="7153" title="non-empty" label="non-empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q249748" start="7172" end="7187" title="spectral radius" label="spectral radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625064" start="7230" end="7261" title="holomorphic functional calculus" label="holomorphic functional calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207476" start="7318" end="7329" title="holomorphic function" label="holomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198874" start="7667" end="7682" title="operator theory" label="operator theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203540" start="8527" end="8540" title="maximal ideal" label="maximal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q806066" start="8903" end="8918" title="structure space" label="structure space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499675" start="9614" end="9636" title="Gelfand representation" label="Gelfand representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851437" start="10009" end="10019" title="semisimple algebra" label="semisimple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677769" start="10034" end="10050" title="Jacobson radical" label="Jacobson radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="10438" end="10452" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="10574" end="10584" title="Involution (mathematics)" label="involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="10707" end="10724" title="complex conjugate" label="complex conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836000" start="10860" end="10869" title="*-algebra" label="*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q740207" start="10934" end="10943" title="isometry" label="isometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q263809" start="11101" end="11111" title="C*-algebra" label="C*-algebra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4667" wikidata="Q41223" url="?curid=4667" title="Boris Pasternak">
<text>Boris Leonidovich Pasternak (; ; 30 May 1960) was a Russian and Soviet poet, novelist, composer, and literary translator.

Composed in 1917, Pasternak&#x27;s first book of poems, &quot;My Sister, Life&quot;, was published in Berlin in 1922 and soon became an important collection in the Russian language. Pasternak&#x27;s translations of stage plays by Goethe, Schiller, Calderón de la Barca and Shakespeare remain very popular with Russian audiences.

Pasternak was the author of &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; (1957), a novel that takes place between the Russian Revolution of 1905 and the First World War. &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; was rejected for publication in the USSR, but the manuscript was smuggled to Italy and was first published there in 1957.

Pasternak was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1958, an event that enraged the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which forced him to decline the prize. In 1989, Pasternak&#x27;s son Yevgeny finally accepted the award on his father&#x27;s behalf. &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; has been part of the main Russian school curriculum since 2003.

== Early life ==
Pasternak was born in Moscow on into a wealthy, assimilated Jewish family. His father was the post-Impressionist painter Leonid Pasternak, who taught as a professor at the Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture. His mother was Rosa Kaufman, a concert pianist and the daughter of Odessa industrialist Isadore Kaufman and his wife. Pasternak had a younger brother, Alex, and two sisters, Lydia and Josephine. The family claimed descent on the paternal line from Isaac Abarbanel, the famous 15th-century Sephardic Jewish philosopher, Bible commentator, and treasurer of Portugal.

=== Early education ===
From 1904 to 1907, Boris Pasternak was the cloister-mate of Peter Minchakievich (1890–1963) in Holy Dormition Pochayev Lavra (now in Ukraine). Minchakievich came from an Orthodox Ukrainian family and Pasternak came from a Jewish family. Some confusion has arisen as to Pasternak attending a military academy in his boyhood years. The uniforms of their monastery Cadet Corp were only similar to those of The Czar Alexander the Third Military Academy, as Pasternak and Minchakievich never attended any military academy. Most schools used a distinctive military-looking uniform particular to them as was the custom of the time in Eastern Europe and Russia. Boyhood friends, they parted in 1908, friendly but with different politics, never to see each other again. Pasternak went to the Moscow Conservatory to study music (and later to Germany to study philosophy), and Minchakievich went to Lvov University to study history and philosophy. The good dimension of the character Strelnikov in &quot;Dr. Zhivago&quot; is based upon Peter Minchakievich. Several of Pasternak&#x27;s characters are composites. After World War One and the Revolution, fighting for the Provisional or Republican government under Kerensky, and then escaping a Communist jail and execution, Minchakievich trekked across Siberia in 1917 and became an American citizen. Pasternak stayed in Russia.

In a 1959 letter to Jacqueline de Proyart, Pasternak recalled:
Shortly after his birth, Pasternak&#x27;s parents had joined the Tolstoyan Movement. Novelist Leo Tolstoy was a close family friend, as Pasternak recalled, 
In a 1956 essay, Pasternak recalled his father&#x27;s feverish work creating illustrations for Tolstoy&#x27;s novel &quot;Resurrection&quot;. The novel was serialized in the journal &quot;Niva&quot; by the publisher Fyodor Marx, based in St Petersburg. The sketches were drawn from observations in such places as courtrooms, prisons and on trains, in a spirit of realism. To ensure that the sketches met the journal deadline, train conductors were enlisted to personally collect the illustrations. Pasternak wrote,

According to Max Hayward, 

Regular visitors to the Pasternaks&#x27; home also included Sergei Rachmaninoff, Alexander Scriabin, Lev Shestov, and Rainer Maria Rilke. Pasternak aspired first to be a musician. Inspired by Scriabin, Pasternak briefly was a student at the Moscow Conservatory. In 1910, he abruptly left for the University of Marburg in Germany, where he studied under neo-Kantian philosophers Hermann Cohen, Nicolai Hartmann, and Paul Natorp.

== Life and career ==
=== Olga Freidenberg ===
In 1910 Pasternak was reunited with his cousin Olga Freidenberg (1890–1955). They had shared the same nursery but had been separated when the Freidenberg family moved to Saint Petersburg. They fell in love immediately but were never lovers. The romance, however, is made clear from their letters, Pasternak writing:

The cousins&#x27; initial passion developed into a lifelong close friendship. From 1910 Pasternak and Freidenberg exchanged frequent letters, and their correspondence lasted over 40 years until 1954. The cousins last met in 1936.

=== Ida Wissotzkaya ===

Pasternak fell in love with Ida Wissotzkaya, a girl from a notable Moscow Jewish family of tea merchants, whose company Wissotzky Tea was the largest tea company in the world. Pasternak had tutored her in the final class of high school. He helped her prepare for finals. They met in Marburg during the summer of 1912 when Boris&#x27; father, Leonid Pasternak, painted her portrait.

Although Professor Cohen encouraged him to remain in Germany and to pursue a Philosophy doctorate, Pasternak decided against it. He returned to Moscow around the time of the outbreak of the First World War. In the aftermath of events, Pasternak proposed marriage to Ida. However, the Wissotzky family was disturbed by Pasternak&#x27;s poor prospects and persuaded Ida to refuse him. She turned him down and he told of his love and rejection in the poem &quot;Marburg&quot; (1917):

&lt;poem&gt;I quivered. I flared up, and then was extinguished.
I shook. I had made a proposal—but late,
Too late. I was scared, and she had refused me.
I pity her tears, am more blessed than a saint.&lt;/poem&gt;

Around this time, when he was back in Russia, he joined the Russian Futurist group Centrifuge (Tsentrifuga) as a pianist; poetry was still only a hobby for him at that time. It was in their group journal, &quot;Lirika&quot;, where some of his earliest poems were published. His involvement with the Futurist movement as a whole reached its peak when, in 1914, he published a satirical article in &quot;Rukonog&quot;, which attacked the jealous leader of the &quot;Mezzanine of Poetry&quot;, Vadim Shershenevich, who was criticizing &quot;Lirika&quot; and the Ego-Futurists because Shershenevich himself was barred from collaborating with Centrifuge, the reason being that he was such a talentless poet. The action eventually caused a verbal battle amongst several members of the groups, fighting for recognition as the first, truest Russian Futurists; these included the Cubo-Futurists, who were by that time already notorious for their scandalous behaviour. Pasternak&#x27;s first and second books of poetry were published shortly after these events.

Another failed love affair in 1917 inspired the poems in his third and first major book, &quot;My Sister, Life&quot;. His early verse cleverly dissimulates his preoccupation with Immanuel Kant&#x27;s philosophy. Its fabric includes striking alliterations, wild rhythmic combinations, day-to-day vocabulary, and hidden allusions to his favourite poets such as Rilke, Lermontov, Pushkin and German-language Romantic poets.

During World War I, Pasternak taught and worked at a chemical factory in Vsevolodo-Vilva near Perm, which undoubtedly provided him with material for &quot;Dr. Zhivago&quot; many years later. Unlike the rest of his family and many of his closest friends, Pasternak chose not to leave Russia after the October Revolution of 1917. According to Max Hayward,


When it finally was published in 1922, Pasternak&#x27;s &quot;My Sister, Life&quot; revolutionised Russian poetry. It made Pasternak the model for younger poets, and decisively changed the poetry of Osip Mandelshtam, Marina Tsvetayeva and others.

Following &quot;My Sister, Life&quot;, Pasternak produced some hermetic pieces of uneven quality, including his masterpiece, the lyric cycle &quot;Rupture&quot; (1921). Both Pro-Soviet writers and their White émigré equivalents applauded Pasternak&#x27;s poetry as pure, unbridled inspiration.

In the late 1920s, he also participated in the much celebrated tripartite correspondence with Rilke and Tsvetayeva. As the 1920s wore on, however, Pasternak increasingly felt that his colourful style was at odds with a less educated readership. He attempted to make his poetry more comprehensible by reworking his earlier pieces and starting two lengthy poems on the Russian Revolution of 1905. He also turned to prose and wrote several autobiographical stories, notably &quot;The Childhood of Luvers&quot; and &quot;Safe Conduct&quot;. (The collection &quot;Zhenia&#x27;s Childhood and Other Stories&quot; would be published in 1982.)
In 1922 Pasternak married Evgeniya Lurye (Евгения Лурье), a student at the Art Institute. The following year their son Yevgeny was born.

Evidence of Pasternak&#x27;s support of still-revolutionary members of the leadership of the Communist Party as late as 1926 is indicated by his poem &quot;In Memory of Reissner&quot; presumably written upon the premature death from typhus of Bolshevik leader Larissa Reissner aged 30 in February of that year.

By 1927, Pasternak&#x27;s close friends Vladimir Mayakovsky and Nikolai Aseyev were advocating the complete subordination of the arts to the needs of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. In a letter to his sister Josephine, Pasternak wrote of his intentions to &quot;break off relations&quot; with both of them. Although he expressed that it would be deeply painful, Pasternak explained that it could not be prevented. He explained:
By 1932, Pasternak had strikingly reshaped his style to make it more understandable to the general public and printed the new collection of poems, aptly titled &quot;The Second Birth&quot;. Although its Caucasian pieces were as brilliant as the earlier efforts, the book alienated the core of Pasternak&#x27;s refined audience abroad, which was largely composed of anti-communist émigrés.

In 1932, Pasternak fell in love with Zinaida Neuhaus, the wife of the Russian pianist Heinrich Neuhaus. They both got divorces and married two years later.

Pasternak continued to change his poetry, simplifying his style and language through the years, as expressed in his next book, &quot;Early Trains&quot; (1943).

=== Stalin Epigram ===
In April 1934 Osip Mandelstam recited his &quot;Stalin Epigram&quot; to Pasternak. After listening, Pasternak told Mandelstam: 

On the night of 14 May 1934, Mandelstam was arrested at his home based on a warrant signed by NKVD boss Genrikh Yagoda. Devastated, Pasternak went immediately to the offices of &quot;Izvestia&quot; and begged Nikolai Bukharin to intercede on Mandelstam&#x27;s behalf.

Soon after his meeting with Bukharin, the telephone rang in Pasternak&#x27;s Moscow apartment. A voice from the Kremlin said, According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak was struck dumb. Flustered, Pasternak denied that there was any discussion or that there were any literary circles left in Soviet Russia. Stalin went on to ask him for his own opinion of Mandelstam. In an &quot;eager fumbling manner&quot; Pasternak explained that he and Mandelstam each had a completely different philosophy about poetry. Stalin finally said, in a mocking tone of voice: , and put down the receiver.

=== Great Purge ===

According to Pasternak, during the 1937 show trial of General Iona Yakir and Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, the Union of Soviet Writers requested all members to add their names to a statement supporting the death penalty for the defendants. Pasternak refused to sign, even after leadership of the Union visited and threatened him.
Soon after, Pasternak appealed directly to Stalin, describing his family&#x27;s strong Tolstoyan convictions and putting his own life at Stalin&#x27;s disposal; he said that he could not stand as a self-appointed judge of life and death. Pasternak was certain that he would be arrested, but instead Stalin is said to have crossed Pasternak&#x27;s name off an execution list, reportedly declaring, (or, in another version, ).

Pasternak&#x27;s close friend Titsian Tabidze did fall victim to the Great Purge. In an autobiographical essay published in the 1950s, Pasternak described the execution of Tabidze and the suicides of Marina Tsvetaeva and Paolo Iashvili.

Ivinskaya wrote, 

=== World War II ===
When the Luftwaffe began bombing Moscow, Pasternak immediately began to serve as a fire warden on the roof of the writer&#x27;s building on Lavrushinski Street. According to Ivinskaya, he repeatedly helped to dispose of German bombs which fell on it.

In 1943, Pasternak was finally granted permission to visit the soldiers at the front. He bore it well, considering the hardships of the journey (he had a weak leg from an old injury), and he wanted to go to the most dangerous places. He read his poetry and talked extensively with the active and injured troops.

Pasternak later said, 

=== Olga Ivinskaya ===
In October 1946, the twice-married Pasternak met Olga Ivinskaya, a 34 year old single mother employed by &quot;Novy Mir&quot;. Deeply moved by her resemblance to his first love Ida Vysotskaya, Pasternak gave Ivinskaya several volumes of his poetry and literary translations. Although Pasternak never left his wife Zinaida, he started an extramarital relationship with Ivinskaya that would last for the remainder of Pasternak&#x27;s life. Ivinskaya later recalled, 

She gave him the phone number of her neighbour Olga Volkova who resided below. In the evenings, Pasternak would phone and Volkova would signal by Olga banging on the water pipe which connected their apartments.

When they first met, Pasternak was translating the verse of the Hungarian national poet, Sándor Petőfi. Pasternak gave his lover a book of Petőfi with the inscription, 

Pasternak later noted on a photograph of himself: Ivinskaya would later describe the Petőfi translations as &quot;a first declaration of love&quot;.

According to Ivinskaya, Zinaida Pasternak was infuriated by her husband&#x27;s infidelity. Once, when his younger son Leonid fell seriously ill, Zinaida extracted a promise from her husband, as they stood by the boy&#x27;s sickbed, that he would end his affair with Ivinskaya. Pasternak asked Luisa Popova, a mutual friend, to tell Ivinskaya about his promise. Popova told him that he must do it himself. Soon after, Ivinskaya happened to be ill at Popova&#x27;s apartment, when suddenly Zinaida Pasternak arrived and confronted her.

Ivinskaya later recalled,
In 1948, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya to resign her job at &quot;Novy Mir&quot;, which was becoming extremely difficult due to their relationship. In the aftermath, Pasternak began to instruct her in translating poetry. In time, they began to refer to her apartment on Potapov Street as, &quot;Our Shop&quot;.

On the evening of 6 October 1949, Ivinskaya was arrested at her apartment by the KGB. Ivinskaya relates in her memoirs that, when the agents burst into her apartment, she was at her typewriter working on translations of the Korean poet Won Tu-Son. Her apartment was ransacked and all items connected with Pasternak were piled up in her presence. Ivinskaya was taken to the Lubyanka Prison and repeatedly interrogated, where she refused to say anything incriminating about Pasternak. At the time, she was pregnant with Pasternak&#x27;s child and had a miscarriage early in her ten-year sentence in the GULAG.

Upon learning of his mistress&#x27; arrest, Pasternak telephoned Luisa Popova and asked her to come at once to Gogol Boulevard. She found him sitting on a bench near the Palace of Soviets Metro Station. Weeping, Pasternak told her, 

According to Ivinskaya, 

In a 1958 letter to a friend in West Germany, Pasternak wrote, 

=== Translating Goethe ===
Pasternak&#x27;s translation of the of &quot;Faust&quot; led him to be attacked in the August 1950 edition of &quot;Novy Mir&quot;. The critic accused Pasternak of distorting Goethe&#x27;s &quot;progressive&quot; meanings to support , as well as introducing aesthetic and individualist values. In a subsequent letter to the daughter of Marina Tsvetaeva, Pasternak explained that the attack was motivated by the fact that the supernatural elements of the play, which &quot;Novy Mir&quot; considered, &quot;irrational&quot;, had been translated as Goethe had written them. Pasternak further declared that, despite the attacks on his translation, his contract for the had not been revoked.

=== Khrushchev thaw ===
When Stalin died of a stroke on 5 March 1953, Ivinskaya was still imprisoned in the Gulag, and Pasternak was in Moscow. Across the nation, there were waves of panic, confusion, and public displays of grief. Pasternak wrote, 

After her release, Pasternak&#x27;s relationship with Ivinskaya picked up where it had left off. Soon after he confided in her, During this period, Pasternak delighted in reading a clandestine copy of George Orwell&#x27;s &quot;Animal Farm&quot; in English. In conversation with Ivinskaya, Pasternak explained that the pig dictator Napoleon, in the novel, &quot;vividly reminded&quot; him of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.

=== &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; ===

Although it contains passages written in the 1910s and 1920s, &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; was not completed until 1955. Pasternak submitted the novel to &quot;Novy Mir&quot; in 1956, which refused publication due to its rejection of socialist realism. The author, like his protagonist Yuri Zhivago, showed more concern for the welfare of individual characters than for the &quot;progress&quot; of society. Censors also regarded some passages as anti-Soviet, especially the novel&#x27;s criticisms of Stalinism, Collectivisation, the Great Purge, and the Gulag.

Pasternak&#x27;s fortunes were soon to change, however. In March 1956, the Italian Communist Party sent a journalist, Sergio D&#x27;Angelo, to work in the Soviet Union, and his status as a journalist as well as his membership in the Italian Communist Party allowed him to have access to various aspects of the cultural life in Moscow at the time. A Milan publisher, the communist Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, had also given him a commission to find new works of Soviet literature that would be appealing to Western audiences, and upon learning of &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot;″s existence, D&#x27;Angelo travelled immediately to Peredelkino and offered to submit Pasternak&#x27;s novel to Feltrinelli&#x27;s company for publication. At first Pasternak was stunned. Then he brought the manuscript from his study and told D&#x27;Angelo with a laugh, 

According to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak was aware that he was taking a huge risk. No Soviet author had attempted to deal with Western publishers since the 1920s, when such behavior led the Soviet State to declare war on Boris Pilnyak and Evgeny Zamyatin. Pasternak, however, believed that Feltrinelli&#x27;s Communist affiliation would not only guarantee publication, but might even force the Soviet State to publish the novel in Russia.

In a rare moment of agreement, both Olga Ivinskaya and Zinaida Pasternak were horrified by the submission of &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; to a Western publishing house. Pasternak, however, refused to change his mind and informed an emissary from Feltrinelli that he was prepared to undergo any sacrifice in order to see &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; published.

In 1957, Feltrinelli announced that the novel would be published by his company. Despite repeated demands from visiting Soviet emissaries, Feltrinelli refused to cancel or delay publication. According to Ivinskaya, The Soviet government forced Pasternak to cable the publisher to withdraw the manuscript, but he sent separate, secret letters advising Feltrinelli to ignore the telegrams.

Helped considerably by the Soviet campaign against the novel (as well as by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency&#x27;s secret purchase of hundreds of copies of the book as it came off the presses around the world – see &quot;Nobel Prize&quot; section below), &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; became an instant sensation throughout the non-Communist world upon its release in November 1957. In the State of Israel, however, Pasternak&#x27;s novel was sharply criticized for its assimilationist views towards the Jewish people. When informed of this, Pasternak responded, According to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak had written the disputed passages prior to Israeli independence. At the time, Pasternak had also been regularly attending Russian Orthodox Divine Liturgy. Therefore, he believed that Soviet Jews converting to Christianity was preferable to assimilating into atheism and Stalinism.

The first English translation of &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; was hastily produced by Max Hayward and Manya Harari in order to coincide with overwhelming public demand. It was released in August 1958, and remained the only edition available for more than fifty years. Between 1958 and 1959, the English language edition spent 26 weeks at the top of &quot;The New York Times&quot;&#x27; bestseller list.

Ivinskaya&#x27;s daughter Irina circulated typed copies of the novel in Samizdat. Although no Soviet critics had read the banned novel, &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; was pilloried in the State-owned press. Similar attacks led to a humorous Russian saying, &quot;I haven&#x27;t read Pasternak, but I condemn him&quot;.

During the aftermath of the Second World War, Pasternak had composed a series of poems on Gospel themes. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak had regarded Stalin as a Therefore, Pasternak&#x27;s decision to write Christian poetry was .

On 9 September 1958, the &quot;Literary Gazette&quot; critic Viktor Pertsov retaliated by denouncing Furthermore, the author received much hate mail from Communists both at home and abroad. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to receive such letters for the remainder of his life.

In a letter written to his sister Josephine, however, Pasternak recalled the words of his friend Ekaterina Krashennikova upon reading &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot;. She had said, 

=== Nobel Prize ===
According to Yevgeni Borisovich Pasternak, According to the former Nobel Committee head Lars Gyllensten, his nomination was discussed every year from 1946 to 1950, then again in 1957 (it was finally awarded in 1958). Pasternak guessed at this from the growing waves of criticism in USSR. Sometimes he had to justify his European fame: &#x27;According to the Union of Soviet Writers, some literature circles of the West see unusual importance in my work, not matching its modesty and low productivity...&#x27;

Meanwhile, Pasternak wrote to Renate Schweitzer and his sister, Lydia Pasternak Slater. In both letters, the author expressed hope that he would be passed over by the Nobel Committee in favour of Alberto Moravia. Pasternak wrote that he was wracked with torments and anxieties at the thought of placing his loved ones in danger.

On 23 October 1958, Boris Pasternak was announced as the winner of the Nobel Prize. The citation credited Pasternak&#x27;s contribution to Russian lyric poetry and for his role in On 25 October, Pasternak sent a telegram to the Swedish Academy: That same day, the Literary Institute in Moscow demanded that all its students sign a petition denouncing Pasternak and his novel. They were further ordered to join a &quot;spontaneous&quot; demonstration demanding Pasternak&#x27;s exile from the Soviet Union. Also on that day, the &quot;Literary Gazette&quot; published a letter which was sent to B. Pasternak in September 1956 by the editors of the Soviet literary journal Novy Mir to justify their rejection of Doctor Zhivago. In publishing this letter the Soviet authorities wished to justify the measures they had taken against the author and his work. On 26 October, the &quot;Literary Gazette&quot; ran an article by David Zaslavski entitled, &quot;Reactionary Propaganda Uproar over a Literary Weed&quot;.

According to Solomon Volkov:
Furthermore, Pasternak was informed that, if he traveled to Stockholm to collect his Nobel Medal, he would be refused re-entry to the Soviet Union. As a result, on 29 October Pasternak sent a second telegram to the Nobel Committee: The Swedish Academy announced: 
According to Yevgenii Pasternak, 

=== Deportation plans ===
Despite his decision to decline the award, the Union of Soviet Writers continued to demonise Pasternak in the State-owned press. Furthermore, he was threatened at the very least with formal exile to the West. In response, Pasternak wrote directly to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev,
In &quot;The Oak and the Calf&quot;, Alexander Solzhenitsyn sharply criticized Pasternak, both for declining the Nobel Prize and for sending such a letter to Khrushchev. In her own memoirs, Olga Ivinskaya blames herself for pressuring her lover into making both decisions.

According to Yevgenii Pasternak, 

On 31 October 1958, the Union of Soviet Writers held a trial behind closed doors. According to the meeting minutes, Pasternak was denounced as an internal émigré and a Fascist fifth columnist. Afterwards, the attendees announced that Pasternak had been expelled from the Union. They further signed a petition to the Politburo, demanding that Pasternak be stripped of his Soviet citizenship and exiled to According to Yevgenii Pasternak, however, author Konstantin Paustovsky refused to attend the meeting. Yevgeny Yevtushenko did attend, but walked out in disgust.

According to Yevgenii Pasternak, his father would have been exiled had it not been for Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who telephoned Khrushchev and threatened to organize a Committee for Pasternak&#x27;s protection.

It is possible that the 1958 Nobel Prize prevented Pasternak&#x27;s imprisonment due to the Soviet State&#x27;s fear of international protests. Yevgenii Pasternak believes, however, that the resulting persecution fatally weakened his father&#x27;s health.

Meanwhile, Bill Mauldin produced a cartoon about Pasternak that won the 1959 Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning. The cartoon depicts Pasternak as a GULAG inmate splitting trees in the snow, saying to another inmate: 

=== Last years ===

Pasternak&#x27;s post-&quot;Zhivago&quot; poetry probes the universal questions of love, immortality, and reconciliation with God. Boris Pasternak wrote his last complete book, &quot;When the Weather Clears&quot;, in 1959.

According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to stick to his daily writing schedule even during the controversy over &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot;. He also continued translating the writings of Juliusz Słowacki and Pedro Calderón de la Barca. In his work on Calderon, Pasternak received the discreet support of Nikolai Mikhailovich Liubimov, a senior figure in the Party&#x27;s literary apparatus. Ivinskaya describes Liubimov as, &quot;a shrewd and enlightened person who understood very well that all the mudslinging and commotion over the novel would be forgotten, but that there would always be a Pasternak.&quot; In a letter to his sisters in Oxford, England, Pasternak claimed to have finished translating one of Calderon&#x27;s plays in less than a week.

During the summer of 1959, Pasternak began writing &quot;The Blind Beauty&quot;, a trilogy of stage plays set before and after Alexander II&#x27;s abolition of serfdom in Russia. In an interview with Olga Carlisle from &quot;The Paris Review&quot;, Pasternak enthusiastically described the play&#x27;s plot and characters. He informed Olga Carlisle that, at the end of &quot;The Blind Beauty&quot;, he wished to depict &quot;the birth of an enlightened and affluent middle class, open to occidental influences, progressive, intelligent, artistic&quot;. However, Pasternak fell ill with terminal lung cancer before he could complete the first play of the trilogy.

== Death ==
Boris Pasternak died of lung cancer in his dacha in Peredelkino on the evening of 30 May 1960. He first summoned his sons, and in their presence said, Pasternak&#x27;s last words were, 

=== Funeral demonstration ===
Despite only a small notice appearing in the &quot;Literary Gazette&quot;, handwritten notices carrying the date and time of the funeral were posted throughout the Moscow subway system. As a result, thousands of admirers braved Militia and KGB surveillance to attend Pasternak&#x27;s funeral in Peredelkino.

Before Pasternak&#x27;s civil funeral, Ivinskaya had a conversation with Konstantin Paustovsky. According to her,
Then, in the presence of a large number of foreign journalists, the body of Pasternak was removed to the cemetery. According to Ivinskaya,
To the horror of the assembled Party officials, however, someone with &quot;a young and deeply anguished voice&quot; began reciting Pasternak&#x27;s banned poem &quot;Hamlet&quot;.
According to Ivinskaya,
The final speaker at the graveside service said,
As the spectators cheered, the bells of Peredelkino&#x27;s Church of the Transfiguration began to toll. Written prayers for the dead were then placed upon Pasternak&#x27;s forehead and the coffin was closed and buried. Pasternak&#x27;s gravesite would go on to become a major shrine for members of the Soviet dissident movement.

== Legacy ==

After Pasternak&#x27;s death, Ivinskaya was arrested for the second time, with her daughter, Irina Emelyanova. Both were accused of being Pasternak&#x27;s link with Western publishers and of dealing in hard currency for &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot;. All of Pasternak&#x27;s letters to Ivinskaya, as well as many other manuscripts and documents, were seized by the KGB. The KGB quietly released them, Irina after one year, in 1962, and Olga in 1964. By this time, Ivinskaya had served four years of an eight-year sentence, in retaliation for her role in &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot;&#x27;s publication. In 1978, her memoirs were smuggled abroad and published in Paris. An English translation by Max Hayward was published the same year under the title &quot;A Captive of Time: My Years with Pasternak&quot;.

Ivinskaya was rehabilitated only in 1988. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ivinskaya sued for the return of the letters and documents seized by the KGB in 1961. The Russian Supreme Court ultimately ruled against her, stating that &quot;there was no proof of ownership&quot; and that the &quot;papers should remain in the state archive&quot;. Ivinskaya died of cancer on 8 September 1995. A reporter on NTV compared her role to that of other famous muses for Russian poets: &quot;As Pushkin would not be complete without Anna Kern, and Yesenin would be nothing without Isadora, so Pasternak would not be Pasternak without Olga Ivinskaya, who was his inspiration for &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot;.&quot;.

Meanwhile, Boris Pasternak continued to be pilloried by the Soviet State until Mikhail Gorbachev proclaimed Perestroika during the 1980s.

In 1980, an asteroid was named 3508 Pasternak after Boris Pasternak.

In 1988, after decades of circulating in Samizdat, &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; was serialized in the literary journal &quot;Novy Mir&quot;.

In December 1989, Yevgenii Borisovich Pasternak was permitted to travel to Stockholm in order to collect his father&#x27;s Nobel Medal. At the ceremony, acclaimed cellist and Soviet dissident Mstislav Rostropovich performed a Bach serenade in honor of his deceased countryman.

The Pasternak family papers are stored at the Hoover Institution Archives, Stanford University. They contain correspondence, drafts of &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; and other writings, photographs, and other material, of Boris Pasternak and other family members.

Since 2003, during the first presidency of Vladimir Putin, the novel &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; has entered the Russian school curriculum, where it is read in the 11th grade of secondary school.

=== Commemoration ===
In October 1984 by decision of a court, Pasternak&#x27;s dacha in Peredelkino was taken from the writer&#x27;s relatives and transferred to state ownership. Two years later, in 1986, the House-Museum of Boris Pasternak was founded (the first house-museum in the USSR).

In 1990, the year of the poet&#x27;s 100th anniversary, the Pasternak Museum opened its doors in Chistopol, in the house where the poet evacuated to during the Great Patriotic War (1941–1943), and in Peredelkino, where he lived for many years until his death. The head of the poet&#x27;s house-museum is Natalia Pasternak, his daughter-in-law (widow of the youngest son Leonid).

In 2008 a museum was opened in Vsevolodo-Vilva in the house where the budding poet lived from January to June 1916.

In 2009 on the City Day in Perm the first Russian monument to Pasternak was erected in the square near the Opera Theater (sculptor: Elena Munc).

A memorial plaque was installed on the house where Pasternak was born.

In memory of the poet&#x27;s three-time stay in Tula, on 27 May 2005 a marble memorial plaque to Pasternak was installed on the Wörmann hotel&#x27;s wall, as Pasternak was a Nobel laureate and dedicated several of his works to Tula.

On 20 February 2008, in Kyiv, a memorial plaque was put up on the house No.9 on Lipinsky Street, but seven years later it was stolen by vandals.

In 2012 a monument to Boris Pasternak was erected in the district center of Muchkapsky by Z. Tsereteli.

In 1990, as part of the series &quot;Nobel Prize Winners&quot;, the USSR and Sweden (&quot;Nobel Prize Winners – Literature&quot;) issued stamps depicting Boris Pasternak.

In 2015, as part of the series &quot;125th Annive. of the Birth of Boris Pasternak, 1890–1960&quot;, Mozambique issued a miniature sheet depicting Boris Pasternak. Although this issue was acknowledged by the postal administration of Mozambique, the issue was not placed on sale in Mozambique, and was only distributed to the new issue trade by Mozambique&#x27;s philatelic agent.

In 2015, as part of the series &quot;125th Birth Anniversary of Boris Pasternak&quot;, Maldives issued a miniature sheet depicting Boris Pasternak. The issue was acknowledged by the Maldive postal authorities, but only distributed by the Maldive philatelic agent for collecting purposes.

On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of B. Pasternak&#x27;s Nobel Prize, the Principality of Monaco issued a postage stamp in his memory.

On 27 January 2015, in honor of the poet&#x27;s 125th birthday, the Russian Post issued an envelope with the original stamp.

On 1 October 2015, a monument to Pasternak was erected in Chistopol.

On 10 February 2020, a celebration of the 130th birthday anniversary was held at Exhibition of Achievements of National Economy in Moscow.

On 10 February 2021, Google celebrated his 131st birthday with a Google Doodle. The Doodle was displayed in Russia, Sweden, some Middle Eastern countries and some Mediterranean countries.

=== Cultural influence ===

* A minor planet (3508 Pasternak) discovered by Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Georgievna Karachkina in 1980 is named after him.
* Russian-American singer and songwriter Regina Spektor recites a verse from &quot;Black Spring&quot;, a 1912 poem by Pasternak in her song &quot;Apres Moi&quot; from her album &quot;Begin to Hope&quot;.
*Russian-Dutch composer Fred Momotenko (Alfred Momotenko) wrote a companion composition to Sergej Rachmaninov&#x27;s All-Night Vigil Op 37. based on the eponymous poem from the diptych Doktor Zhivago &quot;Na Strastnoy&quot;

=== Adaptations ===
The first screen adaptation of &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot;, adapted by Robert Bolt and directed by David Lean, appeared in 1965. The film, which toured in the roadshow tradition, starred Omar Sharif, Geraldine Chaplin, and Julie Christie. Concentrating on the love triangle aspects of the novel, the film became a worldwide blockbuster, but was unavailable in Russia until perestroika.

In 2002, the novel was adapted as a television miniseries. Directed by Giacomo Campiotti, the serial starred Hans Matheson, Alexandra Maria Lara, Keira Knightley, and Sam Neill.

The Russian TV version of 2006, directed by Aleksandr Proshkin and starring Oleg Menshikov as Zhivago, is considered more faithful to Pasternak&#x27;s novel than David Lean&#x27;s 1965 film.

== Work ==
=== Poetry ===
==== Thoughts on poetry ====
According to Olga Ivinskaya:
For this reason, Pasternak avoided literary cafes where young poets regularly invited them to read their verse. According to Ivinskaya, 

Also according to Ivinskaya, 

==== Translation ====
Reluctant to conform to socialist realism, Pasternak turned to translation in order to provide for his family. He soon produced acclaimed translations of Sándor Petőfi, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Rainer Maria Rilke, Paul Verlaine, Taras Shevchenko, and Nikoloz Baratashvili. Osip Mandelstam, however, privately warned him, 

In a 1942 letter, Pasternak declared, 

According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak believed in not being too literal in his translations, which he felt could confuse the meaning of the text. He instead advocated observing each poem from afar to plumb its true depths.

Pasternak&#x27;s translations of William Shakespeare (&quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot;, &quot;Othello&quot;, &quot;King Henry IV&quot; (Part I) and (Part II), &quot;Hamlet&quot;, &quot;Macbeth&quot;, &quot;King Lear&quot;) remain deeply popular with Russian audiences because of their colloquial, modernised dialogues. Pasternak&#x27;s critics, however, accused him of &quot;pasternakizing&quot; Shakespeare. In a 1956 essay, Pasternak wrote: 

According to Ivinskaya:
While they were both collaborating on translating Rabindranath Tagore from Bengali into Russian, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya: &quot;1) Bring out the theme of the poem, its subject matter, as clearly as possible; 2) tighten up the fluid, non-European form by rhyming internally, not at the end of the lines; 3) use loose, irregular meters, mostly ternary ones. You may allow yourself to use assonances.&quot;

Later, while she was collaborating with him on a translation of Vítězslav Nezval, Pasternak told Ivinskaya:
According to Ivinskaya, however, translation was not a genuine vocation for Pasternak. She later recalled:
=== Music ===
Boris Pasternak was also a composer, and had a promising musical career as a musician ahead of him, had he chosen to pursue it. He came from a musical family: his mother was a concert pianist and a student of Anton Rubinstein and Theodor Leschetizky, and Pasternak&#x27;s early impressions were of hearing piano trios in the home. The family had a dacha (country house) close to one occupied by Alexander Scriabin. Sergei Rachmaninoff, Rainer Maria Rilke and Leo Tolstoy were all visitors to the family home. His father Leonid was a painter who produced one of the most important portraits of Scriabin, and Pasternak wrote many years later of witnessing with great excitement the creation of Scriabin&#x27;s Symphony No. 3 (&quot;The Divine Poem&quot;), in 1903.

Pasternak began to compose at the age of 13. The high achievements of his mother discouraged him from becoming a pianist, but – inspired by Scriabin – he entered the Moscow Conservatory, but left abruptly in 1910 at the age of twenty, to study philosophy in Marburg University. Four years later he returned to Moscow, having finally decided on a career in literature, publishing his first book of poems, influenced by Aleksandr Blok and the Russian Futurists, the same year.

Pasternak&#x27;s early compositions show the clear influence of Scriabin. His single-movement Piano Sonata of 1909 shows a more mature and individual voice. Nominally in B minor, it moves freely from key to key with frequent changes of key-signature and a chromatic dissonant style that defies easy analysis. Although composed during his time at the Conservatory, the Sonata was composed at Rayki, some 40km north-east of Moscow, where Leonid Pasternak had his painting studio and taught his students.

== Selected books by Pasternak ==
=== Poetry collections ===
* &quot;Twin in the Clouds&quot; (1914)
* &quot;Over the Barriers&quot; (1916)
* &quot;Themes and Variations&quot; (1917)
* &quot;My Sister, Life&quot; (1922)
* &quot;Second Birth&quot; (1932)
* &quot;On Early Trains&quot; (1944)
* &quot;Selected Poems&quot; (1946)
* &quot;Poems&quot; (1954)
* &quot;When the Weather Clears&quot; (1959)
* &quot;In The Interlude: Poems 1945–1960&quot; (1962)

=== Books of prose ===
* &quot;Safe Conduct&quot; (1931)
* &quot;The Last Summer&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Childhood&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Selected Writings&quot; (1949)
* &quot;Collected Works&quot; (1945)
* &quot;Goethe&#x27;s Faust&quot; (1952)
* &quot;Essay in Autobiography&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; (1957)

== See also ==
* List of Jewish Nobel laureates

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* Conquest, Robert. (1962). &quot;The Pasternak Affair: Courage of Genius. A Documentary Report.&quot; New York: J.B. Lippincott Company.
** 
* Paolo Mancosu, &quot;Inside the Zhivago Storm: The Editorial Adventures of Pasternak&#x27;s Masterpiece,&quot; Milan: Feltrinelli, 2013
* Mossman, Elliott (ed.) (1982) &quot;The Correspondence of Boris Pasternak and Olga Freidenberg 1910 – 1954&quot;, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
* Peter Finn and Petra Couvee, &quot;The Zhivago Affair: The Kremlin, the CIA, and the Battle Over a Forbidden Book,&quot; New York: Pantheon Books, 2014
* Paolo Mancosu, &quot;Zhivago&#x27;s Secret Journey: From Typescript to Book,&quot; Stanford: Hoover Press, 2016
* Anna Pasternak, &quot;Lara: The Untold Love Story and the Inspiration for Doctor Zhivago&quot;, Ecco, 2017; .
* Paolo Mancosu, &quot;Moscow has Ears Everywhere: New Investigations on Pasternak and Ivinskaya,&quot; Stanford: Hoover Press, 2019

== External links ==
* 
* Read Pasternak&#x27;s interview with &quot;The Paris Review&quot; Summer-Fall 1960 No. 24
* Pasternak profile at Poets.org
* PBS biography of Pasternak 
* Register of the Pasternak Family Papers at the Hoover Institution Archives
* profile and images at the Pasternak Trust
* pp. 36–39: Pasternak as a student at Marburg University, Germany
* Boris Pasternak poetry
* The Poems by Boris Pasternak (English)
* – Cornell University Lecture Tape Collection, 1990</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41223" start="0" end="27" title="Boris Pasternak" label="Boris Leonidovich Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="225" end="231" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="287" end="303" title="Russian language" label="Russian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="338" end="348" title="stage play" label="stage play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="353" end="359" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="361" end="369" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q170800" start="371" end="391" title="Pedro Calderón de la Barca" label="Calderón de la Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="396" end="407" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q206870" start="487" end="501" title="Doctor Zhivago (novel)" label="Doctor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="553" end="579" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="Russian Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="668" end="672" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="781" end="806" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="842" end="877" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1181" end="1187" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="1215" end="1233" title="post-Impressionist" label="post-Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q213596" start="1242" end="1258" title="Leonid Pasternak" label="Leonid Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949325" start="1293" end="1347" title="Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture" label="Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q213596" start="1364" end="1376" title="Rosa Kaufman" label="Rosa Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="1416" end="1422" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1437" end="1452" title="Isadore Kaufman" label="Isadore Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707668" start="1523" end="1528" title="Lydia Pasternak Slater" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q319902" start="1597" end="1612" title="Isaac Abarbanel" label="Isaac Abarbanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="1638" end="1654" title="Sephardic Jewish" label="Sephardic Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1655" end="1666" title="Philosophy" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="1668" end="1685" title="Rabbinic commentaries" label="Bible commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1704" end="1712" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595364" start="1834" end="1863" title="Holy Dormition Pochayiv Lavra" label="Holy Dormition Pochayev Lavra"/>
<link wikidata="Q215539" start="2522" end="2541" title="Moscow Conservatory" label="Moscow Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q80207" start="2627" end="2642" title="University of Lviv" label="Lvov University"/>
<link wikidata="Q657907" start="3234" end="3243" title="Tolstoyan" label="Tolstoyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="3263" end="3274" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q146866" start="3448" end="3460" title="Resurrection (Tolstoy novel)" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318426" start="3514" end="3518" title="Niva (magazine)" label="Niva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655395" start="3542" end="3553" title="Adolf Marks" label="Fyodor Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284613" start="3855" end="3866" title="Max Hayward" label="Max Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="3930" end="3949" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Sergei Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q185647" start="3951" end="3969" title="Alexander Scriabin" label="Alexander Scriabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314189" start="3971" end="3982" title="Lev Shestov" label="Lev Shestov"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="3988" end="4006" title="Rainer Maria Rilke" label="Rainer Maria Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q215539" start="4111" end="4130" title="Moscow Conservatory" label="Moscow Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="4166" end="4187" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="4191" end="4198" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q737560" start="4223" end="4234" title="neo-Kantian" label="neo-Kantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76709" start="4248" end="4261" title="Hermann Cohen" label="Hermann Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76501" start="4263" end="4279" title="Nicolai Hartmann" label="Nicolai Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76504" start="4285" end="4296" title="Paul Natorp" label="Paul Natorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492605" start="4393" end="4409" title="Olga Freidenberg" label="Olga Freidenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="4516" end="4532" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5000" end="5023" title=":ru:Высоцкий, Вульф Янкелевич" label="family of tea merchants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910758" start="5039" end="5052" title="Wissotzky Tea" label="Wissotzky Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q213596" start="5261" end="5277" title="Leonid Pasternak" label="Leonid Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q617166" start="6059" end="6075" title="Russian Futurist" label="Russian Futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960513" start="6490" end="6509" title="Vadim Shershenevich" label="Vadim Shershenevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529788" start="6558" end="6571" title="Ego-Futurism" label="Ego-Futurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400843" start="6870" end="6884" title="Cubo-Futurism" label="Cubo-Futurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="7231" end="7244" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="7411" end="7416" title="Rilke" label="Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q46599" start="7418" end="7427" title="Lermontov" label="Lermontov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="7429" end="7436" title="Pushkin" label="Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127291" start="7547" end="7562" title="Vsevolodo-Vilva" label="Vsevolodo-Vilva"/>
<link wikidata="Q915" start="7568" end="7572" title="Perm, Russia" label="Perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="7774" end="7792" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284613" start="7815" end="7826" title="Max Hayward" label="Max Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q189950" start="8029" end="8045" title="Osip Mandelshtam" label="Osip Mandelshtam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188526" start="8047" end="8064" title="Marina Tsvetayeva" label="Marina Tsvetayeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="8281" end="8293" title="White émigré" label="White émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="8467" end="8472" title="Rilke" label="Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q188526" start="8477" end="8487" title="Tsvetayeva" label="Tsvetayeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="8740" end="8766" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="Russian Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q538379" start="9407" end="9423" title="Larissa Reissner" label="Larissa Reissner"/>
<link wikidata="Q132964" start="9499" end="9518" title="Vladimir Mayakovsky" label="Vladimir Mayakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q460329" start="9523" end="9537" title="Nikolai Aseyev" label="Nikolai Aseyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="9613" end="9648" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q506613" start="10372" end="10388" title="Heinrich Neuhaus" label="Heinrich Neuhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189950" start="10641" end="10656" title="Osip Mandelstam" label="Osip Mandelstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q31506" start="10675" end="10689" title="Stalin Epigram" label="Stalin Epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="10850" end="10854" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q141869" start="10860" end="10874" title="Genrikh Yagoda" label="Genrikh Yagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q753932" start="10939" end="10947" title="Izvestia" label="Izvestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186709" start="10965" end="10981" title="Nikolai Bukharin" label="Nikolai Bukharin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="11133" end="11144" title="Moscow Kremlin" label="the Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631954" start="11664" end="11674" title="Case of Trotskyist Anti-Soviet Military Organization" label="show trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q552297" start="11686" end="11696" title="Iona Yakir" label="Iona Yakir"/>
<link wikidata="Q142141" start="11709" end="11729" title="Mikhail Tukhachevsky" label="Mikhail Tukhachevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425328" start="11735" end="11758" title="Union of Soviet Writers" label="Union of Soviet Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q657907" start="12041" end="12050" title="Tolstoyan" label="Tolstoyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q144077" start="12410" end="12425" title="Titsian Tabidze" label="Titsian Tabidze"/>
<link wikidata="Q188526" start="12580" end="12596" title="Marina Tsvetaeva" label="Marina Tsvetaeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669133" start="12601" end="12615" title="Paolo Iashvili" label="Paolo Iashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="12667" end="12676" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q509174" start="13319" end="13333" title="Olga Ivinskaya" label="Olga Ivinskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469587" start="13381" end="13389" title="Novy Mir" label="Novy Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q381062" start="14022" end="14035" title="List of national poets" label="national poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81219" start="14037" end="14050" title="Sándor Petőfi" label="Sándor Petőfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="15220" end="15223" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784354" start="15363" end="15374" title="Korean poetry" label="Korean poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q646334" start="15512" end="15527" title="Lubyanka (KGB)" label="Lubyanka Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="15740" end="15745" title="GULAG" label="GULAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q625369" start="15769" end="15777" title="Mistress (lover)" label="mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141036" start="15859" end="15874" title="Gogol Boulevard" label="Gogol Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341676" start="15918" end="15949" title="Kropotkinskaya" label="Palace of Soviets Metro Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="16040" end="16052" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q29478" start="16145" end="16150" title="Goethe&amp;#x27;s Faust" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469587" start="16216" end="16224" title="Novy Mir" label="Novy Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="16275" end="16281" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="16372" end="16385" title="individualist" label="individualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="16896" end="16901" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="17239" end="17252" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="17266" end="17277" title="Animal Farm" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063221" start="17370" end="17378" title="Napoleon (Animal Farm)" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="17445" end="17462" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q206870" start="17569" end="17583" title="Doctor Zhivago (novel)" label="Doctor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469587" start="17659" end="17667" title="Novy Mir" label="Novy Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="17733" end="17750" title="socialist realism" label="socialist realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="17773" end="17784" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061633" start="17785" end="17797" title="Yuri Zhivago" label="Yuri Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q83834" start="17945" end="17956" title="anti-Soviet" label="anti-Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="18000" end="18009" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="18011" end="18027" title="Collectivisation" label="Collectivisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="18033" end="18044" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="18054" end="18059" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="18137" end="18160" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18180" end="18200" title="Sergio D&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Sergio D&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346201" start="18442" end="18465" title="Giangiacomo Feltrinelli" label="Giangiacomo Feltrinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q536372" start="19125" end="19138" title="Boris Pilnyak" label="Boris Pilnyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q204868" start="19143" end="19158" title="Evgeny Zamyatin" label="Evgeny Zamyatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="20175" end="20202" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20316" end="20327" title="#Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="20482" end="20497" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294354" start="20562" end="20577" title="Jewish assimilation" label="assimilationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="20596" end="20609" title="Jewish people" label="Jewish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076567" start="20834" end="20848" title="Divine Liturgy" label="Divine Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="20953" end="20960" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="20965" end="20974" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284613" start="21061" end="21072" title="Max Hayward" label="Max Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753381" start="21077" end="21089" title="Manya Harari" label="Manya Harari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21330" end="21348" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q152416" start="21451" end="21459" title="Samizdat" label="Samizdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="21785" end="21791" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906975" start="21905" end="21921" title="Christian poetry" label="Christian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2794113" start="22068" end="22077" title="hate mail" label="hate mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q921268" start="22505" end="22520" title="Lars Gyllensten" label="Lars Gyllensten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707668" start="22991" end="23013" title="Lydia Pasternak Slater" label="Lydia Pasternak Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q161933" start="23123" end="23138" title="Alberto Moravia" label="Alberto Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="23469" end="23477" title="telegram" label="telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q207360" start="23485" end="23500" title="Swedish Academy" label="Swedish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469587" start="23928" end="23936" title="Novy Mir" label="Novy Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q206870" start="23967" end="23981" title="Doctor Zhivago (novel)" label="Doctor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="24209" end="24220" title="Reactionary" label="Reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291992" start="24281" end="24295" title="Solomon Volkov" label="Solomon Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="24357" end="24366" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="24887" end="24904" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q34474" start="24943" end="24965" title="Alexander Solzhenitsyn" label="Alexander Solzhenitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425328" start="25239" end="25262" title="Union of Soviet Writers" label="Union of Soviet Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q896323" start="25361" end="25376" title="Inner emigration" label="internal émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="25391" end="25406" title="fifth columnist" label="fifth columnist"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="25531" end="25540" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q368812" start="25668" end="25689" title="Konstantin Paustovsky" label="Konstantin Paustovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q297736" start="25721" end="25740" title="Yevgeny Yevtushenko" label="Yevgeny Yevtushenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="25890" end="25906" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q862297" start="26275" end="26287" title="Bill Mauldin" label="Bill Mauldin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26297" end="26322" title=":File:I won the Nobel Prize for Literature.jpg" label="a cartoon about Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q649953" start="26341" end="26380" title="Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning" label="Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="26417" end="26422" title="GULAG" label="GULAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q243267" start="26921" end="26937" title="Juliusz Słowacki" label="Juliusz Słowacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q170800" start="26942" end="26968" title="Pedro Calderón de la Barca" label="Pedro Calderón de la Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="27375" end="27381" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="27584" end="27594" title="stage play" label="stage play"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="27617" end="27629" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498278" start="27650" end="27667" title="serfdom in Russia" label="serfdom in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="27715" end="27731" title="The Paris Review" label="The Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q160169" start="28209" end="28214" title="dacha" label="dacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q593888" start="28678" end="28689" title="Peredelkino" label="Peredelkino"/>
<link wikidata="Q368812" start="28765" end="28786" title="Konstantin Paustovsky" label="Konstantin Paustovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q697295" start="29475" end="29481" title="shrine" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528945" start="29501" end="29517" title="Soviet dissident" label="Soviet dissident"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="29905" end="29908" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284613" start="30233" end="30244" title="Max Hayward" label="Max Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q705943" start="30360" end="30373" title="Rehabilitation (Soviet)" label="rehabilitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="30398" end="30429" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622450" start="30521" end="30542" title="Russian Supreme Court" label="Russian Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q574625" start="30758" end="30761" title="NTV (Russia)" label="NTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="30804" end="30808" title="muse" label="muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="30838" end="30845" title="Pushkin" label="Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360522" start="30876" end="30885" title="Anna Kern" label="Anna Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q31628" start="30891" end="30898" title="Yesenin" label="Yesenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q483512" start="30924" end="30931" title="Isadora Duncan" label="Isadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q509174" start="30977" end="30991" title="Olga Ivinskaya" label="Olga Ivinskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="31136" end="31153" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="31165" end="31176" title="Perestroika" label="Perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="31227" end="31241" title="3508 Pasternak" label="3508 Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q152416" start="31307" end="31315" title="Samizdat" label="Samizdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469587" start="31389" end="31397" title="Novy Mir" label="Novy Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q152043" start="31598" end="31619" title="Mstislav Rostropovich" label="Mstislav Rostropovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="31632" end="31636" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="31730" end="31748" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="31759" end="31778" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q206870" start="31825" end="31839" title="Doctor Zhivago (novel)" label="Doctor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="31988" end="32002" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160169" start="32220" end="32225" title="dacha" label="dacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q593888" start="32229" end="32240" title="Peredelkino" label="Peredelkino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087181" start="32405" end="32417" title="Historic house museum" label="house-museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="32421" end="32429" title="Soviet Union" label="the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q198102" start="32530" end="32539" title="Chistopol" label="Chistopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="32593" end="32612" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Great Patriotic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q593888" start="32633" end="32644" title="Peredelkino" label="Peredelkino"/>
<link wikidata="Q213596" start="32803" end="32809" title="Leonid Pasternak" label="Leonid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127291" start="32844" end="32859" title="Vsevolodo-Vilva" label="Vsevolodo-Vilva"/>
<link wikidata="Q915" start="32957" end="32961" title="Perm, Russia" label="Perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q115035" start="33037" end="33050" title="Perm Opera and Ballet Theatre" label="Opera Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="33078" end="33093" title="memorial plaque" label="memorial plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2770" start="33196" end="33200" title="Tula, Russia" label="Tula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="33322" end="33336" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="33406" end="33410" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3868800" start="33604" end="33614" title="Muchkapsky (urban locality)" label="Muchkapsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="33697" end="33705" title="Soviet Union" label="the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="33710" end="33716" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="33907" end="33917" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q521461" start="33927" end="33942" title="miniature sheet" label="miniature sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="34274" end="34282" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q521461" start="34292" end="34307" title="miniature sheet" label="miniature sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="34572" end="34578" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502763" start="34686" end="34698" title="Russian Post" label="Russian Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q198102" start="34802" end="34811" title="Chistopol" label="Chistopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q855493" start="34895" end="34941" title="Exhibition of Achievements of National Economy" label="Exhibition of Achievements of National Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="34975" end="34981" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="35019" end="35032" title="Google Doodle" label="Google Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="35175" end="35187" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="35189" end="35203" title="3508 Pasternak" label="3508 Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q242809" start="35237" end="35267" title="Lyudmila Georgievna Karachkina" label="Lyudmila Georgievna Karachkina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140588" start="35298" end="35314" title="Russian-American" label="Russian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q229274" start="35337" end="35351" title="Regina Spektor" label="Regina Spektor"/>
<link wikidata="Q674606" start="35479" end="35492" title="Begin to Hope" label="Begin to Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="35515" end="35523" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212297" start="35524" end="35538" title="Fred Momotenko" label="Fred Momotenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="35591" end="35609" title="Sergej Rachmaninov" label="Sergej Rachmaninov"/>
<link wikidata="Q14796683" start="35617" end="35632" title="All-Night Vigil" label="All-Night Vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q385271" start="35633" end="35635" title="Opus number" label="Op"/>
<link wikidata="Q206870" start="35685" end="35699" title="Doktor Zhivago" label="Doktor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q323827" start="35756" end="35773" title="Doctor Zhivago (1965 film)" label="screen adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26062" start="35816" end="35827" title="Robert Bolt" label="Robert Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="35844" end="35854" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319880" start="35904" end="35912" title="Roadshow theatrical release" label="roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q170515" start="35932" end="35943" title="Omar Sharif" label="Omar Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q230636" start="35945" end="35962" title="Geraldine Chaplin" label="Geraldine Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181413" start="35968" end="35982" title="Julie Christie" label="Julie Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070872" start="36005" end="36018" title="love triangle" label="love triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="36118" end="36129" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q573376" start="36168" end="36189" title="Doctor Zhivago (TV serial)" label="television miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q535218" start="36241" end="36254" title="Hans Matheson" label="Hans Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q65106" start="36256" end="36276" title="Alexandra Maria Lara" label="Alexandra Maria Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q42581" start="36278" end="36293" title="Keira Knightley" label="Keira Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q214309" start="36299" end="36308" title="Sam Neill" label="Sam Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382330" start="36355" end="36373" title="Aleksandr Proshkin" label="Aleksandr Proshkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q563895" start="36387" end="36401" title="Oleg Menshikov" label="Oleg Menshikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q509174" start="36571" end="36585" title="Olga Ivinskaya" label="Olga Ivinskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="36802" end="36819" title="socialist realism" label="socialist realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81219" start="36932" end="36945" title="Sándor Petőfi" label="Sándor Petőfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="36947" end="36973" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="36975" end="36993" title="Rainer Maria Rilke" label="Rainer Maria Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q755" start="36995" end="37008" title="Paul Verlaine" label="Paul Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134958" start="37010" end="37026" title="Taras Shevchenko" label="Taras Shevchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q560238" start="37032" end="37052" title="Nikoloz Baratashvili" label="Nikoloz Baratashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q189950" start="37054" end="37069" title="Osip Mandelstam" label="Osip Mandelstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="37397" end="37416" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="37424" end="37440" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="37454" end="37474" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="37488" end="37495" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q631855" start="37503" end="37537" title="Henry IV, Part 1" label="&amp;quot;King Henry IV&amp;quot; (Part I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232349" start="37542" end="37551" title="Henry IV, Part 2" label="(Part II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="37559" end="37565" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="37579" end="37586" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="37600" end="37609" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="37913" end="37932" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="37938" end="37945" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="38194" end="38200" title="Meter (poetry)" label="meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q191092" start="38253" end="38262" title="assonance" label="assonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q471184" start="38336" end="38352" title="Vítězslav Nezval" label="Vítězslav Nezval"/>
<link wikidata="Q87567" start="38710" end="38726" title="Anton Rubinstein" label="Anton Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q362340" start="38731" end="38750" title="Theodor Leschetizky" label="Theodor Leschetizky"/>
<link wikidata="Q160169" start="38849" end="38854" title="dacha" label="dacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q185647" start="38896" end="38914" title="Alexander Scriabin" label="Alexander Scriabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="38916" end="38935" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Sergei Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="38937" end="38955" title="Rainer Maria Rilke" label="Rainer Maria Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="38960" end="38971" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223538" start="39209" end="39223" title="Symphony No. 3 (Scriabin)" label="Symphony No. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q215539" start="39431" end="39450" title="Moscow Conservatory" label="Moscow Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="39523" end="39541" title="Marburg University" label="Marburg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q164765" start="39683" end="39697" title="Aleksandr Blok" label="Aleksandr Blok"/>
<link wikidata="Q617166" start="39706" end="39723" title="Russian Futurists" label="Russian Futurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q25217227" start="40764" end="40779" title="The Last Summer (Pasternak novella)" label="The Last Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206870" start="40993" end="41007" title="Doctor Zhivago (novel)" label="Doctor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915649" start="41039" end="41069" title="List of Jewish Nobel laureates" label="List of Jewish Nobel laureates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4668" wikidata="Q209875" url="?curid=4668" title="Binomial coefficient">
<text>In mathematics, the binomial coefficients are the positive integers that occur as coefficients in the binomial theorem. Commonly, a binomial coefficient is indexed by a pair of integers and is written formula_1 It is the coefficient of the term in the polynomial expansion of the binomial power ; this coefficient can be computed by the multiplicative formula
: formula_2
which using factorial notation can be compactly expressed as
: formula_3

For example, the fourth power of is
: formula_4
and the binomial coefficient formula_5 is the coefficient of the term.

Arranging the numbers formula_6 in successive rows for gives a triangular array called Pascal&#x27;s triangle, satisfying the recurrence relation
: formula_7

The binomial coefficients occur in many areas of mathematics, and especially in combinatorics. In combinatorics the symbol formula_8 is usually read as &quot; choose &quot; because there are formula_8 ways to choose an (unordered) subset of elements from a fixed set of elements. For example, there are formula_10 ways to choose elements from , namely , , , , and .

The first form of the binomial coefficients can be generalized to formula_11 for any complex number and integer , and many of their properties continue to hold in this more general form.

== History and notation ==
Andreas von Ettingshausen introduced the notation formula_12 in 1826, although the numbers were known centuries earlier (see Pascal&#x27;s triangle). In about 1150, the Indian mathematician Bhaskaracharya gave an exposition of binomial coefficients in his book &quot;Līlāvatī&quot;.

Alternative notations include , , , , , and , in all of which the stands for &quot;combinations&quot; or &quot;choices&quot;; the notation means the number of ways to choose &quot;k&quot; out of &quot;n&quot; objects. Many calculators use variants of the because they can represent it on a single-line display. In this form the binomial coefficients are easily compared to the numbers of -permutations of, written as , etc.

== Definition and interpretations ==
For natural numbers (taken to include 0) and , the binomial coefficient formula_12 can be defined as the coefficient of the monomial in the expansion of . The same coefficient also occurs (if ) in the binomial formula

(valid for any elements , of a commutative ring),
which explains the name &quot;binomial coefficient&quot;.

Another occurrence of this number is in combinatorics, where it gives the number of ways, disregarding order, that objects can be chosen from among objects; more formally, the number of -element subsets (or -combinations) of an -element set. This number can be seen as equal to the one of the first definition, independently of any of the formulas below to compute it: if in each of the factors of the power one temporarily labels the term with an index (running from to ), then each subset of indices gives after expansion a contribution , and the coefficient of that monomial in the result will be the number of such subsets. This shows in particular that formula_12 is a natural number for any natural numbers and . There are many other combinatorial interpretations of binomial coefficients (counting problems for which the answer is given by a binomial coefficient expression), for instance the number of words formed of bits (digits 0 or 1) whose sum is is given by formula_12, while the number of ways to write formula_16 where every is a nonnegative integer is given by . Most of these interpretations can be shown to be equivalent to counting -combinations.

== Computing the value of binomial coefficients ==
Several methods exist to compute the value of formula_8 without actually expanding a binomial power or counting -combinations.

=== Recursive formula ===
One method uses the recursive, purely additive formula
formula_18 for all integers formula_19 such that formula_20
with boundary values
formula_21
for all integers .

The formula follows from considering the set and counting separately (a) the -element groupings that include a particular set element, say &quot;, in every group (since &quot; is already chosen to fill one spot in every group, we need only choose from the remaining ) and (b) all the &quot;k&quot;-groupings that don&#x27;t include &quot;&quot;; this enumerates all the possible -combinations of elements. It also follows from tracing the contributions to &quot;X&quot;&quot;k&quot; in . As there is zero or in , one might extend the definition beyond the above boundaries to include formula_22 when either or . This recursive formula then allows the construction of Pascal&#x27;s triangle, surrounded by white spaces where the zeros, or the trivial coefficients, would be.

=== Multiplicative formula ===
A more efficient method to compute individual binomial coefficients is given by the formula
formula_23
where the numerator of the first fraction, formula_24, is a falling factorial.
This formula is easiest to understand for the combinatorial interpretation of binomial coefficients.
The numerator gives the number of ways to select a sequence of distinct objects, retaining the order of selection, from a set of objects. The denominator counts the number of distinct sequences that define the same -combination when order is disregarded. This formula can also be stated in a recursive form. Using the &quot;C&quot; notation from above, formula_25, where formula_26. It is readily derived by evaluating formula_27 and can intuitively be understood as starting at the leftmost coefficient of the formula_28-th row of Pascal&#x27;s triangle, whose value is always formula_29, and recursively computing the next coefficient to its right until the formula_30-th one is reached.

Due to the symmetry of the binomial coefficients with regard to and , calculation of the above product, as well as the recursive relation, may be optimised by setting its upper limit to the smaller of and .

=== Factorial formula ===
Finally, though computationally unsuitable, there is the compact form, often used in proofs and derivations, which makes repeated use of the familiar factorial function:
formula_31
where denotes the factorial of . This formula follows from the multiplicative formula above by multiplying numerator and denominator by ; as a consequence it involves many factors common to numerator and denominator. It is less practical for explicit computation (in the case that is small and is large) unless common factors are first cancelled (in particular since factorial values grow very rapidly). The formula does exhibit a symmetry that is less evident from the multiplicative formula (though it is from the definitions)

which leads to a more efficient multiplicative computational routine. Using the falling factorial notation,
formula_32

=== Generalization and connection to the binomial series ===

The multiplicative formula allows the definition of binomial coefficients to be extended by replacing &quot;n&quot; by an arbitrary number &quot;α&quot; (negative, real, complex) or even an element of any commutative ring in which all positive integers are invertible:
formula_33

With this definition one has a generalization of the binomial formula (with one of the variables set to 1), which justifies still calling the formula_34 binomial coefficients:
This formula is valid for all complex numbers &quot;α&quot; and &quot;X&quot; with |&quot;X&quot;| &lt; 1. It can also be interpreted as an identity of formal power series in &quot;X&quot;, where it actually can serve as definition of arbitrary powers of power series with constant coefficient equal to 1; the point is that with this definition all identities hold that one expects for exponentiation, notably
formula_35

If &quot;α&quot; is a nonnegative integer &quot;n&quot;, then all terms with are zero, and the infinite series becomes a finite sum, thereby recovering the binomial formula. However, for other values of &quot;α&quot;, including negative integers and rational numbers, the series is really infinite.

== Pascal&#x27;s triangle ==


Pascal&#x27;s rule is the important recurrence relation

which can be used to prove by mathematical induction that formula_36 is a natural number for all integer &quot;n&quot; ≥ 0 and all integer &quot;k&quot;, a fact that is not immediately obvious from formula (1). To the left and right of Pascal&#x27;s triangle, the entries (shown as blanks) are all zero.

Pascal&#x27;s rule also gives rise to Pascal&#x27;s triangle:

Row number contains the numbers formula_8 for . It is constructed by first placing 1s in the outermost positions, and then filling each inner position with the sum of the two numbers directly above. This method allows the quick calculation of binomial coefficients without the need for fractions or multiplications. For instance, by looking at row number 5 of the triangle, one can quickly read off that
:formula_38

== Combinatorics and statistics ==
Binomial coefficients are of importance in combinatorics because they provide ready formulas for certain frequent counting problems:
* There are formula_39 ways to choose &quot;k&quot; elements from a set of &quot;n&quot; elements. See Combination.
* There are formula_40 ways to choose &quot;k&quot; elements from a set of &quot;n&quot; elements if repetitions are allowed. See Multiset.
* There are formula_41 strings containing &quot;k&quot; ones and &quot;n&quot; zeros.
* There are formula_42 strings consisting of &quot;k&quot; ones and &quot;n&quot; zeros such that no two ones are adjacent.
* The Catalan numbers are formula_43
* The binomial distribution in statistics is formula_44

== Binomial coefficients as polynomials ==
For any nonnegative integer &quot;k&quot;, the expression formula_45 can be written as a polynomial with denominator :
: formula_46
this presents a polynomial in &quot;t&quot; with rational coefficients.

As such, it can be evaluated at any real or complex number &quot;t&quot; to define binomial coefficients with such first arguments. These &quot;generalized binomial coefficients&quot; appear in Newton&#x27;s generalized binomial theorem.

For each &quot;k&quot;, the polynomial formula_47 can be characterized as the unique degree &quot;k&quot; polynomial satisfying and .

Its coefficients are expressible in terms of Stirling numbers of the first kind:
: formula_48
The derivative of formula_47 can be calculated by logarithmic differentiation:
: formula_50
This can cause a problem when evaluated at integers from formula_51 to formula_52, but using identities below we can compute the derivative as:
: formula_53

=== Binomial coefficients as a basis for the space of polynomials ===
Over any field of characteristic 0 (that is, any field that contains the rational numbers), each polynomial &quot;p&quot;(&quot;t&quot;) of degree at most &quot;d&quot; is uniquely expressible as a linear combination formula_54 of binomial coefficients, because the binomial coefficients consist of one polynomial of each degree. The coefficient &quot;a&quot;&quot;k&quot; is the &quot;k&quot;th difference of the sequence &quot;p&quot;(0), &quot;p&quot;(1), ..., &quot;p&quot;(&quot;k&quot;). Explicitly,
=== Integer-valued polynomials ===

Each polynomial formula_47 is integer-valued: it has an integer value at all integer inputs formula_56. (One way to prove this is by induction on &quot;k&quot; using Pascal&#x27;s identity.) Therefore, any integer linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials is integer-valued too. Conversely, () shows that any integer-valued polynomial is an integer linear combination of these binomial coefficient polynomials. More generally, for any subring &quot;R&quot; of a characteristic 0 field &quot;K&quot;, a polynomial in &quot;K&quot;[&quot;t&quot;] takes values in &quot;R&quot; at all integers if and only if it is an &quot;R&quot;-linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials.

=== Example ===
The integer-valued polynomial can be rewritten as
:formula_57

== Identities involving binomial coefficients ==
The factorial formula facilitates relating nearby binomial coefficients. For instance, if &quot;k&quot; is a positive integer and &quot;n&quot; is arbitrary, then

and, with a little more work,
: formula_58

We can also get
: formula_59

Moreover, the following may be useful:
:formula_60

For constant &quot;n&quot;, we have the following recurrence:
: formula_61

To sum up, we have
: formula_62
: formula_63

=== Sums of the binomial coefficients ===
The formula

says that the elements in the th row of Pascal&#x27;s triangle always add up to 2 raised to the th power. This is obtained from the binomial theorem () by setting and . The formula also has a natural combinatorial interpretation: the left side sums the number of subsets of {1, ..., &quot;n&quot;} of sizes &quot;k&quot; = 0, 1, ..., &quot;n&quot;, giving the total number of subsets. (That is, the left side counts the power set of {1, ..., &quot;n&quot;}.) However, these subsets can also be generated by successively choosing or excluding each element 1, ..., &quot;n&quot;; the &quot;n&quot; independent binary choices (bit-strings) allow a total of formula_64 choices. The left and right sides are two ways to count the same collection of subsets, so they are equal.

The formulas

and
: formula_65
follow from the binomial theorem after differentiating with respect to (twice for the latter) and then substituting .

The Chu–Vandermonde identity, which holds for any complex values &quot;m&quot; and &quot;n&quot; and any non-negative integer &quot;k&quot;, is

and can be found by examination of the coefficient of formula_66 in the expansion of using equation (). When , equation () reduces to equation (). In the special case , using (), the expansion () becomes (as seen in Pascal&#x27;s triangle at right)
where the term on the right side is a central binomial coefficient.

Another form of the Chu–Vandermonde identity, which applies for any integers &quot;j&quot;, &quot;k&quot;, and &quot;n&quot; satisfying , is

The proof is similar, but uses the binomial series expansion () with negative integer exponents.
When , equation () gives the hockey-stick identity
: formula_67
and its relative
: formula_68

Let &quot;F&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) denote the &quot;n&quot;-th Fibonacci number.
Then
: formula_69
This can be proved by induction using () or by Zeckendorf&#x27;s representation. A combinatorial proof is given below.

==== Multisections of sums ====
For integers &quot;s&quot; and &quot;t&quot; such that formula_70 series multisection gives the following identity for the sum of binomial coefficients:
: formula_71

For small , these series have particularly nice forms; for example,
: formula_72
: formula_73
: formula_74
: formula_75
: formula_76
: formula_77
: formula_78

==== Partial sums ====
Although there is no closed formula for partial sums
: formula_79
of binomial coefficients, one can again use () and induction to show that for ,
: formula_80
with special case

: formula_81
for . This latter result is also a special case of the result from the theory of finite differences that for any polynomial &quot;P&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) of degree less than &quot;n&quot;,
:formula_82
Differentiating () &quot;k&quot; times and setting &quot;x&quot; = −1 yields this for
formula_83,
when 0 ≤ &quot;k&quot; &lt; &quot;n&quot;,
and the general case follows by taking linear combinations of these.

When &quot;P&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is of degree less than or equal to &quot;n&quot;,

where formula_84 is the coefficient of degree &quot;n&quot; in &quot;P&quot;(&quot;x&quot;).

More generally for (),
: formula_85
where &quot;m&quot; and &quot;d&quot; are complex numbers. This follows immediately applying () to the polynomial instead of , and observing that still has degree less than or equal to &quot;n&quot;, and that its coefficient of degree &quot;n&quot; is &quot;dnan&quot;.

The series formula_86 is convergent for &quot;k&quot; ≥ 2. This formula is used in the analysis of the German tank problem. It follows from formula_87 which is proved by induction on &quot;M&quot;.

=== Identities with combinatorial proofs ===
Many identities involving binomial coefficients can be proved by combinatorial means. For example, for nonnegative integers formula_88, the identity
: formula_89
(which reduces to () when &quot;q&quot; = 1) can be given a double counting proof, as follows. The left side counts the number of ways of selecting a subset of [&quot;n&quot;] = {1, 2, ..., &quot;n&quot;} with at least &quot;q&quot; elements, and marking &quot;q&quot; elements among those selected. The right side counts the same thing, because there are formula_90 ways of choosing a set of &quot;q&quot; elements to mark, and formula_91 to choose which of the remaining elements of [&quot;n&quot;] also belong to the subset.

In Pascal&#x27;s identity
: formula_92
both sides count the number of &quot;k&quot;-element subsets of [&quot;n&quot;]: the two terms on the right side group them into those that contain element &quot;n&quot; and those that do not.

The identity () also has a combinatorial proof. The identity reads
: formula_93

Suppose you have formula_94 empty squares arranged in a row and you want to mark (select) &quot;n&quot; of them. There are formula_95 ways to do this. On the other hand, you may select your &quot;n&quot; squares by selecting &quot;k&quot; squares from among the first &quot;n&quot; and formula_96 squares from the remaining &quot;n&quot; squares; any &quot;k&quot; from 0 to &quot;n&quot; will work. This gives
:formula_97
Now apply () to get the result.

If one denotes by the sequence of Fibonacci numbers, indexed so that , then the identity
formula_98
has the following combinatorial proof. One may show by induction that counts the number of ways that a strip of squares may be covered by and tiles. On the other hand, if such a tiling uses exactly of the tiles, then it uses of the tiles, and so uses tiles total. There are formula_99 ways to order these tiles, and so summing this coefficient over all possible values of gives the identity.

==== Sum of coefficients row ====
The number of &quot;k&quot;-combinations for all &quot;k&quot;, formula_100, is the sum of the &quot;n&quot;th row (counting from 0) of the binomial coefficients. These combinations are enumerated by the 1 digits of the set of base 2 numbers counting from 0 to formula_101, where each digit position is an item from the set of &quot;n&quot;.

=== Dixon&#x27;s identity ===
Dixon&#x27;s identity is
: formula_102
or, more generally,
: formula_103
where &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, and &quot;c&quot; are non-negative integers.

=== Continuous identities ===
Certain trigonometric integrals have values expressible in terms of binomial coefficients: For any formula_104
: formula_105
: formula_106
: formula_107

These can be proved by using Euler&#x27;s formula to convert trigonometric functions to complex exponentials, expanding using the binomial theorem, and integrating term by term.

=== Congruences ===
If &quot;n&quot; is prime, then formula_108 for every &quot;k&quot; with formula_109
More generally, this remains true if &quot;n&quot; is any number and &quot;k&quot; is such that all the numbers between 1 and &quot;k&quot; are coprime to &quot;n&quot;.

Indeed, we have
: formula_110

== Generating functions ==
=== Ordinary generating functions ===
For a fixed , the ordinary generating function of the sequence formula_111 is
: formula_112

For a fixed , the ordinary generating function of the sequence formula_113 is
: formula_114

The bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is
: formula_115

A symmetric bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is
: formula_116
which is the same as the previous generating function after the substitution formula_117.

=== Exponential generating function ===
A symmetric exponential bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is:
: formula_118

== Divisibility properties ==

In 1852, Kummer proved that if &quot;m&quot; and &quot;n&quot; are nonnegative integers and &quot;p&quot; is a prime number, then the largest power of &quot;p&quot; dividing formula_119 equals &quot;p&quot;&quot;c&quot;, where &quot;c&quot; is the number of carries when &quot;m&quot; and &quot;n&quot; are added in base &quot;p&quot;.
Equivalently, the exponent of a prime &quot;p&quot; in formula_39
equals the number of nonnegative integers &quot;j&quot; such that the fractional part of &quot;k&quot;/&quot;p&quot;&quot;j&quot; is greater than the fractional part of &quot;n&quot;/&quot;p&quot;&quot;j&quot;. It can be deduced from this that formula_39 is divisible by &quot;n&quot;/gcd(&quot;n&quot;,&quot;k&quot;). In particular therefore it follows that &quot;p&quot; divides formula_122 for all positive integers &quot;r&quot; and &quot;s&quot; such that . However this is not true of higher powers of &quot;p&quot;: for example 9 does not divide formula_123.

A somewhat surprising result by David Singmaster (1974) is that any integer divides almost all binomial coefficients. More precisely, fix an integer &quot;d&quot; and let &quot;f&quot;(&quot;N&quot;) denote the number of binomial coefficients formula_39 with &quot;n&quot; &lt; &quot;N&quot; such that &quot;d&quot; divides formula_39. Then
: formula_126
Since the number of binomial coefficients formula_39 with &quot;n&quot; &lt; &quot;N&quot; is &quot;N&quot;(&quot;N&quot; + 1) / 2, this implies that the density of binomial coefficients divisible by &quot;d&quot; goes to 1.

Binomial coefficients have divisibility properties related to least common multiples of consecutive integers. For example:
: formula_128 divides formula_129.
: formula_128 is a multiple of formula_131.

Another fact:
An integer is prime if and only if
all the intermediate binomial coefficients
: formula_132
are divisible by &quot;n&quot;.

Proof:
When &quot;p&quot; is prime, &quot;p&quot; divides
: formula_133 for all 
because formula_134 is a natural number and &quot;p&quot; divides the numerator but not the denominator.
When &quot;n&quot; is composite, let &quot;p&quot; be the smallest prime factor of &quot;n&quot; and let . Then and
: formula_135
otherwise the numerator has to be divisible by , this can only be the case when is divisible by &quot;p&quot;. But &quot;n&quot; is divisible by &quot;p&quot;, so &quot;p&quot; does not divide and because &quot;p&quot; is prime, we know that &quot;p&quot; does not divide and so the numerator cannot be divisible by &quot;n&quot;.

== Bounds and asymptotic formulas ==
The following bounds for formula_39 hold for all values of &quot;n&quot; and &quot;k&quot; such that :
formula_137
The first inequality follows from the fact that
formula_138
and each of these formula_139 terms in this product is formula_140. A similar argument can be made to show the second inequality. The final strict inequality is equivalent to formula_141, that is clear since the RHS is a term of the exponential series formula_142.

From the divisibility properties we can infer that
formula_143
where both equalities can be achieved.

The following bounds are useful in information theory:
formula_144
where formula_145 is the binary entropy function. It can be further tightened to
formula_146
for all formula_147.

=== Both &quot;n&quot; and &quot;k&quot; large ===
Stirling&#x27;s approximation yields the following approximation, valid when formula_148 both tend to infinity:
formula_149
Because the inequality forms of Stirling&#x27;s formula also bound the factorials, slight variants on the above asymptotic approximation give exact bounds.
In particular, when formula_28 is sufficiently large, one has
formula_151 and formula_152. More generally, for and (again, by applying Stirling&#x27;s formula to the factorials in the binomial coefficient),
formula_153

If &quot;n&quot; is large and &quot;k&quot; is linear in &quot;n&quot;, various precise asymptotic estimates exist for the binomial coefficient formula_154. For example, if formula_155 then
formula_156
where &quot;d&quot; = &quot;n&quot; − 2&quot;k&quot;.

=== much larger than ===
If is large and is (that is, if ), then
formula_157
where again is the little o notation.

=== Sums of binomial coefficients ===
A simple and rough upper bound for the sum of binomial coefficients can be obtained using the binomial theorem:
formula_158
More precise bounds are given by
formula_159
valid for all integers formula_160 with formula_161.

=== Generalized binomial coefficients ===
The infinite product formula for the gamma function also gives an expression for binomial coefficients
formula_162
which yields the asymptotic formulas
formula_163
as formula_164.

This asymptotic behaviour is contained in the approximation
formula_165
as well. (Here formula_166 is the &quot;k&quot;-th harmonic number and formula_167 is the Euler–Mascheroni constant.)

Further, the asymptotic formula
formula_168
hold true, whenever formula_169 and formula_170 for some complex number formula_171.

== Generalizations ==
=== Generalization to multinomials ===

Binomial coefficients can be generalized to multinomial coefficients defined to be the number:
: formula_172
where
: formula_173

While the binomial coefficients represent the coefficients of , the multinomial coefficients
represent the coefficients of the polynomial
: formula_174
The case &quot;r&quot; = 2 gives binomial coefficients:
: formula_175

The combinatorial interpretation of multinomial coefficients is distribution of &quot;n&quot; distinguishable elements over &quot;r&quot; (distinguishable) containers, each containing exactly &quot;ki&quot; elements, where &quot;i&quot; is the index of the container.

Multinomial coefficients have many properties similar to those of binomial coefficients, for example the recurrence relation:
: formula_176
and symmetry:
: formula_177
where formula_178 is a permutation of (1, 2, ..., &quot;r&quot;).

=== Taylor series ===
Using Stirling numbers of the first kind the series expansion around any arbitrarily chosen point formula_179 is
: formula_180

=== Binomial coefficient with ===
The definition of the binomial coefficients can be extended to the case where formula_28 is real and formula_30 is integer.

In particular, the following identity holds for any non-negative integer formula_30:
: formula_184

This shows up when expanding formula_185 into a power series using the Newton binomial series :
: formula_186

=== Products of binomial coefficients ===
One can express the product of two binomial coefficients as a linear combination of binomial coefficients:
: formula_187

where the connection coefficients are multinomial coefficients. In terms of labelled combinatorial objects, the connection coefficients represent the number of ways to assign labels to a pair of labelled combinatorial objects—of weight &quot;m&quot; and &quot;n&quot; respectively—that have had their first &quot;k&quot; labels identified, or glued together to get a new labelled combinatorial object of weight . (That is, to separate the labels into three portions to apply to the glued part, the unglued part of the first object, and the unglued part of the second object.) In this regard, binomial coefficients are to exponential generating series what falling factorials are to ordinary generating series.

The product of all binomial coefficients in the &quot;n&quot;th row of the Pascal triangle is given by the formula:
: formula_188

=== Partial fraction decomposition ===
The partial fraction decomposition of the reciprocal is given by
: formula_189

=== Newton&#x27;s binomial series ===

Newton&#x27;s binomial series, named after Sir Isaac Newton, is a generalization of the binomial theorem to infinite series:
: formula_190

The identity can be obtained by showing that both sides satisfy the differential equation .

The radius of convergence of this series is 1. An alternative expression is
: formula_191
where the identity
: formula_192
is applied.

=== Multiset (rising) binomial coefficient ===

Binomial coefficients count subsets of prescribed size from a given set. A related combinatorial problem is to count multisets of prescribed size with elements drawn from a given set, that is, to count the number of ways to select a certain number of elements from a given set with the possibility of selecting the same element repeatedly. The resulting numbers are called &quot;multiset coefficients&quot;; the number of ways to &quot;multichoose&quot; (i.e., choose with replacement) &quot;k&quot; items from an &quot;n&quot; element set is denoted formula_193.

To avoid ambiguity and confusion with &quot;n&quot;&#x27;s main denotation in this article, let and .

Multiset coefficients may be expressed in terms of binomial coefficients by the rule
formula_194
One possible alternative characterization of this identity is as follows:
We may define the falling factorial as
formula_195
and the corresponding rising factorial as
formula_196
so, for example,
formula_197
Then the binomial coefficients may be written as
formula_198
while the corresponding multiset coefficient is defined by replacing the falling with the rising factorial:
formula_199

==== Generalization to negative integers &quot;n&quot; ====

For any &quot;n&quot;,
: formula_200
In particular, binomial coefficients evaluated at negative integers &quot;n&quot; are given by signed multiset coefficients. In the special case formula_201, this reduces to formula_202

For example, if &quot;n&quot; = −4 and &quot;k&quot; = 7, then &quot;r&quot; = 4 and &quot;f&quot; = 10:
: formula_203

=== Two real or complex valued arguments ===
The binomial coefficient is generalized to two real or complex valued arguments using the gamma function or beta function via
: formula_204
This definition inherits these following additional properties from formula_205:
: formula_206
moreover,
: formula_207

The resulting function has been little-studied, apparently first being graphed in . Notably, many binomial identities fail: formula_208 but formula_209 for &quot;n&quot; positive (so formula_210 negative). The behavior is quite complex, and markedly different in various octants (that is, with respect to the &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; axes and the line formula_211), with the behavior for negative &quot;x&quot; having singularities at negative integer values and a checkerboard of positive and negative regions:
* in the octant formula_212 it is a smoothly interpolated form of the usual binomial, with a ridge (&quot;Pascal&#x27;s ridge&quot;).
* in the octant formula_213 and in the quadrant formula_214 the function is close to zero.
* in the quadrant formula_215 the function is alternatingly very large positive and negative on the parallelograms with vertices formula_216
* in the octant formula_217 the behavior is again alternatingly very large positive and negative, but on a square grid.
* in the octant formula_218 it is close to zero, except for near the singularities.

=== Generalization to &quot;q&quot;-series ===
The binomial coefficient has a q-analog generalization known as the Gaussian binomial coefficient.

=== Generalization to infinite cardinals ===
The definition of the binomial coefficient can be generalized to infinite cardinals by defining:
: formula_219
where is some set with cardinality formula_220. One can show that the generalized binomial coefficient is well-defined, in the sense that no matter what set we choose to represent the cardinal number formula_220, formula_222 will remain the same. For finite cardinals, this definition coincides with the standard definition of the binomial coefficient.

Assuming the Axiom of Choice, one can show that formula_223 for any infinite cardinal formula_220.

== See also ==

* Binomial transform
* Delannoy number
* Eulerian number
* Hypergeometric function
* List of factorial and binomial topics
* Macaulay representation of an integer
* Motzkin number
* Multiplicities of entries in Pascal&#x27;s triangle
* Narayana number
* Star of David theorem
* Sun&#x27;s curious identity
* Table of Newtonian series
* Trinomial expansion
== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q209875" start="20" end="41" title="Binomial coefficient" label="binomial coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="59" end="66" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="82" end="93" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="102" end="118" title="binomial theorem" label="binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452866" start="252" end="272" title="polynomial expansion" label="polynomial expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193623" start="280" end="288" title="binomial (polynomial)" label="binomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="289" end="294" title="exponentiation" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="384" end="393" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="653" end="675" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="692" end="711" title="recurrence relation" label="recurrence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="805" end="818" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1177" end="1191" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q86374" start="1307" end="1332" title="Andreas von Ettingshausen" label="Andreas von Ettingshausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="1432" end="1454" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q213385" start="1497" end="1511" title="Bhaskaracharya" label="Bhaskaracharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289114" start="1574" end="1582" title="Līlāvatī" label="Līlāvatī"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="1674" end="1685" title="combination" label="combination"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1979" end="1995" title="permutation#k-permutations of n" label="-permutations of"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="2057" end="2071" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="2158" end="2169" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q243723" start="2177" end="2185" title="monomial" label="monomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="2254" end="2270" title="binomial formula" label="binomial formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="2303" end="2319" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="2589" end="2600" title="combination" label="combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="3307" end="3310" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="3774" end="3783" title="recursion" label="recursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="4588" end="4610" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339261" start="4890" end="4907" title="falling factorial" label="falling factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="5542" end="5564" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="5728" end="5749" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="binomial coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="6085" end="6094" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339261" start="6726" end="6752" title="Pochhammer symbol" label="falling factorial notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="7033" end="7049" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003025" start="7437" end="7456" title="formal power series" label="formal power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="7540" end="7552" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="7671" end="7685" title="exponentiation" label="exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099544" start="8038" end="8056" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="8074" end="8093" title="recurrence relation" label="recurrence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178377" start="8125" end="8147" title="mathematical induction" label="mathematical induction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8293" end="8304" title="#Definition_and_interpretations" label="formula (1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="8438" end="8460" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="8958" end="8971" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="9151" end="9162" title="Combination" label="Combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q864377" start="9294" end="9302" title="Multiset" label="Multiset"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="9327" end="9334" title="string (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q270513" start="9520" end="9534" title="Catalan number" label="Catalan number"/>
<link wikidata="Q185547" start="9557" end="9578" title="binomial distribution" label="binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="9582" end="9592" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="9799" end="9809" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="9832" end="9840" title="rational number" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10050" end="10092" title="Binomial theorem#Newton&amp;#x27;s generalized binomial theorem" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s generalized binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657556" start="10275" end="10309" title="Stirling numbers of the first kind" label="Stirling numbers of the first kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="10328" end="10338" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289425" start="10374" end="10401" title="logarithmic differentiation" label="logarithmic differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="10653" end="10658" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q836088" start="10662" end="10678" title="characteristic (algebra)" label="characteristic 0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="10717" end="10732" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068418" start="11024" end="11050" title="finite difference" label="&amp;quot;k&amp;quot;th difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q568988" start="11216" end="11230" title="integer-valued polynomial" label="integer-valued"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099544" start="11352" end="11374" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s identity" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="12900" end="12909" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="13323" end="13338" title="derivative" label="differentiating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147827" start="13407" end="13431" title="Chu–Vandermonde identity" label="Chu–Vandermonde identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045966" start="13835" end="13863" title="central binomial coefficient" label="central binomial coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403965" start="14134" end="14155" title="hockey-stick identity" label="hockey-stick identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23835349" start="14261" end="14277" title="Fibonacci number" label="Fibonacci number"/>
<link wikidata="Q178377" start="14319" end="14328" title="mathematical induction" label="induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188392" start="14344" end="14376" title="Zeckendorf&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Zeckendorf&amp;#x27;s representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4307004" start="14515" end="14534" title="series multisection" label="series multisection"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="14820" end="14834" title="closed formula" label="closed formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="14839" end="14850" title="partial sum" label="partial sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068418" start="15071" end="15089" title="finite differences" label="finite differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="15891" end="15897" title="series (mathematics)" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751512" start="15990" end="16009" title="German tank problem" label="German tank problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q178377" start="16057" end="16066" title="mathematical induction" label="induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402784" start="16196" end="16215" title="combinatorial proof" label="combinatorial means"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191750" start="16353" end="16374" title="double counting (proof technique)" label="double counting proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q23835349" start="17626" end="17642" title="Fibonacci number" label="Fibonacci number"/>
<link wikidata="Q178377" start="17747" end="17756" title="mathematical induction" label="induction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18147" end="18159" title="Combination#Number of k-combinations for all k" label="combinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="18346" end="18352" title="base 2" label="base 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284938" start="18492" end="18513" title="Dixon&amp;#x27;s identity" label="Dixon&amp;#x27;s identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184871" start="18860" end="18880" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="18892" end="18915" title="trigonometric functions" label="trigonometric functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q860609" start="19400" end="19428" title="ordinary generating function" label="ordinary generating function"/>
<link wikidata="Q860609" start="19572" end="19601" title="bivariate generating function" label="bivariate generating function"/>
<link wikidata="Q860609" start="19880" end="19921" title="exponential generating function" label="exponential bivariate generating function"/>
<link wikidata="Q57245" start="20010" end="20016" title="Ernst Kummer" label="Kummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366982" start="20473" end="20488" title="fractional part" label="fractional part"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="20688" end="20691" title="greatest common divisor" label="gcd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176665" start="21002" end="21018" title="David Singmaster" label="David Singmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397701" start="21054" end="21064" title="almost all" label="almost all"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913893" start="23214" end="23237" title="binary entropy function" label="binary entropy function"/>
<link wikidata="Q470877" start="23355" end="23384" title="Stirling&amp;#x27;s approximation" label="Stirling&amp;#x27;s approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="24208" end="24225" title="little o notation" label="little o notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="24360" end="24376" title="binomial theorem" label="binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24535" end="24582" title="Gamma function#Euler&amp;#x27;s definition as an infinite product" label="infinite product formula for the gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407133" start="24835" end="24850" title="harmonic number" label="harmonic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q273023" start="24874" end="24899" title="Euler–Mascheroni constant" label="Euler–Mascheroni constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="25908" end="25919" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657556" start="25980" end="26014" title="Stirling numbers of the first kind" label="Stirling numbers of the first kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="26019" end="26035" title="Taylor series" label="series expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q619985" start="26674" end="26698" title="Multinomial theorem" label="multinomial coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339261" start="27292" end="27309" title="falling factorial" label="falling factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q431617" start="27521" end="27551" title="partial fraction decomposition" label="partial fraction decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="27679" end="27695" title="Sir Isaac Newton" label="Sir Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="27844" end="27865" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428097" start="27873" end="27894" title="radius of convergence" label="radius of convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q864377" start="28170" end="28178" title="multiset" label="multiset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28432" end="28453" title="Multiset#Counting multisets" label="multiset coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339261" start="28910" end="28927" title="falling factorial" label="falling factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190573" start="29748" end="29762" title="gamma function" label="gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q468881" start="29766" end="29779" title="beta function" label="beta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491352" start="31086" end="31094" title="q-analog" label="q-analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527834" start="31123" end="31152" title="Gaussian binomial coefficient" label="Gaussian binomial coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="31265" end="31283" title="Cardinal Number" label="infinite cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="31334" end="31345" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="31495" end="31510" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="31678" end="31693" title="Axiom of Choice" label="Axiom of Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604449" start="31783" end="31801" title="Binomial transform" label="Binomial transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886564" start="31804" end="31819" title="Delannoy number" label="Delannoy number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373849" start="31822" end="31837" title="Eulerian number" label="Eulerian number"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028472" start="31840" end="31863" title="Hypergeometric function" label="Hypergeometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619181" start="31866" end="31903" title="List of factorial and binomial topics" label="List of factorial and binomial topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150829" start="31906" end="31943" title="Macaulay representation of an integer" label="Macaulay representation of an integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915234" start="31946" end="31960" title="Motzkin number" label="Motzkin number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993335" start="31963" end="32014" title="Multiplicities of entries in Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Multiplicities of entries in Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965520" start="32017" end="32032" title="Narayana number" label="Narayana number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601243" start="32035" end="32056" title="Star of David theorem" label="Star of David theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638108" start="32059" end="32086" title="Sun&amp;#x27;s curious identity" label="Sun&amp;#x27;s curious identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673219" start="32089" end="32114" title="Table of Newtonian series" label="Table of Newtonian series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077653" start="32117" end="32136" title="Trinomial expansion" label="Trinomial expansion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4669" wikidata="Q4909463" url="?curid=4669" title="Bill Holbrook">
<text>Bill Holbrook (born 1958) is an American cartoonist and webcomic writer and artist, best known for his syndicated comic strip &quot;On the Fastrack&quot;.

Born in Los Angeles, Holbrook grew up in Huntsville, Alabama, and began drawing at an early age. While majoring in illustration and visual design at Auburn University, Holbrook served as art director of the student newspaper, doing editorial cartoons and a weekly comic strip. At the same time, his work was being published in the &quot;Huntsville Times&quot; and the &quot;Monroe Journal&quot;. After graduation in 1980, he joined the &quot;Atlanta Constitution&quot; as an editorial staff artist.

During a 1982 visit to relatives on the West Coast, Holbrook met &quot;Peanuts&quot; creator, Charles Schulz. Following his advice and encouragement, Holbrook created a strip in the fall of that year about a college graduate working in a rundown diner. It did not stir syndicate interest, but what he learned on the strip helped him when he created &quot;On the Fastrack&quot;.

Eleven days before &quot;On the Fastrack&quot; made its syndicated debut (March 19, 1984), Holbrook met Teri Peitso on a blind date. They were married on Pearl Harbor Day, 1985. They have two daughters, Chandler and Haviland. Peitso-Holbrook&#x27;s novels have been nominated for both Edgar Awards and Agatha Awards. She is currently an assistant professor in literacy education at Georgia State University. The family lives in the Atlanta area.

On October 3, 1988, Holbrook began his second strip, &quot;Safe Havens&quot;, and his third strip, &quot;Kevin and Kell&quot; was launched in September 1995.

==Comic strips==
Every week Holbrook writes the story line for the next three weeks for one of his strips and draws the next three weeks&#x27; worth of strips for another. In 2010, characters from &quot;On the Fastrack&quot; and &quot;Safe Havens&quot; began appearing in both strips.
* &quot;On the Fastrack&quot; - About the misadventures at Fastrack, Inc., &quot;On the Fastrack&quot; has been distributed by King Features Syndicate since 1984. It now appears in 75 newspapers nationwide.
* &quot;Safe Havens&quot; - Initially about a day care center, this strip evolved into the adventures of Samantha Argus and her friends and is now syndicated nationally to over 50 newspapers.
* &quot;Kevin and Kell&quot; - Originally an online-only strip but was also published in the &quot;Atlanta Journal-Constitution&quot; for some years, &quot;Kevin and Kell&quot; centers on the mixed marriage between a rabbit, Kevin and a grey wolf, Kell Dewclaw. The plot revolves around species-related humor, satire, and interpersonal conflict.
* &quot;Duel In The Somme &quot; - Holbrook illustrated a story by Ben Bova and Rob Balder in this strip about a romantic rivalry between a computer-simulation designer and his boss.

==References==


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4909463" start="0" end="13" title="Bill Holbrook" label="Bill Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="56" end="64" title="webcomic" label="webcomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="114" end="125" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112712" start="132" end="147" title="On the Fastrack" label="On the Fastrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="164" end="175" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="197" end="216" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="305" end="322" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741121" start="493" end="509" title="Huntsville Times" label="Huntsville Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740374" start="530" end="544" title="Amasa Coleman Lee" label="Monroe Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="598" end="618" title="Atlanta Constitution" label="Atlanta Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="727" end="734" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="750" end="764" title="Charles Schulz" label="Charles Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974848" start="1189" end="1205" title="Pearl Harbor Day" label="Pearl Harbor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="1320" end="1331" title="Edgar Award" label="Edgar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q390975" start="1337" end="1349" title="Agatha Award" label="Agatha Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509333" start="1417" end="1441" title="Georgia State University" label="Georgia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="1467" end="1474" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398483" start="1541" end="1552" title="Safe Havens" label="Safe Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740071" start="1587" end="1601" title="Kevin and Kell" label="Kevin and Kell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112712" start="1934" end="1949" title="On the Fastrack" label="On the Fastrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469675" start="2053" end="2076" title="King Features Syndicate" label="King Features Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398483" start="2141" end="2152" title="Safe Havens" label="Safe Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740071" start="2333" end="2347" title="Kevin and Kell" label="Kevin and Kell"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="2370" end="2387" title="webcomic" label="online-only strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="2424" end="2452" title="Atlanta Journal-Constitution" label="Atlanta Journal-Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q436664" start="2738" end="2746" title="Ben Bova" label="Ben Bova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339966" start="2751" end="2761" title="Rob Balder" label="Rob Balder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4670" wikidata="Q309932" url="?curid=4670" title="Bruce Campbell">
<text>Bruce Lorne Campbell (born June 22, 1958) is an American actor and filmmaker. He is known best for his role as Ash Williams in Sam Raimi&#x27;s &quot;Evil Dead&quot; horror series, beginning with the short movie &quot;Within the Woods&quot; (1978). He has also featured in many low-budget cult movies, such as &quot;Crimewave&quot; (1985), &quot;Maniac Cop&quot; (1988), &quot;&quot; (1989), and &quot;Bubba Ho-Tep&quot; (2002).

Campbell had the main roles of the television series &quot;The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.&quot; (1993–1994) and &quot;Jack of All Trades&quot; (2000), and a recurring role as Autolycus, King of Thieves in &quot;&quot; (1995–1999) and &quot;&quot; (1995–1999). He played Sam Axe on the USA Network series &quot;Burn Notice&quot; (2007–2013) and reprised his role as Ash for the Starz series &quot;Ash vs. Evil Dead&quot; (2015–2018). He also appeared in &quot;The Escort&quot; (2015).

Campbell directed, produced, and featured in the documentaries &quot;Fanalysis&quot; (2002) and &quot;A Community Speaks&quot; (2004); co-wrote, directed, produced, and featured in the movie &quot;Man with the Screaming Brain&quot; (2005); and directed, produced, and featured in a parody of his career &quot;My Name Is Bruce&quot; (2007).

Campbell is known for frequent collaborations with the aforementioned Raimi, his brother Ted, Josh Becker, and Scott Spiegel.

==Early life==
Bruce Lorne Campbell was born in Royal Oak, Michigan, on June 22, 1958, the son of advertising executive and college professor Charles Newton Campbell and homemaker Joanne Louise (née Pickens). He is of English and Scottish ancestry, and has an older brother named Don and an older half-brother named Michael. His father was also an actor and director for local theater. Campbell began acting and making short Super 8 movies with friends as a teenager. After meeting future moviemaker Sam Raimi while the two attended Wylie E. Groves High School, they became good friends and collaborators. Campbell attended Western Michigan University and continued to pursue an acting career.

==Career==
===Film===

Campbell and Raimi collaborated with a 30-minute Super 8 version of the first &quot;Evil Dead&quot; movie, titled &quot;Within the Woods&quot; (1978), which was initially used to attract investors. He and Raimi got together with family and friends to begin working on &quot;The Evil Dead&quot; (1981). While featuring as the protagonist, Campbell also had participation with the production of the movie, receiving a co-executive producer credit. Raimi wrote, directed, and edited the movie, while Rob Tapert produced. After an endorsement by horror author Stephen King, the movie slowly began to receive attention and offers for distribution. Four years after its original release, it became the most popular movie in the UK. It was then distributed in the United States, resulting in the sequels &quot;Evil Dead II&quot; (1987) and &quot;Army of Darkness&quot; (1992).

Campbell was also drawn in the Marvel Zombie comics as his character, Ash Williams. He is featured in five comics, all in the series &quot;Marvel Zombies vs. Army of Darkness&quot;. In them, he fights alongside the Marvel heroes against the heroes and people who have become zombies (deadites) while in search of the Necronomicon (Book of the Names of the Dead). Campbell also played as Coach Boomer in the movie “Sky High”.

He has appeared in several of Raimi&#x27;s movies other than the &quot;Evil Dead&quot; series, notably having cameo appearances in the director&#x27;s &quot;Spider-Man&quot; film series. Campbell also joined the cast of Raimi&#x27;s movie &quot;Darkman&quot; and &quot;The Quick and the Dead&quot;, though having no actual screen time in the latter movie&#x27;s theatrical version. In March 2022, Campbell was announced to have a cameo in Raimi&#x27;s Marvel Cinematic Universe film &quot;Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness&quot;.

Campbell often performs quirky roles, such as Elvis Presley for the movie &quot;Bubba Ho-Tep&quot;. Along with &quot;Bubba Ho-Tep&quot;, he played a supporting role in &quot;Maniac Cop&quot; and &quot;Maniac Cop 2&quot;, and spoofed his career in the self-directed &quot;My Name is Bruce.&quot;

Other mainstream movies for Campbell include supporting or featured roles in the Coen Brothers movie &quot;The Hudsucker Proxy&quot;, the Michael Crichton adaptation &quot;Congo&quot;, the movie version of &quot;McHale&#x27;s Navy&quot;, &quot;Escape from L.A.&quot; (the sequel to John Carpenter&#x27;s &quot;Escape from New York&quot;), the Jim Carrey drama &quot;The Majestic&quot; and the 2005 Disney movie &quot;Sky High&quot;.

Campbell had a major voice role for the 2009 animated adaptation of the children&#x27;s book &quot;Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs&quot;, and a supporting voice role for Pixar&#x27;s &quot;Cars 2&quot;.

Campbell produced the 2013 remake of &quot;The Evil Dead&quot;, along with Raimi and Rob Tapert, appearing in the movie&#x27;s post-credits scene in a cameo role with the expectation he would reprise that role in &quot;Army of Darkness 2&quot;. The next year, the comedy metal band Psychostick released a song titled &quot;Bruce Campbell&quot; on their album &quot;&quot; that pays a comedic tribute to his past roles.

Campbell worked as an executive producer for the 2023 movie &quot;Evil Dead Rise&quot;.

===Television===
Other than cinema, Campbell has appeared in a number of television series. He featured in &quot;The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.&quot; a boisterous science fiction comedy western created by Jeffrey Boam and Carlton Cuse that played for one season. He played a lawyer turned bounty hunter who was trying to hunt down John Bly, the man who killed his father. He featured in the television series &quot;Jack of All Trades&quot;, set on a fictional island occupied by the French in 1801. Campbell was also credited as co-executive producer, among others. The show was directed by Eric Gruendemann, and was produced by various people, including Sam Raimi. The show was broadcast for two seasons, from 2000 to 2001. He had a recurring role as &quot;Bill Church Jr.&quot; based upon the character of Morgan Edge from the Superman comics on &quot;Lois &amp; Clark: The New Adventures of Superman&quot;.

From 1996 to 1997, Campbell was a recurring guest actor of the television series &quot;Ellen&quot; as Ed Billik, who becomes Ellen&#x27;s boss when she sells her bookstore in season four.

He is also known for his supporting role as the recurring character Autolycus (&quot;King of Thieves&quot;) on both &quot;&quot; and &quot;&quot;, which reunited him with producer Rob Tapert. Campbell played &quot;Hercules&quot;/&quot;Xena&quot; series producer Tapert in two episodes of &quot;Hercules&quot; set in the present. He directed a number of episodes of &quot;Hercules&quot; and &quot;Xena&quot;, including the &quot;Hercules&quot; series finale.

Campbell also obtained the main role of race car driver Hank Cooper for the Disney made-for-television remake of &quot;The Love Bug&quot;.

Campbell had a critically acclaimed dramatic guest role as a grief-stricken detective seeking revenge for his father&#x27;s murder in a two-part episode of the fourth season of &quot;&quot;. Campbell later played the part of a bigamous demon in &quot;The X-Files&quot; episode &quot;Terms of Endearment&quot;. He also featured as Agent Jackman in the episode &quot;Witch Way Now?&quot; of the WB series &quot;Charmed&quot;, as well as playing a state police officer in an episode of the short-lived series &quot;American Gothic&quot; titled &quot;Meet The Beetles&quot;.

Campbell co-featured in the television series &quot;Burn Notice&quot;, which was broadcast from 2007 to 2013 by USA Network. He portrayed Sam Axe, a beer-chugging, former Navy SEAL now working as an unlicensed private investigator and occasional mercenary with his old friend Michael Westen, the show&#x27;s main character. When working undercover, his character frequently used the alias Chuck Finley, which Bruce later revealed was the name of one of his father&#x27;s old co-workers. Campbell was the star of a 2011 &quot;Burn Notice&quot; made-for-television prequel focusing on Sam&#x27;s Navy SEAL career, titled &quot;Burn Notice: The Fall of Sam Axe&quot;.

In 2014, Campbell played Santa Claus for an episode of &quot;The Librarians&quot;. Campbell played Ronald Reagan in season 2 of the FX original series &quot;Fargo&quot;. More recently Campbell reprised his role as Ashley &quot;Ash&quot; Williams in &quot;Ash vs Evil Dead&quot;, a series based upon the &quot;Evil Dead&quot; series that began his career. &quot;Ash vs Evil Dead&quot; began airing on Starz on October 31, 2015, and was renewed by the cable channel for second and third seasons, before being cancelled.

In January 2019, Travel Channel announced a new version of the &quot;Ripley&#x27;s Believe It or Not!&quot; reality series, with Campbell serving as host and executive producer. The 10-episode season debuted on June 9, 2019.

===Voice acting===
Campbell is featured as a voice actor for several video games. He provides the voice of Ash in the four games based on the &quot;Evil Dead&quot; movies series: &quot;Evil Dead: Hail to the King&quot;, &quot;Evil Dead: A Fistful of Boomstick&quot;, &quot;Evil Dead: Regeneration&quot; and &quot;Evil Dead: The Game&quot;. He has expressed his intent to return to the role in an upcoming &quot;Evil Dead&quot; animated series. He also provided the voice of Ash in &quot;Dead by Daylight&quot;. Despite the inclusion of his character &quot;Ash Williams&quot; in Telltale Games&#x27; &quot;Poker Night 2&quot;, Danny Webber voices the character in the game, instead of Bruce Campbell.

Campbell also provided voice talent in other titles such as &quot;Pitfall 3D: Beyond the Jungle&quot;, &quot;Spider-Man&quot;, &quot;Spider-Man 2&quot;, &quot;Spider-Man 3&quot;, and &quot;The Amazing Spider-Man&quot;.

He provided the voice of main character Jake Logan for the PC game, &quot;&quot;, the voice of main character Jake Burton for the PlayStation game &quot;Broken Helix&quot; and the voice of Magnanimous for &quot;Megas XLR&quot;. Campbell voiced the pulp adventurer Lobster Johnson in &quot;&quot; and has done voice-over work for the Codemaster&#x27;s game &quot;Hei$t&quot;, a game which was announced on January 28, 2010, to have been &quot;terminated&quot;. He also provided the voice of The Mayor for the 2009 movie &quot;Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs&quot;, the voice of Rod &quot;Torque&quot; Redline in &quot;Cars 2&quot;, the voice of Himcules in the 2003 Nickelodeon TV series &quot;My Life as a Teenage Robot&quot;, and the voice of Fugax in the 2006 movie &quot;The Ant Bully&quot;.

He has a voice in the online MOBA game, &quot;Tome: Immortal Arena&quot; in 2014. Campbell also provided voice-over and motion capture for Sgt. Lennox in the Exo Zombies mode of &quot;Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare&quot;.

===Writing===
In addition to acting and occasionally directing, Campbell has become a writer, starting with an autobiography, &quot;If Chins Could Kill: Confessions of a B Movie Actor&quot;, published in June 2001. The autobiography was a successful &quot;New York Times&quot; Best Seller. It describes Campbell&#x27;s career to date as an actor in low-budget movies and television, providing his insight into &quot;Blue-Collar Hollywood&quot;. The paperback version of the book adds details about the reactions of fans during book signings: &quot;Whenever I do mainstream stuff, I think they&#x27;re pseudo-interested, but they&#x27;re still interested in seeing weirdo, offbeat stuff, and that&#x27;s what I&#x27;m attracted to&quot;.

Campbell&#x27;s next book &quot;Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way&quot; was published on May 26, 2005. The book&#x27;s plot involves him (depicted in a comical way) as the main character struggling to make it into the world of A-list movies. He later recorded an audio play adaptation of &quot;Make Love&quot; with fellow Michigan actors, including longtime collaborator Ted Raimi. This radio drama was released by the independent label Rykodisc and spans six discs with a six-hour running time.

In addition to his books, Campbell also wrote a column for &quot;X-Ray Magazine&quot; in 2001, an issue of the popular comic series &quot;The Hire&quot;, and comic book adaptations of his &quot;Man with the Screaming Brain&quot;. Most recently he wrote the introduction to Josh Becker&#x27;s &quot;The Complete Guide to Low-Budget Feature Filmmaking&quot;.

In late 2016, Campbell announced that he would be releasing a third book, &quot;Hail to the Chin: Further Confessions of a B Movie Actor,&quot; which will detail his life from where &quot;If Chins Could Kill&quot; ended. &quot;Hail to the Chin&quot; was released in August 2017, and accompanied by a book tour across the United States and Europe.

Campbell maintained a weblog on his official website, where he posted mainly about politics and the movie industry. However, the website has since been deleted.

===Bruce Campbell Horror Film Festival===
Since 2014, the Bruce Campbell Horror Film Festival, narrated and organized by Campbell, was held in the Muvico Theater in Rosemont, Illinois. The first festival was originally from August 21 to 25, 2014, presented by Wizard World, as part of the Chicago Comicon. The second festival was from August 20 to 23, 2015, with guests Tom Holland and Eli Roth. The third festival took place over four days in August 2016. Guests of the event were Sam Raimi, Robert Tapert and Doug Benson.

==Personal life==
Campbell married Christine Deveau in 1983; they had two children before divorcing in 1989. He met costume designer Ida Gearon while working on &quot;Mindwarp.&quot; They married in 1991. They reside in Jacksonville, Oregon.

Campbell is also an ordained minister, and has performed marriage ceremonies.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Video games===
2024- Spooky Pinball’s-Evil Dead Callouts

==Accolades==
==See also==

* &quot;Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way&quot; ()

==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;Not My Job&quot; Bruce Campbell appears on &quot;Wait Wait... Don&#x27;t Tell Me!&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q309932" start="0" end="20" title="Bruce Campbell" label="Bruce Lorne Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552758" start="111" end="123" title="Ash Williams" label="Ash Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q275402" start="127" end="136" title="Sam Raimi" label="Sam Raimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q921605" start="144" end="179" title="Evil Dead" label="&amp;quot;Evil Dead&amp;quot; horror series"/>
<link wikidata="Q905743" start="218" end="234" title="Within the Woods" label="Within the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="289" end="299" title="cult film" label="cult movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633261" start="316" end="325" title="Crimewave" label="Crimewave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571786" start="346" end="356" title="Maniac Cop" label="Maniac Cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q997423" start="402" end="414" title="Bubba Ho-Tep" label="Bubba Ho-Tep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210824" start="489" end="525" title="The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr." label="The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3046213" start="554" end="572" title="Jack of All Trades (TV series)" label="Jack of All Trades"/>
<link wikidata="" start="611" end="637" title="List of Hercules: The Legendary Journeys and Xena: Warrior Princess characters" label="Autolycus, King of Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565275" start="706" end="713" title="Sam Axe" label="Sam Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="721" end="732" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q682825" start="746" end="757" title="Burn Notice" label="Burn Notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422698" start="813" end="818" title="Starz" label="Starz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19952911" start="832" end="849" title="Ash vs. Evil Dead" label="Ash vs. Evil Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q20751319" start="895" end="905" title="The Escort (2015 film)" label="The Escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433630" start="990" end="999" title="Fanalysis" label="Fanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100262" start="1023" end="1041" title="A Community Speaks" label="A Community Speaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746496" start="1118" end="1146" title="Man with the Screaming Brain" label="Man with the Screaming Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q947600" start="1230" end="1246" title="My Name Is Bruce" label="My Name Is Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q447713" start="1351" end="1354" title="Ted Raimi" label="Ted"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487568" start="1356" end="1367" title="Josh Becker (filmmaker)" label="Josh Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q965826" start="1373" end="1386" title="Scott Spiegel" label="Scott Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q529165" start="1437" end="1456" title="Royal Oak, Michigan" label="Royal Oak, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412320" start="1814" end="1821" title="Super 8 mm film" label="Super 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q275402" start="1889" end="1898" title="Sam Raimi" label="Sam Raimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916710" start="1922" end="1949" title="Birmingham Groves High School" label="Wylie E. Groves High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546191" start="2013" end="2040" title="Western Michigan University" label="Western Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q921605" start="2191" end="2200" title="Evil Dead" label="Evil Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q905743" start="2227" end="2243" title="Within the Woods" label="Within the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q327604" start="2381" end="2394" title="The Evil Dead" label="The Evil Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336149" start="2604" end="2614" title="Robert Tapert" label="Rob Tapert"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="2663" end="2675" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q750028" start="2910" end="2922" title="Evil Dead II" label="Evil Dead II"/>
<link wikidata="Q471992" start="2946" end="2962" title="Army of Darkness" label="Army of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552758" start="3048" end="3060" title="Ash Williams" label="Ash Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2802" start="3295" end="3307" title="Necronomicon" label="Necronomicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="3514" end="3530" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="3561" end="3571" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307877" start="3578" end="3589" title="Spider-Man in film" label="film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166264" start="3649" end="3656" title="Darkman" label="Darkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q756416" start="3673" end="3695" title="The Quick and the Dead (1995 film)" label="The Quick and the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q642878" start="3856" end="3881" title="Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Marvel Cinematic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q64211112" start="3893" end="3936" title="Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness" label="Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="3991" end="4004" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q997423" start="4025" end="4037" title="Bubba Ho-Tep" label="Bubba Ho-Tep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571786" start="4119" end="4129" title="Maniac Cop" label="Maniac Cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q123097" start="4146" end="4158" title="Maniac Cop 2" label="Maniac Cop 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q947600" start="4216" end="4232" title="My Name is Bruce" label="My Name is Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="4322" end="4335" title="Coen Brothers" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q313998" start="4348" end="4367" title="The Hudsucker Proxy" label="The Hudsucker Proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172140" start="4379" end="4395" title="Michael Crichton" label="Michael Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q598860" start="4413" end="4418" title="Congo (film)" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q603318" start="4453" end="4471" title="McHale&amp;#x27;s Navy (1997 film)" label="McHale&amp;#x27;s Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q741026" start="4485" end="4501" title="Escape from L.A." label="Escape from L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q95008" start="4523" end="4537" title="John Carpenter" label="John Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q403033" start="4551" end="4571" title="Escape from New York" label="Escape from New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="4584" end="4594" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322943" start="4607" end="4619" title="The Majestic (film)" label="The Majestic"/>
<link wikidata="Q858508" start="4658" end="4666" title="Sky High (2005 film)" label="Sky High"/>
<link wikidata="Q637169" start="4715" end="4739" title="Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs (film)" label="2009 animated adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q775328" start="4774" end="4807" title="Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs" label="Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="4847" end="4852" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192212" start="4866" end="4872" title="Cars 2" label="Cars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q73279" start="4903" end="4914" title="Evil Dead (2013 film)" label="2013 remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q512311" start="5008" end="5026" title="post-credits scene" label="post-credits scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556131" start="5163" end="5174" title="Psychostick" label="Psychostick"/>
<link wikidata="Q107203508" start="5367" end="5381" title="Evil Dead Rise" label="Evil Dead Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210824" start="5503" end="5539" title="The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr." label="The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q251638" start="5601" end="5613" title="Jeffrey Boam" label="Jeffrey Boam"/>
<link wikidata="Q443440" start="5618" end="5630" title="Carlton Cuse" label="Carlton Cuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046213" start="5811" end="5829" title="Jack of All Trades (TV series)" label="Jack of All Trades"/>
<link wikidata="Q275402" start="6051" end="6060" title="Sam Raimi" label="Sam Raimi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6250" end="6298" title="Lois &amp;amp; Clark: The New Adventures of Superman" label="Lois &amp;amp; Clark: The New Adventures of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q82226" start="6394" end="6399" title="Ellen (TV series)" label="Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086098" start="6544" end="6563" title="recurring character" label="recurring character"/>
<link wikidata="Q463107" start="6564" end="6573" title="Autolycus" label="Autolycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31235" start="7058" end="7064" title="remake" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305699" start="7074" end="7086" title="The Love Bug (1997 film)" label="The Love Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="7346" end="7357" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702907" start="7378" end="7397" title="Terms of Endearment (The X-Files)" label="Terms of Endearment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529991" start="7460" end="7474" title="Witch Way Now?" label="Witch Way Now?"/>
<link wikidata="Q162371" start="7504" end="7511" title="Charmed" label="Charmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247014" start="7607" end="7622" title="American Gothic (1995 TV series)" label="American Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q682825" start="7719" end="7730" title="Burn Notice" label="Burn Notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="7779" end="7790" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565275" start="7805" end="7812" title="Sam Axe" label="Sam Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="7838" end="7847" title="United States Navy SEALs" label="Navy SEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="7877" end="7897" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="7913" end="7922" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565275" start="7943" end="7957" title="Michael Westen" label="Michael Westen"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="8230" end="8237" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8292" end="8324" title="Burn Notice: The Fall of Sam Axe" label="Burn Notice: The Fall of Sam Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="8358" end="8369" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18608417" start="8394" end="8408" title="The Librarians (2014 TV series)" label="The Librarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="8432" end="8445" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="8465" end="8467" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931555" start="8490" end="8495" title="Fargo (TV series)" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552758" start="8547" end="8578" title="Ash Williams" label="Ashley &amp;quot;Ash&amp;quot; Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q19952911" start="8588" end="8604" title="Ash vs Evil Dead" label="Ash vs Evil Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317589" start="8869" end="8883" title="Travel Channel" label="Travel Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q116873404" start="8921" end="8953" title="Ripley&amp;#x27;s Believe It or Not! (2019 TV series)" label="Ripley&amp;#x27;s Believe It or Not!"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9263" end="9290" title="Evil Dead: Hail to the King" label="Evil Dead: Hail to the King"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9304" end="9337" title="Evil Dead: A Fistful of Boomstick" label="Evil Dead: A Fistful of Boomstick"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9351" end="9374" title="Evil Dead: Regeneration" label="Evil Dead: Regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9391" end="9410" title="Evil Dead: The Game" label="Evil Dead: The Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q24514682" start="9565" end="9581" title="Dead by Daylight" label="Dead by Daylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583301" start="9683" end="9696" title="Poker Night 2" label="Poker Night 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9845" end="9874" title="Pitfall 3D: Beyond the Jungle" label="Pitfall 3D: Beyond the Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539517" start="9888" end="9898" title="Spider-Man (2002 video game)" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660542" start="9912" end="9924" title="Spider-Man 2 (2004 video game)" label="Spider-Man 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337769" start="9938" end="9950" title="Spider-Man 3 (video game)" label="Spider-Man 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625129" start="9968" end="9990" title="The Amazing Spider-Man (2012 video game)" label="The Amazing Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973401" start="10152" end="10164" title="Broken Helix" label="Broken Helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q922258" start="10210" end="10219" title="Megas XLR" label="Megas XLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663843" start="10263" end="10278" title="Lobster Johnson" label="Lobster Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129388" start="10361" end="10366" title="Heist (video game)" label="Hei$t"/>
<link wikidata="Q637169" start="10524" end="10557" title="Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs (film)" label="Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192212" start="10618" end="10624" title="Cars 2" label="Cars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="10666" end="10677" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q786120" start="10694" end="10720" title="My Life as a Teenage Robot" label="My Life as a Teenage Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q622758" start="10775" end="10788" title="The Ant Bully (film)" label="The Ant Bully"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10981" end="11011" title="Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare" label="Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="11270" end="11308" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="11436" end="11457" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Blue-Collar Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738987" start="11790" end="11823" title="Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way" label="Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646993" start="11985" end="11991" title="A-list" label="A-list"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="12021" end="12031" title="radio drama" label="audio play"/>
<link wikidata="Q447713" start="12129" end="12138" title="Ted Raimi" label="Ted Raimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q512499" start="12393" end="12401" title="The Hire" label="The Hire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487568" start="12528" end="12539" title="Josh Becker (filmmaker)" label="Josh Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191401" start="13288" end="13306" title="Rosemont, Illinois" label="Rosemont, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028742" start="13412" end="13427" title="Fan Expo Chicago" label="Chicago Comicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340923" start="13493" end="13504" title="Tom Holland (filmmaker)" label="Tom Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q358714" start="13509" end="13517" title="Eli Roth" label="Eli Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q275402" start="13605" end="13614" title="Sam Raimi" label="Sam Raimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336149" start="13616" end="13629" title="Robert Tapert" label="Robert Tapert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300294" start="13634" end="13645" title="Doug Benson" label="Doug Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371794" start="13815" end="13823" title="Mindwarp (film)" label="Mindwarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q335307" start="13868" end="13888" title="Jacksonville, Oregon" label="Jacksonville, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738987" start="14111" end="14144" title="Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way" label="Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q12504760" start="14249" end="14281" title="Wait Wait... Don&amp;#x27;t Tell Me!" label="Wait Wait... Don&amp;#x27;t Tell Me!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4671" wikidata="Q767296" url="?curid=4671" title="Baron Aberdare">
<text>Baron Aberdare, of Duffryn in the County of Glamorgan, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created on 23 August 1873 for the Liberal politician Henry Bruce. He served as Home Secretary from 1868 to 1873. 

His grandson, the third Baron, was a soldier, cricketer and tennis player and a member of the International Olympic Committee. His son, the fourth Baron, held office in the Conservative administration of Edward Heath and was later a Deputy Speaker of the House of Lords. Lord Aberdare was one of the ninety-two elected hereditary peers that were allowed to remain in the House of Lords after the passing of the House of Lords Act 1999. 

, the title is held by his son, the fifth Baron, who succeeded in 2005 and was elected to the House of Lords in 2009.

==Lineage==
Henry Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare, was the son of John Bruce-Pryce (born John Bruce Knight in Barnstaple, Devon), the eldest son of John Knight (died 1799) and Margaret Bruce (died 1809), daughter and heir of William Bruce of Llanblethian, Glamorgan. He descends from the Welsh Bruces, a branch of Bruce of Kennet of Clackmannan that dates to the 14th century.

In 1805, Lord Aberdare&#x27;s father changed his surname from Knight to Bruce when he reached the age of majority and inherited the Bruce estates in Llanblethian, as per his grandfather&#x27;s will. His younger brothers were Rev. William Bruce Knight (1785–1845) and Sir James Knight-Bruce (1791–1866).

In 1837, he changed his name again to Bruce-Pryce when he inherited Duffryn and the Monknash estates from a distant cousin, Frances Anne Grey (&quot;née&quot; Pryce), the daughter and heiress of Thomas Pryce, who had married Hon. William Booth Grey (1773–1852; the second son of the 5th Earl of Stamford).

Lord Aberdare&#x27;s great-grandmother, Jane Lewis, was the daughter of MP Gabriel Lewis, of Llanishen House. The Lewis family of Van Castle, Glamorgan, had been prominent in politics since the 16th century.

==Coat of arms==
The heraldic blazon for the coat of arms of the family is: &quot;Or, a saltire gules, on a chief of the last a martlet of the field&quot;.

==Baron Aberdare (1873)==
*Henry Austin Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare (1815–1895)
*Henry Campbell Bruce, 2nd Baron Aberdare (1851–1929)
** Hon. Henry Lyndhurst Bruce (1881–1914), killed in action at Ypres
*Clarence Napier Bruce, 3rd Baron Aberdare (1885–1957)
*Morys George Lyndhurst Bruce, 4th Baron Aberdare (1919–2005)
*Alastair John Lyndhurst Bruce, 5th Baron Aberdare (born 1947)

The heir apparent is the present holder&#x27;s son, the Hon. Hector Morys Napier Bruce (born 1974).

===Title succession chart===






==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q767296" start="0" end="14" title="Baron Aberdare" label="Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="34" end="53" title="Glamorgan" label="County of Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="73" end="102" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="Peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="145" end="152" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q335550" start="164" end="175" title="Henry Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare" label="Henry Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="190" end="204" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="320" end="351" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693589" start="399" end="426" title="Conservative Government 1970-1974" label="Conservative administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="430" end="442" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="481" end="495" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="545" end="560" title="hereditary peer" label="hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="637" end="660" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q335550" start="795" end="826" title="Henry Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare" label="Henry Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q808532" start="887" end="897" title="Barnstaple" label="Barnstaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129633" start="1019" end="1031" title="Llanblethian" label="Llanblethian"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="1033" end="1042" title="Glamorgan" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q845196" start="1071" end="1077" title="Clan Bruce" label="Bruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q845196" start="1091" end="1106" title="Bruce of Kennet" label="Bruce of Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010098" start="1110" end="1121" title="Clackmannan" label="Clackmannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20734577" start="1385" end="1405" title="William Bruce Knight" label="William Bruce Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994564" start="1426" end="1444" title="James Knight-Bruce" label="James Knight-Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582463" start="1742" end="1762" title="George Grey, 5th Earl of Stamford" label="5th Earl of Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1841" end="1854" title="Gabriel Lewis" label="Gabriel Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335550" start="2159" end="2197" title="Henry Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare" label="Henry Austin Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718742" start="2211" end="2251" title="Henry Bruce, 2nd Baron Aberdare" label="Henry Campbell Bruce, 2nd Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126424" start="2334" end="2375" title="Clarence Bruce, 3rd Baron Aberdare" label="Clarence Napier Bruce, 3rd Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401247" start="2389" end="2437" title="Morys Bruce, 4th Baron Aberdare" label="Morys George Lyndhurst Bruce, 4th Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q336223" start="2451" end="2500" title="Alastair Bruce, 5th Baron Aberdare" label="Alastair John Lyndhurst Bruce, 5th Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="2518" end="2531" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4673" wikidata="Q216337" url="?curid=4673" title="Boy band">
<text>A boy band is a vocal group consisting of young male singers, usually in their teenage years or in their twenties at the time of formation. Generally, boy bands perform love songs marketed towards girls and young women. Many boy bands dance as well as sing, usually giving highly choreographed performances. South Korean boy bands usually also have designated rappers. Most boy band members do not play musical instruments, either in recording sessions or on-stage. They are similar in concept to their counterparts known as girl groups.

Some boy bands are formed on their own, but most are created by talent managers or record producers who hold auditions. The popularity of boy bands has peaked three times: first in the 1960s to &#x27;70s, with e.g. the Jackson 5 and the Osmonds; the second time during the late 1980s, the 1990s and the 2000s, when acts such as New Kids on the Block, Take That, Backstreet Boys, Boyzone, NSYNC, Five, Westlife and Blue dominated global pop charts; and the latest time in the 2010s up to the present, with the emergence of groups such as Big Time Rush, the Wanted, One Direction, and K-pop acts such as BTS and Seventeen.

==History==
The term was not established until the late 1980s when Lou Pearlman decided to form a record company to promote a new singing and dancing group after becoming fascinated with the success of New Kids on the Block.

Although generally described as a rock band, the highest-selling band in history – the Beatles – have been described by several journalists as &quot;the first&quot; or &quot;the original&quot; boy band, &quot;before anyone had thought of the term&quot;, exclusively due to the enthusiastic response they received from their young female audience.

Other critics, however, have pointed out that this assessment of the Beatles as a &quot;boy band&quot; could be applied to all other bands of the 1960s, saying, &quot;if they were a (boy band), so was everyone else&quot; and is countered by others, including Ringo Starr, who point out that, from the beginning, the Beatles wrote and exercised creative control over their own music, played their own instruments, were not manufactured by a record label, and did not feature the choreographed dance moves that later came to be associated with boy bands. The Beatles did, however, inspire the production of the 1966 television series &quot;The Monkees&quot;, which featured a music group of the same name, created for the show, that consisted of the four starring actors. The Monkees had a career as a rock and pop band after their songs from the TV series were released as successful records.

===Late 1960s and 1970s: The Jackson 5 and the Osmonds===

Although the term &quot;boy band&quot; was not commonly used then, the earliest predecessors of this format were groups such as the Jackson 5 and the Osmonds which helped form the template for boy bands. The Jackson 5 were a sibling group that established many musical conventions that boy bands follow. For instance, their music featured close harmonies from soul music and catchy pop hooks influenced as much as they were by Motown and acts like the Supremes. The group also incorporated choreographed dance moves to their performances. All members of the band sang, which is a common convention of a boy band, as opposed to having a front man and the rest on instruments; thus, no one person dominated the stage. Also a sibling group, The Osmonds first started singing barbershop music for local audiences, before being hired to perform at Disneyland early in their career. Their appearance in a televised Disney special earned them additional TV spots, such as &quot;The Andy Williams Show&quot; and &quot;The Jerry Lewis Show&quot;.

===Late 1970s and 1980s: Menudo, New Edition, and New Kids on the Block===

The Puerto Rican boy band Menudo, appealing to young Latina audiences, was founded in 1977. Menudo had a convention unique among boy bands: when a member turned 16, became too tall, or their voice changed, they were replaced. The members of Menudo were generally aged 12–16. Menudo had a large impact in Latin America and in Asia; Menudo fever there was compared to Beatlemania and it was nicknamed &quot;Menudomania&quot;. 

Boston group New Edition was formed in 1978 and reached their height of popularity in the 1980s, meaning they are often credited for starting the boy-band trend, even though the term &quot;boy band&quot; did not exist until the 1990s. Maurice Starr was influenced by New Edition and popularized it with his protégé New Kids on the Block (NKOTB), the first commercially successful modern boy band, which formed in 1984 and found international success in 1988. Starr&#x27;s idea was to take the traditional template from the R&amp;B genre (in this case his teenage band New Edition) and apply it to a pop genre.

Bros (abbreviation of the word &quot;brothers&quot;) were a British boy band active in the late 1980s and early 1990s, consisting of twin brothers Matt and Luke Goss along with Craig Logan. Formed in 1986, they scored multiple top 10 hits between 1987 and 1989 and in 1988 became the first modern era–style boy band to have a multiple platinum-selling album in the UK, with &quot;Push&quot;, still one of the most successful boy-band albums in the UK. Other big boy bands in Britain during the late 1980s were Big Fun and Brother Beyond.

===1990s: Boyz II Men, Take That, Backstreet Boys, NSYNC, Westlife, Seo Taiji and Boys and the birth of modern K-pop ===

The ongoing international success of New Kids on the Block inspired music managers in Europe to create their own acts, beginning with Nigel Martin-Smith&#x27;s Take That in the UK (formed in 1990) and followed by Tom Watkins, who had success with Bros in the late 1980s and formed East 17 in 1991. East 17 were marketed and pitted against Take That as &quot;rivals&quot; with a rougher or harsher attitude, style and sound. Take That reformed in 2006 after a decade-long hiatus and became one of the most successful groups in British music chart history, with renewed chart success internationally, especially in Europe. Irish music manager Louis Walsh, who had witnessed the impact of these British boy bands, put out an advert for an &quot;Irish Take That&quot;, thereby creating Boyzone in 1993. MN8 (formed in 1992), Let Loose (formed in 1993), and Damage and 911 (formed in 1995) were also successful boy bands in Britain; however, by the late 1990s all these bands had split up.

All these artists were very successful on both the singles and albums charts domestically and internationally; however, with the emergence of Britpop and the commercial co-option of indie rock, many boy bands were ridiculed by the British music press as having no artistic credibility, although some, such as East 17 and Take That, did write most of their own material. The media attention was then placed on the &quot;Battle of Britpop&quot;, and the bands Oasis and Blur replaced the importance and rivalry of Take That and East 17 as the two new biggest bands in Britain. However, boy bands continued to find success in the late 1990s, such as Five, Another Level, Point Break and Westlife. In 1995 successful German music manager Frank Farian, who had been manager of Boney M and Milli Vanilli, put together Latin American band No Mercy who scored a few worldwide hits during the mid-90s.

Although being American and the sons of Tito Jackson, a member of the Jackson 5, 3T had several hits singles across Europe in the mid-1990s, despite limited success in the US, and finished the second biggest selling act of 1996 in Europe behind the Spice Girls. With the success of North American boy bands like New Kids on the Block in East Asia, Japanese entertainment company Johnny &amp; Associates formed SMAP in 1992. The group enjoyed tremendous success, selling over 35 million records.

In 1992, after the disbandment of the heavy metal band Sinawe, in which he had a brief stint, Seo Taiji formed the boy band Seo Taiji and Boys (Korean: 서태지와 아이들) together with dancers Lee Juno and Yang Hyun-suk, which went on to become highly successful and created a craze at the time. Seo Taiji and Boys is credited with changing the South Korean music industry by pioneering the incorporation of rap and breakdance as well as the fusion of Korean music and various popular Western music genres in Korean popular music, and in turn creating the prototype for the modern hybrid K-pop genre or &quot;rap-dance&quot;, as it was called at the time, and K-pop groups. They also left a lasting impact by explicitly putting social criticism at the forefront of their music, as well as paving the way for artistic freedom in South Korea by challenging censorship laws and the television networks hegemony over the music market. In 1995 the Korean Broadband is not 6 ft to a particular location casting Ethics Committee demanded that Seo Taiji and Boys change the lyrics for &quot;Regret of the Times&quot;. As a result, Seo decided to release the song as a purely instrumental track. This incited protests and resulted in the abolishment of music pre-censorship in Korea. Seo Taiji also did not have to rely on television networks due to the fact that he owned his own studio. This autonomy allowed Seo to bring subcultures in Korea, such as heavy metal, to the forefront of popular culture and challenge pervasive social norms. The band&#x27;s independent success diminished the power of the television networks to dictate which artists appeared on shows, and gave rise to the influence of record labels and talent agencies. In 1996, Seo Taiji and Boys disbanded. In April 1996, Billboard reported that the band&#x27;s first three albums had each sold over 1.6 million copies, with the fourth nearing two million, making all four some of the best-selling albums of all time in South Korea to this day. Lee Juno became a record producer, and Yang Hyun-suk was successful in founding YG Entertainment, one of the three biggest record companies in the country. Seo Taiji returned to music two years later with a successful solo career as a rock artist; he rose to become one of the most prominent and influential cultural icons in South Korea and was dubbed &quot;the President of culture&quot;. In 2017, Seo Taiji released a 25th Anniversary album with his greatest hits and remakes by prominent Korean artists, including the group BTS. He also held a joint celebratory concert with the latter, in which he acknowledged them as his spiritual successors in K-pop due to the socially conscious thematic similarities in their music as well their shared hip hop leanings, and metaphorically passed the torch, saying &quot;This is your generation now&quot;.
In the early 1990s in North America, with New Kids on the Block&#x27;s continued success and Color Me Badd also having success, boy bands became a continued staple of the Billboard charts. Continuing this success in the mid-1990s, most prominent boy bands were African American and had R&amp;B and gospel elements, such as the groups All-4-One (formed in 1993) and Boyz II Men (formed in 1988). Boyz II Men are also the most successful boy band act on the U.S. Hot 100 as well as the Australian Singles Chart. Although they had success on the Billboard charts, they were not marketed towards youth but more towards adults. It was not until 1997 and the change to pop-oriented groups such as Backstreet Boys, 98 Degrees, NSYNC, the Moffatts, and Hanson that boy bands exploded commercially and dominated the market in the United States. This late 1990s marked the height of boy band popularity in North America, which has not been seen since.

Arguably the most successful boy band manager from the U.S. was Lou Pearlman, who founded commercially successful acts such as the Backstreet Boys in 1993, NSYNC and LFO in 1995, O-Town in 2000, and US5 in 2005. Backstreet Boys and NSYNC became the two biggest boy bands in the late 1990s until the early 2000s, and Backstreet Boys went on to become the best-selling boy band in history with over 100 million records sold.

In the late 1990s in the UK, producer Simon Cowell (noted in the U.S. for the &quot;American Idol/The X Factor&quot; franchise) is also known for having managed British boyband Five (formed in 1997) and Irish boyband Westlife (formed in 1998). Westlife was created by Irishman Louis Walsh as a replacement for Boyzone and was initially managed by a former member of the band Ronan Keating. Westlife would eventually overtake Take That in number one&#x27;s tally in the UK although Take That&#x27;s overall UK sales are still higher. In 2012, the Official Charts Company revealed the biggest selling singles artists in British music chart history with Take That placed 15th overall and the highest selling boyband act (9.3 million), followed by Boyzone at 29 (7.1 million) and Westlife at 34 (6.8 million). Even though Cowell is known to have managed several successful boy bands, he is also infamous for passing on signing two of the biggest boybands to emerge from the 1990s and 2000s, Take That and Busted.

===2000s: Backstreet Boys, NSYNC, Westlife and Jonas Brothers===

With the continued success of Backstreet Boys and *NSYNC, American and British groups like 98 Degrees, Westlife, O-Town, A1, Blue, and Busted gained quick popularity both domestically and internationally. International boy bands would also occasionally spring up, such as the Moldovan band O-Zone, and Overground. American Christian boy band Plus One also enjoyed brief remarkable success during this time.

At the height of boy band popularity in North America, MTV created their own parody boyband, 2gether. Like the Monkees in the 1960s, they were a manufactured act composed of actors. 2gether played off of the idea that every successful boy band must have five distinct personality types: the bad boy, the shy one, the young one, the older brother type, and a heart throb.

Since 2001, the dominance of traditional boy bands on pop charts began to fade in the western hemisphere, although Gil Kaufman of MTV has described &quot;new boy bands&quot; that are &quot;more likely to resemble My Chemical Romance, Sum 41, and Simple Plan.

In 2001, Taiwanese boy band F4 (called JVKV since 2007) blew up big as a result of the success of their TV drama &quot;Meteor Garden&quot;. According to &quot;Forbes&quot;, F4 has sold 3.5 million copies of their first two albums all over Asia as of July 2003.

With their success, many other Taiwanese boy bands emerged around this time, such as 5566 and Fahrenheit. In South Korea, Shinhwa also spread hallyu wave throughout Asia such as Japan, Thailand, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong and China. Also in 2001, a new all-male pop band and dance group boyband hailing from Japan called Exile debuted under Avex Group&#x27;s label Rhythm Zone with 14 members, putting them on par with Super Junior, a South Korean boy band, who at the time, had had 13 members at its peak.

Japanese boy band Arashi has sold over 30 million copies of their records since their first release in 1999. They had the yearly best-selling single in Japan in 2008 and 2009. In 2003 SMAP released the single &quot;Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana&quot; that has become the third best-selling single ever in Japan, with over three million copies sold.

In North America, the Jonas Brothers rose to fame from promotion on the Disney Channel in 2008. Other boy bands like JLS and Mindless Behavior also emerged and experienced remarkable success around this time. However, apart from them, boy bands have not seen the commercial boom experienced in the genre from the mid to late nineties in North America.

The mid 2000s, especially the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe, saw the continued longevity of nineties boy bands such as Backstreet Boys and Westlife (before they disbanded in 2012), and the successful comeback of Take That in 2005, Boyzone in 2007, and New Kids on the Block in 2008. Some sections of the press have referred to these acts, particularly those who have reformed after a previous split, such as Take That, Boyzone, and 98 Degrees, as &#x27;man bands&#x27;.

===2010s and 2020s: Big Time Rush, One Direction and rise of K-pop ===

In the early 2010s, there was somewhat of a resurgence of boy band popularity in countries where the trend had not maintained, with the emergence of new boy bands like Big Time Rush, the Wanted, and One Direction and the formation of supergroup NKOTBSB which comprised members of New Kids on the Block and Backstreet Boys. NKOTBSB&#x27;s success inspired boy bands who were fairly popular during the 1990s and 2000s to make a comeback, such as A1, Blue, 98 Degrees, Five, 911, and O-Town. Like 2gether and the Monkees, Big Time Rush was a manufactured act created for a television show. One Direction were often credited as sparking a resurgence in the popularity and interest boy bands alongside being credited with forming part of a new &quot;British Invasion&quot; in the United States. Their Where We Are Tour was the highest-grossing tour by a vocal group in history and after the release of their fourth album, &quot;Four&quot;, they became the only group in the 58-year history of the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 to have their first four albums debut at number one.

In Southeast Asia, local boy bands also emerged as a result of the continued success of Korean and Japanese boy bands. After the debut of the Philippines supergroup SB19 in 2018, the group appeared at number six on Billboard Year-End Social 50 chart, making them the first Southeast Asian act to reach the top 10 of the magazine&#x27;s annual chart.

In South Korea, boy bands have been commercially successful. On the Circle Chart year-end albums chart of 2022, 7 of the top 10 and 13 of the top 20 albums are by boy bands or by subunits/members of boy bands. Seventeen&#x27;s &quot;FML&quot; is the best-selling album of all time in South Korea, with more than 6.2 million copies sold, and BTS&#x27;s &quot;Love Yourself: Her&quot; became the first album released since 2001 to sell more than 1 million copies.

In 2013, Billboard started covering music releases in K-pop, though K-pop had been entering the charts as early as 2009. By 2017, BTS crossed into the international music market, furthering the Korean Wave in the United States and becoming the first Korean group to receive a certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) with their single &quot;Mic Drop&quot;. The band is the first Korean act to top the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 with their studio album &quot;Love Yourself: Tear&quot; (2018) and have since hit the top of the U.S. charts with their albums &quot;Love Yourself: Answer&quot; (2018), &quot;Map of the Soul: Persona&quot; (2019), &quot;Map of the Soul: 7&quot; (2020), &quot;Be&quot; (2020) and &quot;Proof&quot;. &quot;Love Yourself: Answer&quot; also broke South Korea&#x27;s Gaon Album Chart&#x27;s all-time monthly record previously set by &quot;Love Yourself: Tear&quot; and became the first Korean album certified Gold in the United States. SuperM later became the first K-pop group to debut at No. 1 in the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. In 2020, BTS &quot;Dynamite&quot; debuted atop the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, making them the first all-South Korean act in Hot 100 history to debut at number one. It garnered the band their first Grammy nomination, for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, making them the first K-pop act to be nominated for one.

On 12 December 2024, South Korean boy group Stray Kids become the first act ever to debut at No. 1 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart with their first six charting albums Oddinary (2022), Maxident (2022), 5-Star (2023), Rock-Star (2023), Ate (2024) and Hop (2024).

In Japan, Arashi was the best-selling music artist in Japan from 2013 through 2017 by value of sales and also having the yearly best-selling album in the country in 2010, 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2016. Other successful Japanese boy bands in this decade include Sandaime J Soul Brothers, the second best-selling music artist of 2016 in the country and Kanjani Eight, the fifth best-selling music artist of that year in Japan.

In Norway, the boy band Ballinciaga gained commercial success in 2022 with dance and party songs like &quot;Dans På Bordet&quot; and &quot;Beklager (Guttaklubben)&quot;. The group is also known for keeping their identities anonymous by wearing pink-colored masks in the public. Other Norwegian boy bands that gained commercial success in the country in 2020s are Undergrunn and Tigergutt101 in 2022 and 2024 respectively.

==Key factors of the concept==

Seen as important to a &quot;boy band&quot; group&#x27;s commercial success is the group&#x27;s image, carefully controlled by managing all aspects of the group&#x27;s attire, promotional materials (which are frequently supplied to teen magazines), and music videos. The key factor of a boy band is being trendy. This means that the band conforms to the most recent fashion and musical trends in the popular music scene. Typically, each member of the group will have some distinguishing feature and be portrayed as having a particular personality stereotype, such as &quot;the baby&quot;, &quot;the bad boy&quot;, or &quot;the shy one&quot;. While managing the portrayal of popular musicians is as old as popular music, the particular pigeonholing of band members is a defining characteristic of boy and girl bands. In K-pop, officially designated positions within the group are common, such as &quot;leader&quot;, &quot;maknae&quot; (Korean: 막내, English: &quot;the youngest&quot;), &quot;visual&quot;, &quot;center&quot; &quot;vocalist&quot;, &quot;rapper&quot; and &quot;dancer&quot;. The latter three are based on the members&#x27; specialized skills and are further divided into &quot;main-&quot;, &quot;lead-&quot; and &quot;sub-&quot; (vocalist/rapper/dancer) positions, with the members occupying the &quot;main&quot; positions often being considered the most skilled and having the most parts in songs or being highlighted during solo dance parts. The &quot;leader&quot; is the spokesperson who represents the group in public, and is in charge of mediating between group members, as well as between the group and the label.

In most cases, their music is written, arranged and produced by a producer who works with the band at all times and controls the group&#x27;s sound – if necessary, to the point of hiring session singers to record guide vocals for each member of the group to sing individually if the members cannot harmonize well together. However, for clarity of each voice, recording each voice individually is most commonly the norm with most modern vocal groups. In recent years, auto-tune has become a popular tool in vocal producing, some boy bands have come under fire for that reason. Some have also come under fire for lip syncing in their performances as well, for example New Kids on the Block.

A typical boy band performance features elaborately choreographed dancing, with the members taking turns singing and/or rapping. Boy bands generally do not compose or produce their own material, unless the members lobby hard enough for creative control. However, some bands were created around the talent of a songwriter within the group like Gary Barlow of Take That or Tony Mortimer of East 17. It is not uncommon to find extra songs on an album written by one or more of the band members; however, their producers rarely use these as singles.

Since the 21st century, however, boy bands have been expected to write or at least contribute in some part lyrically to songs. Apart from the groups mentioned above who all had at least one primary songwriter from their beginning, other groups soon caught up. At the close of the nineties, groups like Backstreet Boys and *NSYNC who had previously used writers like Max Martin during their early albums began writing their own songs. Newer groups from late 2000s such as JLS have all made a point from early interviews that they write their own songs and hold their own image as this is an important part of marketing. Some bands like The Wanted have even spent time learning the craft of songwriting. There has also been a rising trend of so-called &quot;songwriter-&quot; or &quot;producer idols&quot; (Korean: &quot;Hangul&quot; 작곡돌, &quot;rev. Rom.&quot; jakgok-dol) in K-pop since the early 2000s. Nowadays, it is not uncommon for groups to have at least one member who is heavily involved in the songwriting and producing of the groups&#x27; music. In many cases, these members are the rappers in the group, who have often gained songwriting and producing experience while being active as amateur or underground rappers before joining the group. There is also a higher expectation for rappers to write their own lyrics due to self-expression being a core value of the hip-hop genre. There are cases of &quot;producer idols&quot; writing or producing for other artists outside of their solo or respective group work as well, such as BTS&#x27; RM and Suga.

Individuals can also go on to achieve greater success as a solo artist coming out of a boy band having used the groups popularity to build on. Usually this signals the end of the group until potential future reunions. Examples of this include Justin Timberlake from NSYNC, and Robbie Williams from Take That. Some boy band members have gone on to successful careers elsewhere in the media. In K-pop, it is expected and common practice for members to embark on solo endeavors as musical artists or in other entertainment sectors, such as acting, or as variety personalities, alongside their group career after a few years. At the latest, this happens around the time the eldest member reaches the age of 28 (in exceptional cases 30) and is drafted for mandatory military service, forcing the group into a temporary hiatus of at least 18 months. The other members then often go on to pursue solo endeavors and reconvene as a group while no member is serving, or after all members have completed their service.

==Music genres==
Although most boy bands consist of R&amp;B or pop influences, other music genres, most notably country music and folk music, are also represented. South 65 and Marshall Dyllon, for example, were both country music boy bands. Il Divo, created by Simon Cowell in 2004, are a vocal group that performs operatic pop in several (mainly Italian) languages. Since then operatic/classical boy bands have become quite popular and common, especially in the UK. Since 2001, there has been some crossover with power pop and pop punk from bands that play live instruments. Just recently some boy bands decided to go back to their original doo-wop roots, most notably, The Overtones.

==Controversy==
Since the 2000s, groups such as Backstreet Boys and LFO have disliked the term &quot;boy band&quot; and have preferred to be known as a &quot;male vocal group&quot;. Being categorized among boy bands was also the main reason the Moffatts split up. Boy bands have been accused by the music press of emphasizing the appearance and marketing of the group above the quality of music, deliberately trying to appeal to a preteen audience and for conforming to trends instead of being original. Such criticisms can become extremely scathing. Boy bands are often seen as being short-lived, although some acts such as the Jackson 5, Backstreet Boys, Human Nature, New Edition, SMAP, Shinhwa, Take That and Westlife have sustained lasting careers.

==See also==
* All-female band

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* Boybands Radio – Only boy bands 24/7
* Top 10 Boy Bands at About.com
* The Best Boy Bands of All Time—&quot;Rolling Stone&quot;
* Best Boy Bands—&quot;The Washington Times&quot;
* 10 Biggest Boy Bands (1987–2012)—&quot;Billboard&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216337" start="2" end="10" title="Boy band" label="boy band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="16" end="27" title="vocal group" label="vocal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="79" end="92" title="Teenage" label="teenage years"/>
<link wikidata="Q380233" start="169" end="178" title="love song" label="love song"/>
<link wikidata="Q486277" start="308" end="330" title="List of South Korean idol groups" label="South Korean boy bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q641066" start="525" end="535" title="girl group" label="girl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320883" start="603" end="617" title="talent manager" label="talent manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q43267" start="754" end="767" title="the Jackson 5" label="the Jackson 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543041" start="772" end="783" title="the Osmonds" label="the Osmonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q212464" start="867" end="888" title="New Kids on the Block" label="New Kids on the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q152066" start="890" end="899" title="Take That" label="Take That"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="901" end="916" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q213495" start="918" end="925" title="Boyzone" label="Boyzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="927" end="932" title="NSYNC" label="NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q24791" start="934" end="938" title="Five (group)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="940" end="948" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q32825" start="953" end="957" title="Blue (English group)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="968" end="985" title="Billboard charts" label="global pop charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q752419" start="1076" end="1089" title="Big Time Rush (group)" label="Big Time Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q34918" start="1091" end="1101" title="the Wanted" label="the Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q146027" start="1103" end="1116" title="One Direction" label="One Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="1122" end="1127" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580495" start="1141" end="1144" title="BTS" label="BTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524548" start="1149" end="1158" title="Seventeen (South Korean band)" label="Seventeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q730887" start="1228" end="1240" title="Lou Pearlman" label="Lou Pearlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q212464" start="1363" end="1384" title="New Kids on the Block" label="New Kids on the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1470" end="1481" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="1994" end="2005" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031053" start="2373" end="2384" title="The Monkees (TV series)" label="The Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="2407" end="2437" title="The Monkees" label="a music group of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q43267" start="2815" end="2828" title="the Jackson 5" label="the Jackson 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543041" start="2833" end="2844" title="the Osmonds" label="the Osmonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q124296467" start="3026" end="3041" title="close harmony" label="close harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="3047" end="3057" title="soul music" label="soul music"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="3114" end="3120" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q218837" start="3135" end="3147" title="the Supremes" label="the Supremes"/>
<link wikidata="Q807820" start="3459" end="3475" title="barbershop music" label="barbershop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="3530" end="3540" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713728" start="3658" end="3680" title="The Andy Williams Show" label="The Andy Williams Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376478" start="3697" end="3717" title="The Jerry Lewis Show" label="The Jerry Lewis Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555767" start="3828" end="3834" title="Menudo (band)" label="Menudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464994" start="3855" end="3861" title="Latino (demonym)" label="Latina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370588" start="4241" end="4252" title="New Edition" label="New Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405892" start="4463" end="4476" title="Maurice Starr" label="Maurice Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="4535" end="4542" title="Mentorship" label="protégé"/>
<link wikidata="Q212464" start="4543" end="4564" title="New Kids on the Block" label="New Kids on the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q990686" start="4839" end="4843" title="Bros (British band)" label="Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909192" start="4986" end="4990" title="Matt Goss" label="Matt"/>
<link wikidata="Q911462" start="4995" end="5004" title="Luke Goss" label="Luke Goss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181163" start="5016" end="5027" title="Craig Logan" label="Craig Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925987" start="5219" end="5223" title="Push (Bros album)" label="Push"/>
<link wikidata="Q858870" start="5349" end="5356" title="Big Fun (boyband)" label="Big Fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144085" start="5361" end="5375" title="Brother Beyond" label="Brother Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811155" start="5634" end="5652" title="Nigel Martin-Smith" label="Nigel Martin-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q152066" start="5660" end="5669" title="Take That" label="Take That"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817998" start="5713" end="5724" title="Tom Watkins (music manager)" label="Tom Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q990686" start="5747" end="5751" title="Bros (British band)" label="Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277715" start="5781" end="5788" title="East 17" label="East 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q658547" start="6141" end="6152" title="Louis Walsh" label="Louis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q213495" start="6282" end="6289" title="Boyzone" label="Boyzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q176972" start="6299" end="6302" title="MN8" label="MN8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532821" start="6321" end="6330" title="Let Loose" label="Let Loose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211877" start="6353" end="6359" title="Damage (British band)" label="Damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648767" start="6364" end="6367" title="911 (UK band)" label="911"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="6628" end="6635" title="Britpop" label="Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="6668" end="6678" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="6944" end="6949" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="6954" end="6958" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q24791" start="7133" end="7137" title="Five (band)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516131" start="7139" end="7152" title="Another Level (band)" label="Another Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207969" start="7154" end="7165" title="Point Break (band)" label="Point Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="7170" end="7178" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q62437" start="7220" end="7232" title="Frank Farian" label="Frank Farian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156298" start="7258" end="7265" title="Boney M" label="Boney M"/>
<link wikidata="Q850540" start="7270" end="7283" title="Milli Vanilli" label="Milli Vanilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="7298" end="7312" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q836613" start="7318" end="7326" title="No Mercy (pop band)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336222" start="7420" end="7432" title="Tito Jackson" label="Tito Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43267" start="7446" end="7459" title="the Jackson 5" label="the Jackson 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q29779" start="7461" end="7463" title="3T" label="3T"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="7629" end="7640" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q212464" start="7692" end="7713" title="New Kids on the Block" label="New Kids on the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728013" start="7759" end="7782" title="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates" label="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138250" start="7790" end="7794" title="SMAP" label="SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q494493" start="7931" end="7937" title="Sinawe" label="Sinawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q368852" start="7970" end="7979" title="Seo Taiji" label="Seo Taiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q488973" start="8000" end="8018" title="Seo Taiji and Boys" label="Seo Taiji and Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q490938" start="8073" end="8086" title="Yang Hyun-suk" label="Yang Hyun-suk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="8275" end="8278" title="Rapping" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q169737" start="8283" end="8293" title="Breakdancing" label="breakdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="8455" end="8460" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="8527" end="8532" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145704" start="9813" end="9859" title="List of best-selling albums in South Korea" label="best-selling albums of all time in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50595" start="9953" end="9969" title="YG Entertainment" label="YG Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="10619" end="10626" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111187" start="10815" end="10828" title="Color Me Badd" label="Color Me Badd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291981" start="11056" end="11065" title="All-4-One" label="All-4-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q651231" start="11087" end="11098" title="Boyz II Men" label="Boyz II Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="11178" end="11190" title="U.S. Hot 100" label="U.S. Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="11206" end="11230" title="Australian Singles Chart" label="Australian Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="11413" end="11428" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q277230" start="11430" end="11440" title="98 Degrees" label="98 Degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="11442" end="11447" title="NSYNC" label="NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137776" start="11449" end="11461" title="the Moffatts" label="the Moffatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q768621" start="11467" end="11473" title="Hanson (band)" label="Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q730887" start="11729" end="11741" title="Lou Pearlman" label="Lou Pearlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="11796" end="11811" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="11821" end="11826" title="NSYNC" label="NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758534" start="11831" end="11834" title="LFO (group)" label="LFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428025" start="11844" end="11850" title="O-Town (band)" label="O-Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q182622" start="11864" end="11867" title="US5" label="US5"/>
<link wikidata="Q162629" start="12127" end="12139" title="Simon Cowell" label="Simon Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="12173" end="12186" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453652" start="12187" end="12199" title="The X Factor" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24791" start="12266" end="12270" title="Five (band)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="12306" end="12314" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q658547" start="12366" end="12377" title="Louis Walsh" label="Louis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q213495" start="12399" end="12406" title="Boyzone" label="Boyzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q311467" start="12464" end="12477" title="Ronan Keating" label="Ronan Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072376" start="12635" end="12658" title="Official Charts Company" label="Official Charts Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q826185" start="13090" end="13096" title="Busted (band)" label="Busted"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="13195" end="13210" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="13215" end="13221" title="NSYNC" label="*NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q277230" start="13256" end="13266" title="98 Degrees" label="98 Degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="13268" end="13276" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428025" start="13278" end="13284" title="O-Town (band)" label="O-Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q279634" start="13286" end="13288" title="A1 (band)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q32825" start="13290" end="13294" title="Blue (English band)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q826185" start="13300" end="13306" title="Busted (band)" label="Busted"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="13441" end="13448" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562" start="13455" end="13461" title="O-Zone" label="O-Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q316783" start="13467" end="13477" title="Overground (band)" label="Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404454" start="13507" end="13515" title="Plus One (band)" label="Plus One"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="13613" end="13626" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q222915" start="13666" end="13673" title="2gether (band)" label="2gether"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="13680" end="13691" title="the Monkees" label="the Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="14075" end="14078" title="MTV.com" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q483285" start="14158" end="14177" title="My Chemical Romance" label="My Chemical Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q483558" start="14179" end="14185" title="Sum 41" label="Sum 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q485825" start="14191" end="14202" title="Simple Plan" label="Simple Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q713438" start="14233" end="14235" title="F4 (band)" label="F4"/>
<link wikidata="Q545333" start="14324" end="14337" title="Meteor Garden (2001 TV series)" label="Meteor Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="14364" end="14370" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q706975" start="14552" end="14556" title="5566" label="5566"/>
<link wikidata="Q713435" start="14561" end="14571" title="Fahrenheit (Taiwanese band)" label="Fahrenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q482620" start="14589" end="14596" title="Shinhwa" label="Shinhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q494316" start="14609" end="14615" title="hallyu" label="hallyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="14645" end="14650" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="14652" end="14660" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="14662" end="14671" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="14673" end="14679" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="14681" end="14690" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14695" end="14700" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q655239" start="14790" end="14795" title="Exile (Japanese band)" label="Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154245" start="14834" end="14845" title="Rhythm Zone" label="Rhythm Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q239693" start="14888" end="14900" title="Super Junior" label="Super Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q626440" start="14995" end="15001" title="Arashi" label="Arashi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15099" end="15134" title="List of best-selling singles in Japan#Best-selling singles by year" label="yearly best-selling single in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138250" start="15161" end="15165" title="SMAP" label="SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369492" start="15192" end="15221" title="Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana" label="Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15248" end="15287" title="List of best-selling singles in Japan#List of best-selling singles in Japan (1968–present)" label="third best-selling single ever in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134233" start="15349" end="15363" title="Jonas Brothers" label="Jonas Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="15399" end="15413" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165439" start="15444" end="15447" title="JLS" label="JLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q940034" start="15452" end="15469" title="Mindless Behavior" label="Mindless Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="15807" end="15822" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="15827" end="15835" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q152066" start="15900" end="15909" title="Take That" label="Take That"/>
<link wikidata="Q213495" start="15919" end="15926" title="Boyzone" label="Boyzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q212464" start="15940" end="15961" title="New Kids on the Block" label="New Kids on the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q277230" start="16120" end="16130" title="98 Degrees" label="98 Degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q752419" start="16399" end="16412" title="Big Time Rush (group)" label="Big Time Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q34918" start="16414" end="16424" title="the Wanted" label="the Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q146027" start="16430" end="16443" title="One Direction" label="One Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="16465" end="16475" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140096" start="16476" end="16483" title="NKOTBSB" label="NKOTBSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q32825" start="16679" end="16683" title="Blue (English band)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q24791" start="16697" end="16701" title="Five (band)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648767" start="16703" end="16706" title="911 (UK band)" label="911"/>
<link wikidata="Q222915" start="16725" end="16732" title="2gether (band)" label="2gether"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="16737" end="16748" title="the Monkees" label="the Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q211418" start="16976" end="16992" title="British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360150" start="17027" end="17044" title="Where We Are Tour (One Direction)" label="Where We Are Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q18003476" start="17154" end="17158" title="Four (One Direction album)" label="Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="17223" end="17248" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q75905366" start="17468" end="17472" title="SB19" label="SB19"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035104" start="17518" end="17536" title="Billboard Year-End" label="Billboard Year-End"/>
<link wikidata="Q482527" start="17722" end="17734" title="Circle Chart" label="Circle Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q118876397" start="17887" end="17890" title="FML (EP)" label="FML"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18012" end="18030" title="Love Yourself: Her" label="Love Yourself: Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q494316" start="18311" end="18322" title="Korean Wave" label="Korean Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="18414" end="18455" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q47905676" start="18487" end="18495" title="Mic Drop (song)" label="Mic Drop"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18608" end="18627" title="Love Yourself: Tear" label="Love Yourself: Tear"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18711" end="18732" title="Love Yourself: Answer" label="Love Yourself: Answer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18753" end="18777" title="Map of the Soul: Persona" label="Map of the Soul: Persona"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18798" end="18816" title="Map of the Soul: 7" label="Map of the Soul: 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q99671345" start="18837" end="18839" title="Be (BTS album)" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q111849557" start="18863" end="18868" title="Proof (album)" label="Proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q491298" start="18940" end="18956" title="Gaon Album Chart" label="Gaon Album Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q66710876" start="19109" end="19115" title="SuperM" label="SuperM"/>
<link wikidata="Q98073193" start="19227" end="19235" title="Dynamite (BTS song)" label="Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="19259" end="19288" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="19409" end="19415" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027880" start="19432" end="19462" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance" label="Best Pop Duo/Group Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q101111612" start="19466" end="19491" title="63rd Annual Grammy Awards" label="63rd Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q46134670" start="19595" end="19605" title="Stray Kids" label="Stray Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q111077459" start="19719" end="19727" title="Oddinary" label="Oddinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q113954576" start="19736" end="19744" title="Maxident" label="Maxident"/>
<link wikidata="Q118143541" start="19753" end="19759" title="5-Star (Stray Kids album)" label="5-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q123003004" start="19768" end="19777" title="Rock-Star (EP)" label="Rock-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q126974254" start="19786" end="19789" title="Ate (EP)" label="Ate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131380834" start="19801" end="19804" title="Hop (mixtape)" label="Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q626440" start="19824" end="19830" title="Arashi" label="Arashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139131" start="20071" end="20095" title="Sandaime J Soul Brothers" label="Sandaime J Soul Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061446" start="20161" end="20174" title="Kanjani Eight" label="Kanjani Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q111633956" start="20260" end="20271" title="Ballinciaga" label="Ballinciaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q112624794" start="20599" end="20609" title="Undergrunn" label="Undergrunn"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20614" end="20626" title=":no:Tigergutt101" label="Tigergutt101"/>
<link wikidata="Q877546" start="20787" end="20792" title="Reputation" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711354" start="20923" end="20936" title="teen magazine" label="teen magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="21396" end="21409" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="22511" end="22526" title="session singers" label="session singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q784762" start="22791" end="22800" title="auto-tune" label="auto-tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556133" start="22935" end="22946" title="lip syncing" label="lip syncing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212464" start="22990" end="23011" title="New Kids on the Block" label="New Kids on the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q328753" start="23357" end="23368" title="Gary Barlow" label="Gary Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q152066" start="23372" end="23381" title="Take That" label="Take That"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269300" start="23385" end="23398" title="Tony Mortimer" label="Tony Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277715" start="23402" end="23409" title="East 17" label="East 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="23863" end="23878" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="23883" end="23889" title="*NSYNC" label="*NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q318223" start="23927" end="23937" title="Max Martin" label="Max Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165439" start="24032" end="24035" title="JLS" label="JLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34918" start="24196" end="24206" title="The Wanted" label="The Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="24366" end="24372" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8222" start="24380" end="24386" title="Hangul" label="Hangul"/>
<link wikidata="Q704803" start="24404" end="24413" title="Romanization of Korean" label="rev. Rom."/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="24935" end="24942" title="Hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580495" start="25099" end="25102" title="BTS" label="BTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20514446" start="25109" end="25111" title="RM (musician)" label="RM"/>
<link wikidata="Q21075020" start="25116" end="25120" title="Suga" label="Suga"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="25366" end="25383" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="25389" end="25394" title="NSYNC" label="NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="25400" end="25415" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q152066" start="25421" end="25430" title="Take That" label="Take That"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162770" start="25874" end="25900" title="Conscription in South Korea" label="mandatory military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="26184" end="26191" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="26217" end="26228" title="music genre" label="music genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="26244" end="26257" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="26262" end="26272" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565347" start="26296" end="26304" title="South 65" label="South 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773555" start="26309" end="26324" title="Marshall Dyllon" label="Marshall Dyllon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269813" start="26374" end="26381" title="Il Divo" label="Il Divo"/>
<link wikidata="Q162629" start="26394" end="26406" title="Simon Cowell" label="Simon Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336819" start="26448" end="26460" title="operatic pop" label="operatic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="26647" end="26656" title="power pop" label="power pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="26661" end="26669" title="pop punk" label="pop punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296293" start="26804" end="26817" title="The Overtones" label="The Overtones"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="26868" end="26883" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758534" start="26888" end="26891" title="LFO (group)" label="LFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137776" start="27061" end="27073" title="the Moffatts" label="the Moffatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q719723" start="27251" end="27258" title="preadolescence" label="preteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43267" start="27445" end="27458" title="the Jackson 5" label="the Jackson 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="27460" end="27475" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636547" start="27477" end="27489" title="Human Nature (band)" label="Human Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370588" start="27491" end="27502" title="New Edition" label="New Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138250" start="27504" end="27508" title="SMAP" label="SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q482620" start="27510" end="27517" title="Shinhwa" label="Shinhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q152066" start="27519" end="27528" title="Take That" label="Take That"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="27533" end="27541" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623897" start="27590" end="27605" title="All-female band" label="All-female band"/>
<link wikidata="Q124250582" start="27724" end="27733" title="About.com" label="About.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="27773" end="27786" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="27816" end="27836" title="The Washington Times" label="The Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="27884" end="27893" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4674" wikidata="Q677051" url="?curid=4674" title="B-tree">
<text>In computer science, a B-tree is a self-balancing tree data structure that maintains sorted data and allows searches, sequential access, insertions, and deletions in logarithmic time. The B-tree generalizes the binary search tree, allowing for nodes with more than two children. Unlike other self-balancing binary search trees, the B-tree is well suited for storage systems that read and write relatively large blocks of data, such as databases and file systems.

==History==
B-trees were invented by Rudolf Bayer and Edward M. McCreight while working at Boeing Research Labs to efficiently manage index pages for large random-access files. The basic assumption was that indices would be so voluminous that only small chunks of the tree could fit in main memory. Bayer and McCreight&#x27;s paper &quot;Organization and maintenance of large ordered indices&quot; was first circulated in July 1970 and later published in &quot;Acta Informatica&quot;.

Bayer and McCreight never explained what, if anything, the &quot;B&quot; stands for; &quot;Boeing&quot;, &quot;balanced&quot;, &quot;between&quot;, &quot;broad&quot;, &quot;bushy&quot;, and &quot;Bayer&quot; have been suggested. McCreight, when asked &quot;I want to know what B in B-Tree stands for,&quot; answered:&quot;Everybody does!&quot;

&quot;So you just have no idea what a lunchtime conversation can turn into. So there we were, Rudy and I, at lunch. We had to give the thing a name... We were working for Boeing at the time, but we couldn&#x27;t use the name without talking to the lawyers. So there&#x27;s a B.&quot; 

&quot;It has to do with Balance. There&#x27;s another B.&quot; 

&quot;Rudy was the senior author. Rudy (Bayer) was several years older than I am, and had ... many more publications than I did. So there&#x27;s another B.&quot;

&quot;And so at the lunch table, we never did resolve whether there was one of those that made more sense than the rest.&quot; 

&quot;What Rudy likes to say is, the more you think about what the B in B-Tree means, the better you understand B-Trees!&quot;

==Definition==
According to Knuth&#x27;s definition, a B-tree of order &quot;m&quot; is a tree which satisfies the following properties:

# Every node has at most &quot;m&quot; children.
# Every node, except for the root and the leaves, has at least ⌈&quot;m&quot;/2⌉ children.
# The root node has at least two children unless it is a leaf.
# All leaves appear on the same level.
# A non-leaf node with &quot;k&quot; children contains &quot;k&quot;−1 keys.

Each internal node&#x27;s keys act as separation values which divide its subtrees. For example, if an internal node has 3 child nodes (or subtrees) then it must have 2 keys: &quot;a&quot;1 and &quot;a&quot;2. All values in the leftmost subtree will be less than &quot;a&quot;1, all values in the middle subtree will be between &quot;a&quot;1 and &quot;a&quot;2, and all values in the rightmost subtree will be greater than &quot;a&quot;2.

;Internal nodes
: Internal nodes (also known as inner nodes) are all nodes except for leaf nodes and the root node. They are usually represented as an ordered set of elements and child pointers. Every internal node contains a maximum of &quot;U&quot; children and a minimum of &quot;L&quot; children. Thus, the number of elements is always 1 less than the number of child pointers (the number of elements is between &quot;L&quot;−1 and &quot;U&quot;−1). &quot;U&quot; must be either 2&quot;L&quot; or 2&quot;L&quot;−1; therefore each internal node is at least half full. The relationship between &quot;U&quot; and &quot;L&quot; implies that two half-full nodes can be joined to make a legal node, and one full node can be split into two legal nodes (if there&#x27;s room to push one element up into the parent). These properties make it possible to delete and insert new values into a B-tree and adjust the tree to preserve the B-tree properties.
;The root node
: The root node&#x27;s number of children has the same upper limit as internal nodes, but has no lower limit. For example, when there are fewer than &quot;L&quot;−1 elements in the entire tree, the root will be the only node in the tree with no children at all.

;Leaf nodes
: In Knuth&#x27;s terminology, the &quot;leaf&quot; nodes are the actual data objects / chunks. The internal nodes that are one level above these leaves are what would be called the &quot;leaves&quot; by other authors: these nodes only store keys (at most &quot;m&quot;-1, and at least &quot;m&quot;/2-1 if they are not the root) and pointers (one for each key) to nodes carrying the data objects / chunks.

A B-tree of depth &quot;n&quot;+1 can hold about &quot;U&quot; times as many items as a B-tree of depth &quot;n&quot;, but the cost of search, insert, and delete operations grows with the depth of the tree. As with any balanced tree, the cost grows much more slowly than the number of elements.

Some balanced trees store values only at leaf nodes, and use different kinds of nodes for leaf nodes and internal nodes. B-trees keep values in every node in the tree except leaf nodes.

===Differences in terminology===
The literature on B-trees is not uniform in its terminology.

Bayer and McCreight (1972), Comer (1979), and others define the order of B-tree as the minimum number of keys in a non-root node. Folk and Zoellick points out that terminology is ambiguous because the maximum number of keys is not clear. An order 3 B-tree might hold a maximum of 6 keys or a maximum of 7 keys. Knuth (1998) avoids the problem by defining the order to be the maximum number of children (which is one more than the maximum number of keys).

The term leaf is also inconsistent. Bayer and McCreight (1972) considered the leaf level to be the lowest level of keys, but Knuth considered the leaf level to be one level below the lowest keys. There are many possible implementation choices. In some designs, the leaves may hold the entire data record; in other designs, the leaves may only hold pointers to the data record. Those choices are not fundamental to the idea of a B-tree.

For simplicity, most authors assume there are a fixed number of keys that fit in a node. The basic assumption is the key size is fixed and the node size is fixed. In practice, variable length keys may be employed.

==Informal description==
===Node structure===
As with other trees, B-trees can be represented as a collection of three types of nodes: &quot;root&quot;, &quot;internal&quot; (a.k.a. interior), and &quot;leaf&quot;. 

Note the following variable definitions:

* &quot;&quot;: Maximum number of potential search keys for each node in a B-tree. (this value is constant over the entire tree).
* formula_1: The pointer to a child node which starts a sub-tree.
* formula_2: The pointer to a record which stores the data.
* formula_3: The search key at the zero-based node index formula_4.

In B-trees, the following properties are maintained for these nodes:

* If formula_5 exists in any node in a B tree, then formula_6 exists in that node where formula_7.
* All leaf nodes have the same number of ancestors (i.e., they are all at the same depth).

Each internal node in a B-tree has the following format:
Each leaf node in a B-tree has the following format:
The node bounds are summarized in the table below:
===Insertion and deletion===
To maintain the predefined range of child nodes, internal nodes may be joined or split.

Usually, the number of keys is chosen to vary between formula_8 and formula_9, where formula_8 is the minimum number of keys, and formula_11 is the minimum degree or branching factor of the tree. The factor of 2 will guarantee that nodes can be split or combined.

If an internal node has formula_9 keys, then adding a key to that node can be accomplished by splitting the hypothetical formula_13 key node into two formula_8 key nodes and moving the key that would have been in the middle to the parent node. Each split node has the required minimum number of keys. Similarly, if an internal node and its neighbor each have formula_8 keys, then a key may be deleted from the internal node by combining it with its neighbor. Deleting the key would make the internal node have formula_16 keys; joining the neighbor would add formula_8 keys plus one more key brought down from the neighbor&#x27;s parent. The result is an entirely full node of formula_9 keys.

A B-tree is kept balanced after insertion by splitting a would-be overfilled node, of formula_13 keys, into two formula_8-key siblings and inserting the mid-value key into the parent. Depth only increases when the root is split, maintaining balance. Similarly, a B-tree is kept balanced after deletion by merging or redistributing keys among siblings to maintain the formula_8-key minimum for non-root nodes. A merger reduces the number of keys in the parent potentially forcing it to merge or redistribute keys with its siblings, and so on. The only change in depth occurs when the root has two children, of formula_8 and (transitionally) formula_16 keys, in which case the two siblings and parent are merged, reducing the depth by one.

This depth will increase slowly as elements are added to the tree, but an increase in the overall depth is infrequent, and results in all leaf nodes being one more node farther away from the root.

===Comparison to other trees===
Because a range of child nodes is permitted, B-trees do not need re-balancing as frequently as other self-balancing search trees, but may waste some space, since nodes are not entirely full.

B-trees have substantial advantages over alternative implementations when the time to access the data of a node greatly exceeds the time spent processing that data, because then the cost of accessing the node may be amortized over multiple operations within the node. This usually occurs when the node data are in secondary storage such as disk drives. By maximizing the number of keys within each internal node, the height of the tree decreases and the number of expensive node accesses is reduced. In addition, rebalancing of the tree occurs less often. The maximum number of child nodes depends on the information that must be stored for each child node and the size of a full disk block or an analogous size in secondary storage. While 2–3 B-trees are easier to explain, practical B-trees using secondary storage need a large number of child nodes to improve performance.

===Variants===
The term B-tree may refer to a specific design or a general class of designs. In the narrow sense, a B-tree stores keys in its internal nodes but need not store those keys in the records at the leaves. The general class includes variations such as the B+ tree, the B* tree and the B*+ tree.
* In the B+ tree, the internal nodes do not store any pointers to records, thus all pointers to records are stored in the leaf nodes. In addition, a leaf node may include a pointer to the next leaf node to speed up sequential access. Because B+ tree internal nodes have fewer pointers, each node can hold more keys, causing the tree to be shallower and thus faster to search.
* The B* tree balances more neighboring internal nodes to keep the internal nodes more densely packed. This variant ensures non-root nodes are at least 2/3 full instead of 1/2. As the most costly part of operation of inserting the node in B-tree is splitting the node, B*-trees are created to postpone splitting operation as long as they can. To maintain this, instead of immediately splitting up a node when it gets full, its keys are shared with a node next to it. This spill operation is less costly to do than split, because it requires only shifting the keys between existing nodes, not allocating memory for a new one. For inserting, first it is checked whether the node has some free space in it, and if so, the new key is just inserted in the node. However, if the node is full (it has keys, where is the order of the tree as maximum number of pointers to subtrees from one node), it needs to be checked whether the right sibling exists and has some free space. If the right sibling has keys, then keys are redistributed between the two sibling nodes as evenly as possible. For this purpose, keys from the current node, the new key inserted, one key from the parent node and keys from the sibling node are seen as an ordered array of keys. The array becomes split by half, so that lowest keys stay in the current node, the next (middle) key is inserted in the parent and the rest go to the right sibling. (The newly inserted key might end up in any of the three places.) The situation when right sibling is full, and left isn&#x27;t is analogous. When both the sibling nodes are full, then the two nodes (current node and a sibling) are split into three and one more key is shifted up the tree, to the parent node. If the parent is full, then spill/split operation propagates towards the root node. Deleting nodes is somewhat more complex than inserting however.
* The B*+ tree combines the main B+ tree and B* tree features together.
* B-trees can be turned into order statistic trees to allow rapid searches for the Nth record in key order, or counting the number of records between any two records, and various other related operations.

==B-tree usage in databases==

===Time to search a sorted file===
Sorting and searching algorithms can be characterized by the number of comparison operations that must be performed using order notation. A binary search of a sorted table with records, for example, can be done in roughly comparisons. If the table had 1,000,000 records, then a specific record could be located with at most 20 comparisons: .

Large databases have historically been kept on disk drives. The time to read a record on a disk drive far exceeds the time needed to compare keys once the record is available due to seek time and a rotational delay. The seek time may be 0 to 20 or more milliseconds, and the rotational delay averages about half the rotation period. For a 7200 RPM drive, the rotation period is 8.33 milliseconds. For a drive such as the Seagate ST3500320NS, the track-to-track seek time is 0.8 milliseconds and the average reading seek time is 8.5 milliseconds. For simplicity, assume reading from disk takes about 10 milliseconds.

The time to locate one record out of a million in the example above would take 20 disk reads times 10 milliseconds per disk read, which is 0.2 seconds.

The search time is reduced because individual records are grouped together in a disk block. A disk block might be 16 kilobytes. If each record is 160 bytes, then 100 records could be stored in each block. The disk read time above was actually for an entire block. Once the disk head is in position, one or more disk blocks can be read with little delay. With 100 records per block, the last 6 or so comparisons don&#x27;t need to do any disk reads—the comparisons are all within the last disk block read.

To speed up the search further, the time to do the first 13 to 14 comparisons (which each required a disk access) must be reduced.

===An index speeds the search===
A B-tree index can be used to improve performance. A B-tree index creates a multi-level tree structure that breaks a database down into fixed-size blocks or pages. Each level of this tree can be used to link those pages via an address location, allowing one page (known as a node, or internal page) to refer to another with leaf pages at the lowest level. One page is typically the starting point of the tree, or the &quot;root&quot;. This is where the search for a particular key would begin, traversing a path that terminates in a leaf. Most pages in this structure will be leaf pages which refer to specific table rows. 

Because each node (or internal page) can have more than two children, a B-tree index will usually have a shorter height (the distance from the root to the farthest leaf) than a Binary Search Tree. In the example above, initial disk reads narrowed the search range by a factor of two. That can be improved by creating an auxiliary index that contains the first record in each disk block (sometimes called a sparse index). This auxiliary index would be 1% of the size of the original database, but it can be searched quickly. Finding an entry in the auxiliary index would tell us which block to search in the main database; after searching the auxiliary index, we would have to search only that one block of the main database—at a cost of one more disk read. 

In the above example the index would hold 10,000 entries and would take at most 14 comparisons to return a result. Like the main database, the last six or so comparisons in the auxiliary index would be on the same disk block. The index could be searched in about eight disk reads, and the desired record could be accessed in 9 disk reads.

Creating an auxiliary index can be repeated to make an auxiliary index to the auxiliary index. That would make an aux-aux index that would need only 100 entries and would fit in one disk block.

Instead of reading 14 disk blocks to find the desired record, we only need to read 3 blocks. This blocking is the core idea behind the creation of the B-tree, where the disk blocks fill out a hierarchy of levels to make up the index. Reading and searching the first (and only) block of the aux-aux index which is the root of the tree identifies the relevant block in aux-index in the level below. Reading and searching that aux-index block identifies the relevant block to read, until the final level, known as the leaf level, identifies a record in the main database. Instead of 150 milliseconds, we need only 30 milliseconds to get the record.

The auxiliary indices have turned the search problem from a binary search requiring roughly disk reads to one requiring only disk reads where is the blocking factor (the number of entries per block: entries per block in our example; reads).

In practice, if the main database is being frequently searched, the aux-aux index and much of the aux index may reside in a disk cache, so they would not incur a disk read. The B-tree remains the standard index implementation in almost all relational databases, and many nonrelational databases use them too.

===Insertions and deletions===
If the database does not change, then compiling the index is simple to do, and the index need never be changed. If there are changes, managing the database and its index require additional computation.

Deleting records from a database is relatively easy. The index can stay the same, and the record can just be marked as deleted. The database remains in sorted order. If there are a large number of lazy deletions, then searching and storage become less efficient.

Insertions can be very slow in a sorted sequential file because the room for the inserted record must be made. Inserting a record before the first record requires shifting all of the records down one. Such an operation is just too expensive to be practical. One solution is to leave some spaces. Instead of densely packing all the records in a block, the block can have some free space to allow for subsequent insertions. Those spaces would be marked as if they were &quot;deleted&quot; records.

Both insertions and deletions are fast as long as space is available on a block. If an insertion won&#x27;t fit on the block, then some free space on some nearby block must be found and the auxiliary indices adjusted. The best case is that enough space is available nearby so that the amount of block reorganization can be minimized. Alternatively, some out-of-sequence disk blocks may be used.

===Advantages of B-tree usage for databases===
The B-tree uses all of the ideas described above. In particular, a B-tree:
* keeps keys in sorted order for sequential traversing
* uses a hierarchical index to minimize the number of disk reads
* uses partially full blocks to speed up insertions and deletions
* keeps the index balanced with a recursive algorithm

In addition, a B-tree minimizes waste by making sure the interior nodes are at least half full. A B-tree can handle an arbitrary number of insertions and deletions.

==Best case and worst case heights==
Let be the height of the classic B-tree (see for the tree height definition). Let be the number of entries in the tree. Let &quot;m&quot; be the maximum number of children a node can have. Each node can have at most keys.

It can be shown (by induction for example) that a B-tree of height &quot;h&quot; with all its nodes completely filled has entries. Hence, the best case height (i.e. the minimum height) of a B-tree is:
: formula_24

Let formula_8 be the minimum number of children an internal (non-root) node must have. For an ordinary B-tree, formula_26

Comer (1979) and Cormen et al. (2001) give the worst case height (the maximum height) of a B-tree as
: formula_27

==Algorithms==
===Search===
Searching is similar to searching a binary search tree. Starting at the root, the tree is recursively traversed from top to bottom. At each level, the search reduces its field of view to the child pointer (subtree) whose range includes the search value. A subtree&#x27;s range is defined by the values, or keys, contained in its parent node. These limiting values are also known as separation values.

Binary search is typically (but not necessarily) used within nodes to find the separation values and child tree of interest.

===Insertion===
All insertions start at a leaf node. To insert a new element, search the tree to find the leaf node where the new element should be added. Insert the new element into that node with the following steps:

# If the node contains fewer than the maximum allowed number of elements, then there is room for the new element. Insert the new element in the node, keeping the node&#x27;s elements ordered.
# Otherwise the node is full, evenly split it into two nodes so:
## A single median is chosen from among the leaf&#x27;s elements and the new element that is being inserted.
## Values less than the median are put in the new left node and values greater than the median are put in the new right node, with the median acting as a separation value.
## The separation value is inserted in the node&#x27;s parent, which may cause it to be split, and so on. If the node has no parent (i.e., the node was the root), create a new root above this node (increasing the height of the tree).

If the splitting goes all the way up to the root, it creates a new root with a single separator value and two children, which is why the lower bound on the size of internal nodes does not apply to the root. The maximum number of elements per node is &quot;U&quot;−1. When a node is split, one element moves to the parent, but one element is added. So, it must be possible to divide the maximum number &quot;U&quot;−1 of elements into two legal nodes. If this number is odd, then &quot;U&quot;=2&quot;L&quot; and one of the new nodes contains (&quot;U&quot;−2)/2 = &quot;L&quot;−1 elements, and hence is a legal node, and the other contains one more element, and hence it is legal too. If &quot;U&quot;−1 is even, then &quot;U&quot;=2&quot;L&quot;−1, so there are 2&quot;L&quot;−2 elements in the node. Half of this number is &quot;L&quot;−1, which is the minimum number of elements allowed per node.

An alternative algorithm supports a single pass down the tree from the root to the node where the insertion will take place, splitting any full nodes encountered on the way pre-emptively. This prevents the need to recall the parent nodes into memory, which may be expensive if the nodes are on secondary storage. However, to use this algorithm, we must be able to send one element to the parent and split the remaining &quot;U&quot;−2 elements into two legal nodes, without adding a new element. This requires &quot;U&quot; = 2&quot;L&quot; rather than &quot;U&quot; = 2&quot;L&quot;−1, which accounts for why some textbooks impose this requirement in defining B-trees.

===Deletion===
There are two popular strategies for deletion from a B-tree.

# Locate and delete the item, then restructure the tree to retain its invariants, OR
# Do a single pass down the tree, but before entering (visiting) a node, restructure the tree so that once the key to be deleted is encountered, it can be deleted without triggering the need for any further restructuring

The algorithm below uses the former strategy.

There are two special cases to consider when deleting an element:

# The element in an internal node is a separator for its child nodes
# Deleting an element may put its node under the minimum number of elements and children

The procedures for these cases are in order below.

====Deletion from a leaf node====
# Search for the value to delete.
# If the value is in a leaf node, simply delete it from the node.
# If underflow happens, rebalance the tree as described in section &quot;Rebalancing after deletion&quot; below.

====Deletion from an internal node====
Each element in an internal node acts as a separation value for two subtrees, therefore we need to find a replacement for separation. Note that the largest element in the left subtree is still less than the separator. Likewise, the smallest element in the right subtree is still greater than the separator. Both of those elements are in leaf nodes, and either one can be the new separator for the two subtrees. Algorithmically described below:

# Choose a new separator (either the largest element in the left subtree or the smallest element in the right subtree), remove it from the leaf node it is in, and replace the element to be deleted with the new separator.
# The previous step deleted an element (the new separator) from a leaf node. If that leaf node is now deficient (has fewer than the required number of nodes), then rebalance the tree starting from the leaf node.

====Rebalancing after deletion====
Rebalancing starts from a leaf and proceeds toward the root until the tree is balanced. If deleting an element from a node has brought it under the minimum size, then some elements must be redistributed to bring all nodes up to the minimum. Usually, the redistribution involves moving an element from a sibling node that has more than the minimum number of nodes. That redistribution operation is called a rotation. If no sibling can spare an element, then the deficient node must be merged with a sibling. The merge causes the parent to lose a separator element, so the parent may become deficient and need rebalancing. The merging and rebalancing may continue all the way to the root. Since the minimum element count doesn&#x27;t apply to the root, making the root be the only deficient node is not a problem. The algorithm to rebalance the tree is as follows:
* If the deficient node&#x27;s right sibling exists and has more than the minimum number of elements, then rotate left
*# Copy the separator from the parent to the end of the deficient node (the separator moves down; the deficient node now has the minimum number of elements)
*# Replace the separator in the parent with the first element of the right sibling (right sibling loses one node but still has at least the minimum number of elements)
*# The tree is now balanced
* Otherwise, if the deficient node&#x27;s left sibling exists and has more than the minimum number of elements, then rotate right
*# Copy the separator from the parent to the start of the deficient node (the separator moves down; deficient node now has the minimum number of elements)
*# Replace the separator in the parent with the last element of the left sibling (left sibling loses one node but still has at least the minimum number of elements)
*# The tree is now balanced
* Otherwise, if both immediate siblings have only the minimum number of elements, then merge with a sibling sandwiching their separator taken off from their parent
*# Copy the separator to the end of the left node (the left node may be the deficient node or it may be the sibling with the minimum number of elements)
*# Move all elements from the right node to the left node (the left node now has the maximum number of elements, and the right node – empty)
*# Remove the separator from the parent along with its empty right child (the parent loses an element)
*#* If the parent is the root and now has no elements, then free it and make the merged node the new root (tree becomes shallower)
*#* Otherwise, if the parent has fewer than the required number of elements, then rebalance the parent

===Sequential access===
While freshly loaded databases tend to have good sequential behaviour, this behaviour becomes increasingly difficult to maintain as a database grows, resulting in more random I/O and performance challenges.

===Initial construction===

A common special case is adding a large amount of &quot;pre-sorted&quot; data into an initially empty B-tree. While it is quite possible to simply perform a series of successive inserts, inserting sorted data results in a tree composed almost entirely of half-full nodes. Instead, a special &quot;bulk loading&quot; algorithm can be used to produce a more efficient tree with a higher branching factor.

When the input is sorted, all insertions are at the rightmost edge of the tree, and in particular any time a node is split, we are guaranteed that no more insertions will take place in the left half. When bulk loading, we take advantage of this, and instead of splitting overfull nodes evenly, split them as &quot;unevenly&quot; as possible: leave the left node completely full and create a right node with zero keys and one child (in violation of the usual B-tree rules).

At the end of bulk loading, the tree is composed almost entirely of completely full nodes; only the rightmost node on each level may be less than full. Because those nodes may also be less than &quot;half&quot; full, to re-establish the normal B-tree rules, combine such nodes with their (guaranteed full) left siblings and divide the keys to produce two nodes at least half full. The only node which lacks a full left sibling is the root, which is permitted to be less than half full.

==In filesystems==
In addition to its use in databases, the B-tree (or ) is also used in filesystems to allow quick random access to an arbitrary block in a particular file. The basic problem is turning the file block formula_4 address into a disk block address.

Some operating systems require the user to allocate the maximum size of the file when the file is created. The file can then be allocated as contiguous disk blocks. In that case, to convert the file block address formula_4 into a disk block address, the operating system simply adds the file block address formula_4 to the address of the first disk block constituting the file. The scheme is simple, but the file cannot exceed its created size.

Other operating systems allow a file to grow. The resulting disk blocks may not be contiguous, so mapping logical blocks to physical blocks is more involved.

MS-DOS, for example, used a simple File Allocation Table (FAT). The FAT has an entry for each disk block, and that entry identifies whether its block is used by a file and if so, which block (if any) is the next disk block of the same file. So, the allocation of each file is represented as a linked list in the table. In order to find the disk address of file block formula_4, the operating system (or disk utility) must sequentially follow the file&#x27;s linked list in the FAT. Worse, to find a free disk block, it must sequentially scan the FAT. For MS-DOS, that was not a huge penalty because the disks and files were small and the FAT had few entries and relatively short file chains. In the FAT12 filesystem (used on floppy disks and early hard disks), there were no more than 4,080 entries, and the FAT would usually be resident in memory. As disks got bigger, the FAT architecture began to confront penalties. On a large disk using FAT, it may be necessary to perform disk reads to learn the disk location of a file block to be read or written.

TOPS-20 (and possibly TENEX) used a 0 to 2 level tree that has similarities to a B-tree. A disk block was 512 36-bit words. If the file fit in a 512 (29) word block, then the file directory would point to that physical disk block. If the file fit in 218 words, then the directory would point to an aux index; the 512 words of that index would either be NULL (the block isn&#x27;t allocated) or point to the physical address of the block. If the file fit in 227 words, then the directory would point to a block holding an aux-aux index; each entry would either be NULL or point to an aux index. Consequently, the physical disk block for a 227 word file could be located in two disk reads and read on the third.

Apple&#x27;s filesystem HFS+ and APFS, Microsoft&#x27;s NTFS, AIX (jfs2) and some Linux filesystems, such as Bcachefs, Btrfs and ext4, use B-trees.

B*-trees are used in the HFS and Reiser4 file systems.

DragonFly BSD&#x27;s HAMMER file system uses a modified B+-tree.

==Performance==

A B-tree grows slower with growing data amount, than the linearity of a linked list. Compared to a skip list, both structures have the same performance, but the B-tree scales better for growing &quot;n&quot;. A T-tree, for main memory database systems, is similar but more compact.

==Variations==
===Access concurrency===
Lehman and Yao showed that all the read locks could be avoided (and thus concurrent access greatly improved) by linking the tree blocks at each level together with a &quot;next&quot; pointer. This results in a tree structure where both insertion and search operations descend from the root to the leaf. Write locks are only required as a tree block is modified. This maximizes access concurrency by multiple users, an important consideration for databases and/or other B-tree-based ISAM storage methods. The cost associated with this improvement is that empty pages cannot be removed from the btree during normal operations. (However, see for various strategies to implement node merging, and source code at.)

United States Patent 5283894, granted in 1994, appears to show a way to use a &#x27;Meta Access Method&#x27; to allow concurrent B+ tree access and modification without locks. The technique accesses the tree &#x27;upwards&#x27; for both searches and updates by means of additional in-memory indexes that point at the blocks in each level in the block cache. No reorganization for deletes is needed and there are no &#x27;next&#x27; pointers in each block as in Lehman and Yao.

===Parallel algorithms===
Since B-trees are similar in structure to red-black trees, parallel algorithms for red-black trees can be applied to B-trees as well.

===Maple tree===
A Maple tree is a B-tree developed for use in the Linux kernel to reduce lock contention in virtual memory management.

===(a,b)-tree===
(a,b)-trees are generalizations of B-trees. B-trees require that each internal node have a minimum of formula_32 children and a maximum of formula_33 children, for some preset value of formula_33. In contrast, an (a,b)-tree allows the minimum number of children for an internal node to be set arbitrarily low. In an (a,b)-tree, each internal node has between and children, for some preset values of and .

==See also==
* B+ tree
* R-tree
* Red–black tree
* 2–3 tree
* 2–3–4 tree

==Notes==
==References==

==Sources==
* .
* Chapter 18: B-Trees.
* Section 6.2.4: Multiway Trees, pp. 481–491. Also, pp. 476–477 of section 6.2.3 (Balanced Trees) discusses 2–3 trees.

===Original papers===
* .

==External links==

*B-tree lecture by David Scot Taylor, SJSU
*B-Tree visualisation (click &quot;init&quot;)
*Animated B-Tree visualization
*B-tree and UB-tree on Scholarpedia Curator: Dr Rudolf Bayer
*B-Trees: Balanced Tree Data Structures 
*NIST&#x27;s Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures: B-tree
*B-Tree Tutorial
*The InfinityDB BTree implementation
*Cache Oblivious B(+)-trees
*Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures entry for B*-tree
*Open Data Structures - Section 14.2 - B-Trees, Pat Morin
*Counted B-Trees
*B-Tree .Net, a modern, virtualized RAM &amp; Disk implementation

Bulk loading
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q677051" start="23" end="29" title="B-tree" label="B-tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="50" end="69" title="tree data structure" label="tree data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="166" end="182" title="logarithmic time" label="logarithmic time"/>
<link wikidata="Q623818" start="211" end="229" title="binary search tree" label="binary search tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777473" start="244" end="249" title="Node (computer science)" label="nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q245955" start="292" end="325" title="self-balancing binary search tree" label="self-balancing binary search tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146944" start="411" end="425" title="Block (data storage)" label="blocks of data"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="435" end="443" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="449" end="460" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q66656" start="501" end="513" title="Rudolf Bayer" label="Rudolf Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10270906" start="518" end="537" title="Edward M. McCreight" label="Edward M. McCreight"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="555" end="575" title="Boeing" label="Boeing Research Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q127748" start="925" end="941" title="Acta Informatica" label="Acta Informatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="2094" end="2099" title="Donald Knuth" label="Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3012" end="3022" title="Tree (data structure)#Terminology" label="inner node"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7575" end="7581" title="Outdegree#Indegree and outdegree" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059349" start="7585" end="7601" title="branching factor" label="branching factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="9852" end="9869" title="secondary storage" label="secondary storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="9878" end="9889" title="hard drive" label="disk drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="9936" end="9949" title="internal node" label="internal node"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146944" start="10218" end="10228" title="Block (data storage)" label="disk block"/>
<link wikidata="Q285861" start="10682" end="10689" title="B+ tree" label="B+ tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q285861" start="10730" end="10737" title="B+ tree" label="B+ tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q285861" start="13001" end="13008" title="B+ tree" label="B+ tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100701" start="13069" end="13089" title="order statistic tree" label="order statistic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="13434" end="13448" title="Big O notation" label="order notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q243754" start="13452" end="13465" title="binary search" label="binary search"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655518" start="13837" end="13846" title="seek time" label="seek time"/>
<link wikidata="Q580427" start="15105" end="15110" title="Database index" label="index"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16127" end="16139" title="Database index#Sparse index" label="sparse index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124288" start="18028" end="18038" title="page cache" label="disk cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="18144" end="18163" title="relational database" label="relational database"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="18252" end="18260" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506152" start="18645" end="18658" title="lazy deletion" label="lazy deletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q243754" start="21277" end="21290" title="Binary search algorithm" label="Binary search"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="29063" end="29072" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="30981" end="30987" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q190167" start="31016" end="31037" title="File Allocation Table" label="File Allocation Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003418" start="31274" end="31285" title="linked list" label="linked list"/>
<link wikidata="Q190167" start="31680" end="31685" title="FAT12" label="FAT12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481861" start="32037" end="32044" title="TOPS-20" label="TOPS-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992529" start="32059" end="32064" title="TENEX (operating system)" label="TENEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071337" start="32772" end="32776" title="HFS+" label="HFS+"/>
<link wikidata="Q24577174" start="32781" end="32785" title="APFS" label="APFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q183205" start="32804" end="32808" title="NTFS" label="NTFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="32830" end="32835" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754748" start="32857" end="32865" title="Bcachefs" label="Bcachefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q283820" start="32867" end="32872" title="Btrfs" label="Btrfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q283827" start="32877" end="32881" title="ext4" label="ext4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058465" start="32922" end="32925" title="Hierarchical File System (Apple)" label="HFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293002" start="32930" end="32937" title="Reiser4" label="Reiser4"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="32938" end="32949" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q751067" start="32953" end="32966" title="DragonFly BSD" label="DragonFly BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498917" start="32974" end="32980" title="HAMMER (file system)" label="HAMMER"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005893" start="33135" end="33144" title="skip list" label="skip list"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562299" start="33247" end="33253" title="T-tree" label="T-tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572823" start="33259" end="33279" title="main memory database" label="main memory database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154755" start="33841" end="33845" title="ISAM" label="ISAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q506496" start="34616" end="34631" title="Red–black tree" label="red-black trees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34633" end="34672" title="Red–black tree#Parallel algorithms" label="parallel algorithms for red-black trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="34776" end="34788" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q285861" start="35284" end="35291" title="B+ tree" label="B+ tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198051" start="35294" end="35300" title="R-tree" label="R-tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q506496" start="35303" end="35317" title="Red–black tree" label="Red–black tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q169338" start="35320" end="35328" title="2–3 tree" label="2–3 tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q169233" start="35331" end="35341" title="2–3–4 tree" label="2–3–4 tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278607" start="36058" end="36067" title="Pat Morin" label="Pat Morin"/>
</links>
</doc>
