<doc id="5399" wikidata="Q1261" url="?curid=5399" title="Colorado">
<text>Colorado is a state in the Western United States. It is one of the Mountain states, sharing the Four Corners region with Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah. It is also bordered by Wyoming to the north, Nebraska to the northeast, Kansas to the east, and Oklahoma to the southeast. Colorado is noted for its landscape of mountains, forests, high plains, mesas, canyons, plateaus, rivers, and desert lands. It encompasses most of the Southern Rocky Mountains, as well as the northeastern portion of the Colorado Plateau and the western edge of the Great Plains. Colorado is the eighth-largest U.S. state by area and the 21st by population. The United States Census Bureau estimated the population of Colorado to be 5,957,493 as of July 1, 2024, a 3.2% increase from the 2020 United States census.

The region has been inhabited by Native Americans and their ancestors for at least 13,500 years and possibly much longer. The eastern edge of the Rocky Mountains was a major migration route for early peoples who spread throughout the Americas. In 1848, much of the Nuevo México region was annexed to the United States with the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. The Pike&#x27;s Peak Gold Rush of 1858–1862 created an influx of settlers. On February 28, 1861, U.S. President James Buchanan signed an act creating the Territory of Colorado, and on August 1, 1876, President Ulysses S. Grant signed Proclamation 230, admitting Colorado to the Union as the 38th state. The Spanish adjective &quot;colorado&quot; means &quot;colored red&quot; or &quot;ruddy&quot;. Colorado is nicknamed the &quot;Centennial State&quot; because it became a state 100 years (and four weeks) after the signing of the United States Declaration of Independence.

Denver is the capital, the most populous city, and the center of the Front Range Urban Corridor. Colorado Springs is the second-most populous city of the state. Residents of the state are known as Coloradans, although the antiquated &quot;Coloradoan&quot; is occasionally used. Major parts of the economy include government and defense, mining, agriculture, tourism, and increasingly other kinds of manufacturing. With increasing temperatures and decreasing water availability, Colorado&#x27;s agriculture forestry and tourism economies are expected to be heavily affected by climate change.

==History==

The region that is today the State of Colorado has been inhabited by Native Americans and their Paleoamerican ancestors for at least 13,500 years and possibly more than 37,000 years. The eastern edge of the Rocky Mountains was a major migration route that was important to the spread of early peoples throughout the Americas. The Lindenmeier site in Larimer County contains artifacts dating from approximately 8720 BCE. The Ancient Pueblo peoples lived in the valleys and mesas of the Colorado Plateau in far southwestern Colorado. The Ute Nation inhabited the mountain valleys of the Southern Rocky Mountains and the Western Rocky Mountains, even as far east as the Front Range of the present day. The Apache and the Comanche also inhabited the Eastern and Southeastern parts of the state. In the 17th century, the Arapaho and Cheyenne moved west from the Great Lakes region to hunt across the High Plains of Colorado and Wyoming.

The Spanish Empire claimed Colorado as part of Nuevo México. The U.S. acquired the territorial claim to the eastern Rocky Mountains with the Louisiana Purchase from France in 1803. This U.S. claim conflicted with the claim by Spain to the upper Arkansas River Basin. In 1806, Zebulon Pike led a U.S. Army reconnaissance expedition into the disputed region. Colonel Pike and his troops were arrested by Spanish cavalrymen in the San Luis Valley the following February, taken to Chihuahua, and expelled from Mexico the following July.

The U.S. relinquished its claim to all land south and west of the Arkansas River and south of 42nd parallel north and west of the 100th meridian west as part of its purchase of Florida from Spain with the Adams-Onís Treaty of 1819. The treaty took effect on February 22, 1821. Having settled its border with Spain, the U.S. admitted the southeastern portion of the Territory of Missouri to the Union as the state of Missouri on August 10, 1821. The remainder of Missouri Territory, including what would become northeastern Colorado, became an unorganized territory and remained so for 33 years over the question of slavery. After 11 years of war, Spain finally recognized the independence of Mexico with the Treaty of Córdoba signed on August 24, 1821. Mexico eventually ratified the Adams–Onís Treaty in 1831. The Texian Revolt of 1835–36 fomented a dispute between the U.S. and Mexico which eventually erupted into the Mexican–American War in 1846. Mexico surrendered its northern territory to the U.S. with the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo after the war in 1848; this included much of the western and southern areas of Colorado.
Most American settlers first traveled to Colorado through the Santa Fe Trail, which connected the U.S. to Santa Fe and the Camino Real de Tierra Adentro southward. Others were traveling overland west to the Oregon Country, the new goldfields of California, or the new Mormon settlements of the State of Deseret in the Salt Lake Valley, avoided the rugged Southern Rocky Mountains, and instead followed the North Platte River and Sweetwater River to South Pass (Wyoming), the lowest crossing of the Continental Divide between the Southern Rocky Mountains and the Central Rocky Mountains. In 1849, the Mormons of the Salt Lake Valley organized the extralegal State of Deseret, claiming the entire Great Basin and all lands drained by the rivers Green, Grand, and Colorado. The federal government of the U.S. flatly refused to recognize the new Mormon government because it was theocratic and sanctioned plural marriage. Instead, the Compromise of 1850 divided the Mexican Cession and the northwestern claims of Texas into a new state and two new territories, the state of California, the Territory of New Mexico, and the Territory of Utah. On April 9, 1851, Hispano settlers from the area of Taos settled the village of San Luis, then in the New Mexico Territory, as Colorado&#x27;s first permanent Euro-American settlement, further cementing the traditions of New Mexican cuisine and New Mexico music in the developing Southern Rocky Mountain Front.

In 1854, Senator Stephen A. Douglas persuaded the U.S. Congress to divide the unorganized territory east of the Continental Divide into two new organized territories, the Territory of Kansas and the Territory of Nebraska, and an unorganized southern region known as the Indian Territory. Each new territory was to decide the fate of slavery within its boundaries, but this compromise merely served to fuel animosity between free soil and pro-slavery factions.

The gold seekers organized the Provisional Government of the Territory of Jefferson on August 24, 1859, but this new territory failed to secure approval from the Congress of the United States embroiled in the debate over slavery. The election of Abraham Lincoln for the President of the United States on November 6, 1860, led to the secession of nine southern slave states and the threat of civil war among the states. Seeking to augment the political power of the Union states, the Republican Party-dominated Congress quickly admitted the eastern portion of the Territory of Kansas into the Union as the free State of Kansas on January 29, 1861, leaving the western portion of the Kansas Territory, and its gold-mining areas, as unorganized territory.

===Territory act===

Thirty days later on February 28, 1861, outgoing U.S. President James Buchanan signed an Act of Congress organizing the free Territory of Colorado. The original boundaries of Colorado remain unchanged except for government survey amendments. In 1776, Spanish priest Silvestre Vélez de Escalante recorded that Native Americans in the area knew the river as &quot;el Rio Colorado&quot; for the red-brown silt that the river carried from the mountains. In 1859, a U.S. Army topographic expedition led by Captain John Macomb located the confluence of the Green River with the Grand River in what is now Canyonlands National Park in Utah. The Macomb party designated the confluence as the source of the Colorado River.

On April 12, 1861, South Carolina artillery opened fire on Fort Sumter to start the American Civil War. While many gold seekers held sympathies for the Confederacy, the vast majority remained fiercely loyal to the Union cause.

In 1862, a force of Texas cavalry invaded the Territory of New Mexico and captured Santa Fe on March 10. The object of this Western Campaign was to seize or disrupt Colorado and California&#x27;s gold fields and seize Pacific Ocean ports for the Confederacy. A hastily organized force of Colorado volunteers force-marched from Denver City, Colorado Territory, to Glorieta Pass, New Mexico Territory, in an attempt to block the Texans. On March 28, the Coloradans and local New Mexico volunteers stopped the Texans at the Battle of Glorieta Pass, destroyed their cannon and supply wagons, and dispersed 500 of their horses and mules. The Texans were forced to retreat to Santa Fe. Having lost the supplies for their campaign and finding little support in New Mexico, the Texans abandoned Santa Fe and returned to San Antonio in defeat. The Confederacy made no further attempts to seize the Southwestern United States.
In 1864, Territorial Governor John Evans appointed the Reverend John Chivington as Colonel of the Colorado Volunteers with orders to protect white settlers from Cheyenne and Arapaho warriors who were accused of stealing cattle. Colonel Chivington ordered his troops to attack a band of Cheyenne and Arapaho encamped along Sand Creek. Chivington reported that his troops killed more than 500 warriors. The militia returned to Denver City in triumph, but several officers reported that the so-called battle was a blatant massacre of Indians at peace, that most of the dead were women and children, and that the bodies of the dead had been hideously mutilated and desecrated. Three U.S. Army inquiries condemned the action, and incoming President Andrew Johnson asked Governor Evans for his resignation, but none of the perpetrators was ever punished. This event is now known as the Sand Creek massacre.

In the midst and aftermath of the Civil War, many discouraged prospectors returned to their homes, but a few stayed and developed mines, mills, farms, ranches, roads, and towns in Colorado Territory. On September 14, 1864, James Huff discovered silver near Argentine Pass, the first of many silver strikes. In 1867, the Union Pacific Railroad laid its tracks west to Weir, now Julesburg, in the northeast corner of the Territory. The Union Pacific linked up with the Central Pacific Railroad at Promontory Summit, Utah, on May 10, 1869, to form the First transcontinental railroad. The Denver Pacific Railway reached Denver in June of the following year, and the Kansas Pacific arrived two months later to forge the second line across the continent. In 1872, rich veins of silver were discovered in the San Juan Mountains on the Ute Indian reservation in southwestern Colorado. The Ute people were removed from the San Juan Mountains the following year.

===Statehood===


The United States Congress passed an enabling act on March 3, 1875, specifying the requirements for the Territory of Colorado to become a state. On August 1, 1876 (four weeks after the Centennial of the United States), U.S. President Ulysses S. Grant signed a proclamation admitting Colorado to the Union as the 38th state and earning it the moniker &quot;Centennial State&quot;.

The discovery of a major silver lode near Leadville in 1878 triggered the Colorado Silver Boom. The Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890 invigorated silver mining, and Colorado&#x27;s last, but greatest, gold strike at Cripple Creek a few months later lured a new generation of gold seekers. Colorado women were granted the right to vote on November 7, 1893, making Colorado the second state to grant universal suffrage and the first one by a popular vote (of Colorado men). The repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act in 1893 led to a staggering collapse of the mining and agricultural economy of Colorado, but the state slowly and steadily recovered. Between the 1880s and 1930s, Denver&#x27;s floriculture industry developed into a major industry in Colorado. This period became known locally as the Carnation Gold Rush.

===Twentieth and twenty-first centuries===
Poor labor conditions and discontent among miners resulted in several major clashes between strikers and the Colorado National Guard, including the 1903–1904 Western Federation of Miners Strike and Colorado Coalfield War, the latter of which included the Ludlow massacre that killed a dozen women and children. Both the 1913–1914 Coalfield War and the Denver streetcar strike of 1920 resulted in federal troops intervening to end the violence. In 1927, the 1927-28 Colorado coal strike occurred and was ultimately successful in winning a dollar a day increase in wages. During it however the Columbine Mine massacre resulted in six dead strikers following a confrontation with Colorado Rangers. In a separate incident in Trinidad the mayor was accused of deputizing members of the KKK against the striking workers. More than 5,000 Colorado miners—many immigrants—are estimated to have died in accidents since records were first formally collected following an 1884 accident in Crested Butte that killed 59.

In 1924, the Ku Klux Klan Colorado Realm achieved dominance in Colorado politics. With peak membership levels, the Second Klan levied significant control over both the local and state Democrat and Republican parties, particularly in the governor&#x27;s office and city governments of Denver, Cañon City, and Durango. A particularly strong element of the Klan controlled the Denver Police. Cross burnings became semi-regular occurrences in cities such as Florence and Pueblo. The Klan targeted African-Americans, Catholics, Eastern European immigrants, and other non-White Protestant groups. Efforts by non-Klan lawmen and lawyers including Philip Van Cise led to a rapid decline in the organization&#x27;s power, with membership waning significantly by the end of the 1920s.

Colorado became the first western state to host a major political convention when the Democratic Party met in Denver in 1908. By the U.S. census in 1930, the population of Colorado first exceeded one million residents. Colorado suffered greatly through the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl of the 1930s, but a major wave of immigration following World War II boosted Colorado&#x27;s fortune. Tourism became a mainstay of the state economy, and high technology became an important economic engine. The United States Census Bureau estimated that the population of Colorado exceeded five million in 2009.

On September 11, 1957, a plutonium fire occurred at the Rocky Flats Plant, which resulted in the significant plutonium contamination of surrounding populated areas.
From the 1940s and 1970s, many protest movements gained momentum in Colorado, predominantly in Denver. This included the Chicano Movement, a civil rights, and social movement of Mexican Americans emphasizing a Chicano identity that is widely considered to have begun in Denver. The National Chicano Youth Liberation Conference was held in Colorado in March 1969.

In 1967, Colorado was the first state to loosen restrictions on abortion when governor John Love signed a law allowing abortions in cases of rape, incest, or threats to the woman&#x27;s mental or physical health. Many states followed Colorado&#x27;s lead in loosening abortion laws in the 1960s and 1970s.

Since the late 1990s, Colorado has been the site of multiple major mass shootings, including the infamous Columbine High School massacre in 1999 which made international news, where two gunmen killed 12 students and one teacher, before committing suicide. The incident has spawned many copycat incidents. On July 20, 2012, a gunman killed 12 people in a movie theater in Aurora. The state responded with tighter restrictions on firearms, including introducing a limit on magazine capacity. On March 22, 2021, a gunman killed 10 people, including a police officer, in a King Soopers supermarket in Boulder. In an instance of anti-LGBT violence, a gunman killed 5 people at a nightclub in Colorado Springs during the night of November 19–20, 2022.

Four warships of the U.S. Navy have been named the USS &quot;Colorado&quot;. The first USS &quot;Colorado&quot; was named for the Colorado River and served in the Civil War and later the Asiatic Squadron, where it was attacked during the 1871 Korean Expedition. The later three ships were named in honor of the state, including an armored cruiser and the battleship USS &quot;Colorado&quot;, the latter of which was the lead ship of her class and served in World War II in the Pacific beginning in 1941. At the time of the attack on Pearl Harbor, the battleship USS &quot;Colorado&quot; was located at the naval base in San Diego, California, and thus went unscathed. The most recent vessel to bear the name USS &quot;Colorado&quot; is Virginia-class submarine USS &quot;Colorado&quot; (SSN-788), which was commissioned in 2018.

==Geography==

Colorado is notable for its diverse geography, which includes alpine mountains, high plains, deserts with huge sand dunes, and deep canyons. In 1861, the United States Congress defined the boundaries of the new Territory of Colorado exclusively by lines of latitude and longitude, stretching from 37°N to 41°N latitude, and from 102°02′48″W to 109°02′48″W longitude (25°W to 32°W from the Washington Meridian). After years of government surveys, the borders of Colorado were officially defined by 697 boundary markers and 697 straight boundary lines. Colorado, Wyoming, and Utah are the only states that have their borders defined solely by straight boundary lines with no natural features. The southwest corner of Colorado is the Four Corners Monument at 36°59′56″N, 109°2′43″W. The Four Corners Monument, located at the place where Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, and Utah meet, is the only place in the United States where four states meet.

===Plains===
Approximately half of Colorado is flat and rolling land. East of the Rocky Mountains is the Colorado Eastern Plains of the High Plains, the section of the Great Plains within Colorado at elevations ranging from roughly . The Colorado plains are mostly prairies but also include deciduous forests, buttes, and canyons. Precipitation averages annually.

Eastern Colorado is presently mainly farmland and rangeland, along with small farming villages and towns. Corn, wheat, hay, soybeans, and oats are all typical crops. Most villages and towns in this region boast both a water tower and a grain elevator. Irrigation water is available from both surface and subterranean sources. Surface water sources include the South Platte, the Arkansas River, and a few other streams. Subterranean water is generally accessed through artesian wells. Heavy usage of these wells for irrigation purposes caused underground water reserves to decline in the region. Eastern Colorado also hosts a considerable amount and range of livestock, such as cattle ranches and hog farms.

===Front Range===
Roughly 70% of Colorado&#x27;s population resides along the eastern edge of the Rocky Mountains in the Front Range Urban Corridor between Cheyenne, Wyoming, and Pueblo, Colorado. This region is partially protected from prevailing storms that blow in from the Pacific Ocean region by the high Rockies in the middle of Colorado. The &quot;Front Range&quot; includes Denver, Boulder, Fort Collins, Loveland, Castle Rock, Colorado Springs, Pueblo, Greeley, and other townships and municipalities in between. On the other side of the Rockies, the significant population centers in western Colorado (which is known as &quot;The Western Slope&quot;) are the cities of Grand Junction, Durango, and Montrose.

===Mountains===


To the west of the Great Plains of Colorado rises the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains. Notable peaks of the Rocky Mountains include Longs Peak, Mount Blue Sky, Pikes Peak, and the Spanish Peaks near Walsenburg, in southern Colorado. This area drains to the east and the southeast, ultimately either via the Mississippi River or the Rio Grande into the Gulf of Mexico.

The Rocky Mountains within Colorado contain 53 true peaks and 58 named peaks that are or higher in elevation above sea level, known as fourteeners. These mountains are largely covered with trees such as conifers and aspens up to the tree line, at an elevation of about in southern Colorado to about in northern Colorado. Above this tree line, only alpine vegetation grows.

Much of the alpine snow melts by mid-August except for a few snow-capped peaks and a few small glaciers. The Colorado Mineral Belt, stretching from the San Juan Mountains in the southwest to Boulder and Central City on the front range, contains most of the historic gold- and silver-mining districts of Colorado. The 30 highest major summits of the Rocky Mountains of North America are all within the state.

The summit of Mount Elbert at elevation in Lake County is the highest point in Colorado and the Rocky Mountains of North America. Colorado is the only U.S. state that lies entirely above 1,000 meters elevation. The point where the Arikaree River flows out of Yuma County, Colorado, and into Cheyenne County, Kansas, is the lowest in Colorado at elevation. This point, which is the highest low elevation point of any state, is higher than the high elevation points of 18 states and the District of Columbia.

====Continental Divide====
The Continental Divide of the Americas extends along the crest of the Rocky Mountains. The area of Colorado to the west of the Continental Divide is called the Western Slope of Colorado. West of the Continental Divide, water flows to the southwest via the Colorado River and the Green River towards the Gulf of California.

Within the interior of the Rocky Mountains are several large parks which are high broad basins. In the north, on the east side of the Continental Divide is the North Park of Colorado. The North Park is drained by the North Platte River, which flows north into Wyoming and Nebraska. Just to the south of North Park, but on the western side of the Continental Divide, is the Middle Park of Colorado, which is drained by the Colorado River. The South Park of Colorado is the region of the headwaters of the South Platte River.

===South Central region===
In south-central Colorado is the large San Luis Valley, where the headwaters of the Rio Grande are located. The northern part of the valley is the San Luis Closed Basin, an endorheic basin that helped created the Great Sand Dunes. The valley sits between the Sangre de Cristo Mountains and San Juan Mountains. The Rio Grande drains due south into New Mexico, Texas, and Mexico. Across the Sangre de Cristo Range to the east of the San Luis Valley lies the Wet Mountain Valley. These basins, particularly the San Luis Valley, lie along the Rio Grande rift, a major geological formation of the Rocky Mountains, and its branches.

===Western Slope===

The Western Slope of Colorado includes the western face of the Rocky Mountains and all of the area to the western border. This area includes several terrains and climates from alpine mountains to arid deserts. The Western Slope includes many ski resort towns in the Rocky Mountains and towns west to Utah. It is less populous than the Front Range but includes a large number of national parks and monuments.

The northwestern corner of Colorado is a sparsely populated region, and it contains part of the noted Dinosaur National Monument, which not only is a paleontological area, but is also a scenic area of rocky hills, canyons, arid desert, and streambeds. Here, the Green River briefly crosses over into Colorado.

The Western Slope of Colorado is drained by the Colorado River and its tributaries (primarily the Gunnison River, Green River, and the San Juan River). The Colorado River flows through Glenwood Canyon, and then through an arid valley made up of desert from Rifle to Parachute, through the desert canyon of De Beque Canyon, and into the arid desert of Grand Valley, where the city of Grand Junction is located.

Also prominent is the Grand Mesa, which lies to the southeast of Grand Junction; the high San Juan Mountains, a rugged mountain range; and to the north and west of the San Juan Mountains, the Colorado Plateau.

Grand Junction, Colorado, at the confluence of the Colorado and Gunnison Rivers, is the largest city on the Western Slope. Grand Junction and Durango are the only major centers of television broadcasting west of the Continental Divide in Colorado, though most mountain resort communities publish daily newspapers. Grand Junction is located at the juncture of Interstate 70 and US 50, the only major highways in western Colorado. Grand Junction is also along the major railroad of the Western Slope, the Union Pacific. This railroad also provides the tracks for Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;California Zephyr&quot; passenger train, which crosses the Rocky Mountains between Denver and Grand Junction.

The Western Slope includes multiple notable destinations in the Colorado Rocky Mountains, including Glenwood Springs, with its resort hot springs, and the ski resorts of Aspen, Breckenridge, Vail, Crested Butte, Steamboat Springs, and Telluride.

Higher education in and near the Western Slope can be found at Colorado Mesa University in Grand Junction, Western Colorado University in Gunnison, Fort Lewis College in Durango, and Colorado Mountain College in Glenwood Springs and Steamboat Springs.

The Four Corners Monument in the southwest corner of Colorado marks the common boundary of Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, and Utah; the only such place in the United States.
==Climate==
The climate of Colorado is more complex than states outside of the Mountain States region. Unlike most other states, southern Colorado is not always warmer than northern Colorado. Most of Colorado is made up of mountains, foothills, high plains, and desert lands. Mountains and surrounding valleys greatly affect the local climate. Northeast, east, and southeast Colorado are mostly the high plains, while Northern Colorado is a mix of high plains, foothills, and mountains. Northwest and west Colorado are predominantly mountainous, with some desert lands mixed in. Southwest and southern Colorado are a complex mixture of desert and mountain areas.

===Eastern Plains===

The climate of the Eastern Plains is semi-arid (Köppen climate classification: &quot;BSk&quot;) with low humidity and moderate precipitation, usually from annually, although many areas near the rivers are semi-humid climate. The area is known for its abundant sunshine and cool, clear nights, which give this area a great average diurnal temperature range. The difference between the highs of the days and the lows of the nights can be considerable as warmth dissipates to space during clear nights, the heat radiation not being trapped by clouds. The Front Range urban corridor, where most of the population of Colorado resides, lies in a pronounced precipitation shadow as a result of being on the lee side of the Rocky Mountains.

In summer, this area can have many days above and often . On the plains, the winter lows usually range from . About 75% of the precipitation falls within the growing season, from April to September, but this area is very prone to droughts. Most of the precipitation comes from thunderstorms, which can be severe, and from major snowstorms that occur in the winter and early spring. Otherwise, winters tend to be mostly dry and cold.

In much of the region, March is the snowiest month. April and May are normally the rainiest months, while April is the wettest month overall. The Front Range cities closer to the mountains tend to be warmer in the winter due to Chinook winds which warms the area, sometimes bringing temperatures of or higher in the winter. The average July temperature is in the morning and in the afternoon. The average January temperature is in the morning and in the afternoon, although variation between consecutive days can be .

===Front Range foothills===

Just west of the plains and into the foothills, there is a wide variety of climate types. Locations merely a few miles apart can experience entirely different weather depending on the topography. Most valleys have a semi-arid climate, not unlike the eastern plains, which transitions to an alpine climate at the highest elevations. Microclimates also exist in local areas that run nearly the entire spectrum of climates, including subtropical highland (&quot;Cfb/Cwb&quot;), humid subtropical (&quot;Cfa&quot;), humid continental (&quot;Dfa/Dfb&quot;), Mediterranean (&quot;Csa/Csb&quot;) and subarctic (&quot;Dfc&quot;).

===Extreme weather===

Extreme weather changes are common in Colorado, although a significant portion of the extreme weather occurs in the least populated areas of the state. Thunderstorms are common east of the Continental Divide in the spring and summer, yet are usually brief. Hail is a common sight in the mountains east of the Divide and across the eastern Plains, especially the northeast part of the state. Hail is the most commonly reported warm-season severe weather hazard, and occasionally causes human injuries, as well as significant property damage. The eastern Plains are subject to some of the biggest hail storms in North America. Notable examples are the severe hailstorms that hit Denver on July 11, 1990, and May 8, 2017, the latter being the costliest ever in the state.

The Eastern Plains are part of the extreme western portion of Tornado Alley; some damaging tornadoes in the Eastern Plains include the 1990 Limon F3 tornado and the 2008 Windsor EF3 tornado, which devastated a small town. Portions of the eastern Plains see especially frequent tornadoes, both those spawned from mesocyclones in supercell thunderstorms and from less intense landspouts, such as within the Denver convergence vorticity zone (DCVZ).

The Plains are also susceptible to occasional floods and particularly severe flash floods, which are caused both by thunderstorms and by the rapid melting of snow in the mountains during warm weather. Notable examples include the 1965 Denver Flood, the Big Thompson River flooding of 1976 and the 2013 Colorado floods. Hot weather is common during summers in Denver. The city&#x27;s record in 1901 for the number of consecutive days above was broken during the summer of 2008. The new record of 24 consecutive days surpassed the previous record by almost a week.

Much of Colorado is very dry, with the state averaging only of precipitation per year statewide. The state rarely experiences a time when some portion is not in some degree of drought. The lack of precipitation contributes to the severity of wildfires in the state, such as the Hayman Fire of 2002. Other notable fires include the Fourmile Canyon Fire of 2010, the Waldo Canyon Fire and High Park Fire of June 2012, and the Black Forest Fire of June 2013. Even these fires were exceeded in severity by the Pine Gulch Fire, Cameron Peak Fire, and East Troublesome Fire in 2020, all being the three largest fires in Colorado history (see 2020 Colorado wildfires). And the Marshall Fire which started on December 30, 2021, while not the largest in state history, was the most destructive ever in terms of property loss (see Marshall Fire).

However, some of the mountainous regions of Colorado receive a huge amount of moisture from winter snowfalls. The spring melts of these snows often cause great waterflows in the Yampa River, the Colorado River, the Rio Grande, the Arkansas River, the North Platte River, and the South Platte River.

Water flowing out of the Colorado Rocky Mountains is a very significant source of water for the farms, towns, and cities of the southwest states of New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, and Nevada, as well as the Midwest, such as Nebraska and Kansas, and the southern states of Oklahoma and Texas. A significant amount of water is also diverted for use in California; occasionally (formerly naturally and consistently), the flow of water reaches northern Mexico.

===Climate change===

===Records===

The highest official ambient air temperature ever recorded in Colorado was on July 20, 2019, at John Martin Dam. The lowest official air temperature was on February 1, 1985, at Maybell.
===Extreme temperatures===

===Earthquakes===

Despite its mountainous terrain, Colorado experiences less seismic activity than states like California and Alaska. There are over 90 potentially active faults, and since 1867, Colorado has experienced 700 recorded earthquakes of magnitude 2.5 or higher. The U.S. National Earthquake Information Center is located in Golden.

On August 22, 2011, a 5.3 magnitude earthquake occurred west-southwest of the city of Trinidad. There were no casualties and only a small amount of damage was reported. It was the second-largest earthquake in Colorado&#x27;s history, the largest being a magnitude 6.6 earthquake, recorded in 1882. Four minor earthquakes rattled Colorado on August 24, 2018, ranging from magnitude 2.9 to 4.3. , there were 525 recorded earthquakes in Colorado since 1973, a majority of which range 2 to 3.5 on the Richter scale.

==Fauna==

A process of extirpation by trapping and poisoning of the gray wolf (&quot;Canis lupus&quot;) from Colorado in the 1930s saw the last wild wolf in the state shot in 1945. A wolf pack recolonized Moffat County, Colorado in northwestern Colorado in 2019. Cattle farmers have expressed concern that a returning wolf population potentially threatens their herds. Coloradans voted to reintroduce gray wolves in 2020, with the state committing to a plan to have a population in the state by 2022 and permitting non-lethal methods of driving off wolves attacking livestock and pets.

While there is fossil evidence of Harrington&#x27;s mountain goat in Colorado between at least 800,000 years ago and its extinction with megafauna roughly 11,000 years ago, the mountain goat is not native to Colorado but was instead introduced to the state over time during the interval between 1947 and 1972. Despite being an artificially-introduced species, the state declared mountain goats a native species in 1993. In 2013, 2014, and 2019, an unknown illness killed nearly all mountain goat kids, leading to a Colorado Parks and Wildlife investigation.

The native population of pronghorn in Colorado has varied wildly over the last century, reaching a low of only 15,000 individuals during the 1960s. However, conservation efforts succeeded in bringing the stable population back up to roughly 66,000 by 2013. The population was estimated to have reached 85,000 by 2019 and had increasingly more run-ins with the increased suburban housing along the eastern Front Range. State wildlife officials suggested that landowners would need to modify fencing to allow the greater number of pronghorns to move unabated through the newly developed land. Pronghorns are most readily found in the northern and eastern portions of the state, with some populations also in the western San Juan Mountains.

Common wildlife found in the mountains of Colorado include mule deer, southwestern red squirrel, golden-mantled ground squirrel, yellow-bellied marmot, moose, American pika, and red fox, all at exceptionally high numbers, though moose are not native to the state. The foothills include deer, fox squirrel, desert cottontail, mountain cottontail, and coyote. The prairies are home to black-tailed prairie dog, the endangered swift fox, American badger, and white-tailed jackrabbit.

==Government==
===State government===

Like the federal government and all other U.S. states, Colorado&#x27;s state constitution provides for three branches of government: the legislative, the executive, and the judicial branches.

The Governor of Colorado heads the state&#x27;s executive branch. The current governor is Jared Polis, a Democrat. Colorado&#x27;s other statewide elected executive officers are the Lieutenant Governor of Colorado (elected on a ticket with the Governor), Secretary of State of Colorado, Colorado State Treasurer, and Attorney General of Colorado, all of whom serve four-year terms.

The seven-member Colorado Supreme Court is the state&#x27;s highest court. The Colorado Court of Appeals, with 22 judges, sits in divisions of three judges each. Colorado is divided into 22 judicial districts, each of which has a district court and a county court with limited jurisdiction. The state also has specialized water courts, which sit in seven distinct divisions around the state and which decide matters relating to water rights and the use and administration of water.

The state legislative body is the Colorado General Assembly, which is made up of two houses – the House of Representatives and the Senate. The House has 65 members and the Senate has 35. , the Democratic Party holds a 23 to 12 majority in the Senate and a 46 to 19 majority in the House.

Most Coloradans are native to other states (nearly 60% according to the 2000 census), and this is illustrated by the fact that the state did not have a native-born governor from 1975 (when John David Vanderhoof left office) until 2007, when Bill Ritter took office; his election the previous year marked the first electoral victory for a native-born Coloradan in a gubernatorial race since 1958 (Vanderhoof had ascended from the Lieutenant Governorship when John Arthur Love was given a position in Richard Nixon&#x27;s administration in 1973).

Tax is collected by the Colorado Department of Revenue.

====Politics====

Colorado was once considered a swing state, but has become a relatively safe blue state in both state and federal elections since the late 2010s. In presidential elections, it had not been won until 2020 by double digits since 1984 and has backed the winning candidate in 9 of the last 11 elections. Coloradans have elected 17 Democrats and 12 Republicans to the governorship in the last 100 years.

In presidential politics, Colorado was considered a reliably Republican state during the post-World War II era, voting for the Democratic candidate only in 1948, 1964, and 1992. However, it became a competitive swing state in the 1990s. Since the mid-2000s, it has swung heavily to the Democrats, voting for Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012, Hillary Clinton in 2016, Joe Biden in 2020, and Kamala Harris in 2024.

Colorado politics exhibits a contrast between conservative cities such as Colorado Springs and Grand Junction, and liberal cities such as Boulder and Denver. Democrats are strongest in metropolitan Denver, the college towns of Fort Collins and Boulder, southern Colorado (including Pueblo), and several western ski resort counties. The Republicans are strongest in the Eastern Plains, Colorado Springs, Greeley, and far Western Colorado near Grand Junction.

Colorado is represented by two members of the United States Senate:
* Class 2, John Hickenlooper (Democratic), since 2021
* Class 3, Michael Bennet (Democratic), since 2009

Colorado is represented by eight members of the United States House of Representatives:
* 1st district: Diana DeGette (Democratic), since 1997
* 2nd district: Joe Neguse (Democratic), since 2019
* 3rd district: Jeff Hurd (Republican), since 2025
* 4th district: Lauren Boebert (Republican), since 2021
* 5th district: Jeff Crank (Republican), since 2025
* 6th district: Jason Crow (Democratic), since 2019
* 7th district: Brittany Pettersen (Democratic), since 2023
* 8th district: Gabe Evans (Republican), since 2025

In a 2020 study, Colorado was ranked as the seventh easiest state for citizens to vote in.

====Significant initiatives and legislation enacted in Colorado====
Colorado was the first state in the union to enact, by voter referendum, a law extending suffrage to women. That initiative was approved by the state&#x27;s voters on November 7, 1893.

On the November 8, 1932, ballot, Colorado approved the repeal of alcohol prohibition more than a year before the Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution was ratified.

Colorado has banned, via C.R.S. section 12-6-302, the sale of motor vehicles on Sunday since at least 1953.

In 1972, Colorado voters rejected a referendum proposal to fund the 1976 Winter Olympics, which had been scheduled to be held in the state. Denver had been chosen by the International Olympic Committee as the host city on May 12, 1970.

In 1992, by a margin of 53 to 47 percent, Colorado voters approved an amendment to the state constitution (Amendment 2) that would have prevented any city, town, or county in the state from taking any legislative, executive, or judicial action to recognize homosexuals or bisexuals as a protected class. In 1996, in a 6–3 ruling in &quot;Romer v. Evans&quot;, the U.S. Supreme Court found that preventing protected status based upon homosexuality or bisexuality did not satisfy the Equal Protection Clause.

In 2006, voters passed Amendment 43, which banned same-sex marriage in Colorado. That initiative was nullified by the U.S. Supreme Court&#x27;s 2015 decision in &quot;Obergefell v. Hodges&quot;. In 2024, Colorado residents voted to establish an explicit right to abortion in Colorado&#x27;s state constitution and to repeal Amendment 43&#x27;s defunct marriage ban.

In 2012, voters amended the state constitution protecting the &quot;personal use&quot; of marijuana for adults, establishing a framework to regulate cannabis like alcohol. The first recreational marijuana shops in Colorado, and by extension the United States, opened their doors on January 1, 2014.

On 30 October 2019, Colorado became the first state to accept digital ID via its myColorado app. The state-issued digital identifications will be considered valid when Real ID enforcement begins in 2025, in line with the Real ID Act of 2005. By November 2022 The Colorado Governor&#x27;s Office of Information Technology announced that the myColorado app had over 1 million users.

On December 19, 2023, the Colorado Supreme Court ruled that Donald Trump was disqualified from the 2024 United States presidential election in part due to his alleged incitement of the January 6 United States Capitol attack. On March 4, 2024, the United States Supreme Court overruled the Colorado decision.

===Counties===

The State of Colorado is divided into 64 counties. Two of these counties, the City and County of Broomfield and the City and County of Denver, have consolidated city and county governments. Counties are important units of government in Colorado since there are no civil townships or other minor civil divisions.

The most populous county in Colorado is El Paso County, the home of the City of Colorado Springs. The second most populous county is the City and County of Denver, the state capital. Five of the 64 counties now have more than 500,000 residents, while 12 have fewer than 5,000 residents. The ten most populous Colorado counties are all located in the Front Range Urban Corridor. Mesa County is the most populous county on the Colorado Western Slope.

===Municipalities===

Colorado has 273 active incorporated municipalities, comprising 198 towns, 73 cities, and two consolidated city and county governments. At the 2020 United States census, 4,299,942 of the 5,773,714 Colorado residents (74.47%) lived in one of these municipalities. Another 714,417 residents (12.37%) lived in one of the 210 census-designated places, while the remaining 759,355 residents (13.15%) lived in the many rural and mountainous areas of the state.

Colorado municipalities operate under one of five types of municipal governing authority. Colorado currently has two consolidated city and county governments, 61 home rule cities, 12 statutory cities, 35 home rule towns, 161 statutory towns, and one territorial charter municipality.

The most populous municipality is the City and County of Denver. Colorado has 12 municipalities with more than 100,000 residents, and 17 with fewer than 100 residents. The 16 most populous Colorado municipalities are all located in the Front Range Urban Corridor. The City of Grand Junction is the most populous municipality on the Colorado Western Slope. The Town of Carbonate has had no year-round population since the 1890 census due to its severe winter weather and difficult access.


===Unincorporated communities===

In addition to its 272 municipalities, Colorado has 210 unincorporated census-designated places (CDPs) and many other small communities. The most populous unincorporated community in Colorado is Highlands Ranch south of Denver. The seven most populous CDPs are located in the Front Range Urban Corridor. The Clifton CDP is the most populous CDP on the Colorado Western Slope.
===Special districts===
Colorado has more than 4,000 special districts, most with property tax authority. These districts may provide schools, law enforcement, fire protection, water, sewage, drainage, irrigation, transportation, recreation, infrastructure, cultural facilities, business support, redevelopment, or other services.
Some of these districts have the authority to levy sales tax as well as property tax and use fees. This has led to a hodgepodge of sales tax and property tax rates in Colorado. There are some street intersections in Colorado with a different sales tax rate on each corner, sometimes substantially different.

Some of the more notable Colorado districts are:
* The Regional Transportation District (RTD), which affects the counties of Denver, Boulder, Jefferson, and portions of Adams, Arapahoe, Broomfield, and Douglas Counties

* The Scientific and Cultural Facilities District (SCFD), a special regional tax district with physical boundaries contiguous with county boundaries of Adams, Arapahoe, Boulder, Broomfield, Denver, Douglas, and Jefferson Counties
** It is a 0.1% retail sales and uses tax (one penny on every $10).
** According to the Colorado statute, the SCFD distributes the money to local organizations on an annual basis. These organizations must provide for the enlightenment and entertainment of the public through the production, presentation, exhibition, advancement, or preservation of art, music, theater, dance, zoology, botany, natural history, or cultural history.
** As directed by statute, SCFD recipient organizations are currently divided into three &quot;tiers&quot; among which receipts are allocated by percentage.
*** Tier I includes regional organizations: the Denver Art Museum, the Denver Botanic Gardens, the Denver Museum of Nature and Science, the Denver Zoo, and the Denver Center for the Performing Arts. It receives 65.5%.
*** Tier II currently includes 26 regional organizations. Tier II receives 21%.
*** Tier III has more than 280 local organizations such as small theaters, orchestras, art centers, natural history, cultural history, and community groups. Tier III organizations apply for funding from the county cultural councils via a grant process. This tier receives 13.5%.
** An 11-member board of directors oversees the distributions by the Colorado Revised Statutes. Seven board members are appointed by county commissioners (in Denver, the Denver City Council) and four members are appointed by the Governor of Colorado.
* The Football Stadium District (FD or FTBL), approved by the voters to pay for and help build the Denver Broncos&#x27; stadium Empower Field at Mile High.
* Local Improvement Districts (LID) within designated areas of Jefferson and Broomfield counties.
* The Metropolitan Major League Baseball Stadium District, approved by voters to pay for and help build the Colorado Rockies&#x27; stadium Coors Field.
* Regional Transportation Authority (RTA) taxes at varying rates in Basalt, Carbondale, Glenwood Springs, and Gunnison County.

===Statistical areas===

Most recently on July 21, 2023, the Office of Management and Budget defined 21 statistical areas for Colorado comprising four combined statistical areas, seven metropolitan statistical areas, and ten micropolitan statistical areas.

The most populous of the seven metropolitan statistical areas in Colorado is the 10-county Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area with a population of 2,963,821 at the 2020 United States census, an increase of +15.29% since the 2010 census.

The more extensive 12-county Denver-Aurora, CO Combined Statistical Area had a population of 3,623,560 at the 2020 census, an increase of +17.23% since the 2010 census.

The most populous extended metropolitan region in Rocky Mountain Region is the 18-county Front Range Urban Corridor along the northeast face of the Southern Rocky Mountains. This region with Denver at its center had a population of 5,055,344 at the 2020 census, an increase of +16.65% since the 2010 census.

==Demographics==

The United States Census Bureau estimated the population of Colorado on July 1, 2023, at 5,877,610, a 1.80% increase since the 2020 United States census.



Coloradan Hispanics and Latinos (of any race and heritage) made up 20.7% of the population. According to the 2000 census, the largest ancestry groups in Colorado are German (22%), Mexican (18%), Irish (12%), and English (12%). Persons reporting German ancestry are especially numerous in the Front Range, the Rockies (west-central counties), and Eastern parts/High Plains.

Colorado has a high proportion of Hispanic, mostly Mexican-American, citizens in Metropolitan Denver, Colorado Springs, as well as the smaller cities of Greeley and Pueblo, and elsewhere. Southern, Southwestern, and Southeastern Colorado have a large number of Hispanos, the descendants of the early settlers of colonial Spanish origin. In 1940, the U.S. Census Bureau reported Colorado&#x27;s population as 8.2% Hispanic and 90.3% non-Hispanic White. The Hispanic population of Colorado has continued to grow quickly over the past decades. By 2019, Hispanics made up 22% of Colorado&#x27;s population, and Non-Hispanic Whites made up 70%. Spoken English in Colorado has many Spanish idioms.

Colorado also has some large African-American communities located in Denver, in the neighborhoods of Montbello, Five Points, Whittier, and many other East Denver areas. The state has sizable numbers of Asian-Americans of Mongolian, Chinese, Filipino, Korean, Southeast Asian, and Japanese descent. The highest population of Asian Americans can be found on the south and southeast side of Denver, as well as some on Denver&#x27;s southwest side. The Denver metropolitan area is considered more liberal and diverse than much of the state when it comes to political issues and environmental concerns.

The population of Native Americans in the state is small. Native Americans are concentrated in metropolitan Denver and the southwestern corner of Colorado, where there are two Ute reservations.

The majority of Colorado&#x27;s immigrants are from Mexico, India, China, Vietnam, Korea, Germany and Canada.

There were a total of 70,331 births in Colorado in 2006. (Birth rate of 14.6 per thousand.) In 2007, non-Hispanic Whites were involved in 59.1% of all births. Some 14.06% of those births involved a non-Hispanic White person and someone of a different race, most often with a couple including one Hispanic. A birth where at least one Hispanic person was involved counted for 43% of the births in Colorado. As of the 2010 census, Colorado has the seventh highest percentage of Hispanics (20.7%) in the U.S. behind New Mexico (46.3%), California (37.6%), Texas (37.6%), Arizona (29.6%), Nevada (26.5%), and Florida (22.5%). Per the 2000 census, the Hispanic population is estimated to be 918,899, or approximately 20% of the state&#x27;s total population. Colorado has the 5th-largest population of Mexican-Americans, behind California, Texas, Arizona, and Illinois. In percentages, Colorado has the 6th-highest percentage of Mexican-Americans, behind New Mexico, California, Texas, Arizona, and Nevada.

===Birth data===
In 2011, 46% of Colorado&#x27;s population younger than the age of one were minorities, meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic White.

&quot;Note: Births in table do not add up, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.&quot;
* Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one &quot;Hispanic&quot; group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.

In 2017, Colorado recorded the second-lowest fertility rate in the United States outside of New England, after Oregon, at 1.63 children per woman. Significant contributing factors to the decline in pregnancies were the Title X Family Planning Program and an intrauterine device grant from Warren Buffett&#x27;s family.

===Language===

The English language, the official language of the state, is the most commonly spoken language in Colorado. The second most commonly spoken language in the state is the Spanish language. The Colorado River Numic language, also known as the Ute dialect, is still spoken in Colorado.

===Religion===

Major religious affiliations of the people of Colorado as of 2014 were 64% Christian, of whom there are 44% Protestant, 16% Roman Catholic, 3% Mormon, and 1% Eastern Orthodox. Other religious breakdowns according to the Pew Research Center were 1% Judaism, 1% Muslim, 1% Buddhist, and 4% other. Secular Coloradans made up 29% of the population. In 2020, according to the Public Religion Research Institute, Christianity was 66% of the population. Judaism was also reported to have increased in this separate study, forming 2% of the religious landscape, while the religiously unaffiliated were reported to form 28% of the population in this separate study. In 2022, the same organization reported 61% was Christian (39% Protestant, 19% Catholic, 2% Mormon, 1% Eastern Orthodox), 2% New Age, 1% Jewish, 1% Hindu, and 34% religiously unaffiliated.

According to the Association of Religion Data Archives, the largest Christian denominations by the number of adherents in 2010 were the Catholic Church with 811,630; multi-denominational Evangelical Protestants with 229,981; and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 151,433. In 2020, the Association of Religion Data Archives determined the largest Christian denominations were Catholics (873,236), non/multi/inter-denominational Protestants (406,798), and Mormons (150,509). Throughout its non-Christian population, there were 12,500 Hindus, 7,101 Hindu Yogis, and 17,369 Buddhists at the 2020 study.

Our Lady of Guadalupe Catholic Church was the first permanent Catholic parish in modern-day Colorado and was constructed by Spanish colonists from New Mexico in modern-day Conejos. Latin Church Catholics are served by three dioceses: the Archdiocese of Denver and the Dioceses of Colorado Springs and Pueblo.

The first permanent settlement by members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Colorado arrived from Mississippi and initially camped along the Arkansas River just east of the present-day site of Pueblo.

== Health ==
Colorado is generally considered among the healthiest states by behavioral and healthcare researchers. Among the positive contributing factors is the state&#x27;s well-known outdoor recreation opportunities and initiatives. However, there is a stratification of health metrics with wealthier counties such as Douglas and Pitkin performing significantly better relative to southern, less wealthy counties such as Huerfano and Las Animas.

=== Obesity ===
According to several studies, Coloradans have the lowest rates of obesity of any state in the US. , 24% of the population was considered medically obese, and while the lowest in the nation, the percentage had increased from 17% in 2004.

=== Life expectancy ===
According to a report in the Journal of the American Medical Association, residents of Colorado had a 2014 life expectancy of 80.21 years, the longest of any U.S. state.

=== Homelessness ===
According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 10,397 homeless people in Colorado.

== Economy ==


In 2019 the total employment was 2,473,192. The number of employer establishments is 174,258.

The total state product in 2015 was $318.6 billion. Median Annual Household Income in 2016 was $70,666, 8th in the nation. Per capita personal income in 2010 was $51,940, ranking Colorado 11th in the nation. The state&#x27;s economy broadened from its mid-19th-century roots in mining when irrigated agriculture developed, and by the late 19th century, raising livestock had become important. Early industry was based on the extraction and processing of minerals and agricultural products. Current agricultural products are cattle, wheat, dairy products, corn, and hay.

The federal government operates several federal facilities in the state, including NORAD (North American Aerospace Defense Command), United States Air Force Academy, Schriever Air Force Base located approximately east of Peterson Air Force Base, and Fort Carson, both located in Colorado Springs within El Paso County; NOAA, the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) in Golden, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Boulder; U.S. Geological Survey and other government agencies at the Denver Federal Center near Lakewood; the Denver Mint, Buckley Space Force Base, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals, and the Byron G. Rogers Federal Building and United States Courthouse in Denver; and a federal Supermax Prison and other federal prisons near Cañon City. In addition to these and other federal agencies, Colorado has abundant National Forest land and four National Parks that contribute to federal ownership of of land in Colorado, or 37% of the total area of the state.

In the second half of the 20th century, the industrial and service sectors expanded greatly. The state&#x27;s economy is diversified and is notable for its concentration on scientific research and high-technology industries. Other industries include food processing, transportation equipment, machinery, chemical products, the extraction of metals such as gold (see Gold mining in Colorado), silver, and molybdenum. Colorado now also has the largest annual production of beer in any state. Denver is an important financial center.

The state&#x27;s diverse geography and majestic mountains attract millions of tourists every year, including 85.2 million in 2018. Tourism contributes greatly to Colorado&#x27;s economy, with tourists generating $22.3 billion in 2018.

Several nationally known brand names have originated in Colorado factories and laboratories. From Denver came the forerunner of telecommunications giant Qwest in 1879, Samsonite luggage in 1910, Gates belts and hoses in 1911, and Russell Stover Candies in 1923. Kuner canned vegetables began in Brighton in 1864. From Golden came Coors beer in 1873, CoorsTek industrial ceramics in 1920, and Jolly Rancher candy in 1949. CF&amp;I railroad rails, wire, nails, and pipe debuted in Pueblo in 1892. Holly Sugar was first milled from beets in Holly in 1905, and later moved its headquarters to Colorado Springs. The present-day Swift packed meat of Greeley evolved from Monfort of Colorado, Inc., established in 1930. Estes model rockets were launched in Penrose in 1958. Fort Collins has been the home of Woodward Governor Company&#x27;s motor controllers (governors) since 1870, and Waterpik dental water jets and showerheads since 1962. Celestial Seasonings herbal teas have been made in Boulder since 1969. Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory made its first candy in Durango in 1981.

Colorado has a flat 4.63% income tax, regardless of income level. On 3 November 2020 voters authorized an initiative to lower that income tax rate to 4.55 percent. Unlike most states, which calculate taxes based on federal &quot;adjusted gross income&quot;, Colorado taxes are based on &quot;taxable income&quot;—income after federal exemptions and federal itemized (or standard) deductions. Colorado&#x27;s state sales tax is 2.9% on retail sales. When state revenues exceed state constitutional limits, according to Colorado&#x27;s Taxpayer Bill of Rights legislation, full-year Colorado residents can claim a sales tax refund on their individual state income tax return. Many counties and cities charge their own rates, in addition to the base state rate. There are also certain county and special district taxes that may apply.

Real estate and personal business property are taxable in Colorado. The state&#x27;s senior property tax exemption was temporarily suspended by the Colorado Legislature in 2003. The tax break was scheduled to return for the assessment year 2006, payable in 2007.

, the state&#x27;s unemployment rate was 4.2%.

The West Virginia teachers&#x27; strike in 2018 inspired teachers in other states, including Colorado, to take similar action.

=== Agriculture ===
Corn is grown in the Eastern Plains of Colorado. Arid conditions and drought negatively impacted yields in 2020 and 2022.

=== Natural resources ===
Colorado has significant hydrocarbon resources. According to the Energy Information Administration, Colorado hosts seven of the largest natural gas fields in the United States, and two of the largest oil fields. Conventional and unconventional natural gas output from several Colorado basins typically accounts for more than five percent of annual U.S. natural gas production. Colorado&#x27;s oil shale deposits hold an estimated of oil—nearly as much oil as the entire world&#x27;s proven oil reserves. Substantial deposits of bituminous, subbituminous, and lignite coal are found in the state.

Uranium mining in Colorado goes back to 1872, when pitchblende ore was taken from gold mines near Central City, Colorado. Not counting byproduct uranium from phosphate, Colorado is considered to have the third-largest uranium reserves of any U.S. state, behind Wyoming and New Mexico. When Colorado and Utah dominated radium mining from 1910 to 1922, uranium and vanadium were the byproducts (giving towns like present-day Superfund site Uravan their names). Uranium price increases from 2001 to 2007 prompted several companies to revive uranium mining in Colorado. During the 1940s certain communities–including Naturita and Paradox–earned the moniker of &quot;yellowcake towns&quot; from their relationship with uranium mining. Price drops and financing problems in late 2008 forced these companies to cancel or scale back the uranium-mining project. As of 2016, there were no major uranium mining operations in the state, though plans existed to restart production.

===Electricity generation===
Colorado&#x27;s high Rocky Mountain ridges and eastern plains offer wind power potential, and geologic activity in the mountain areas provides the potential for geothermal power development. Much of the state is sunny and could produce solar power. Major rivers flowing from the Rocky Mountains offer hydroelectric power resources.

==Culture==

===Arts and film===

* List of museums in Colorado
* List of theaters in Colorado
* Music of Colorado

Several film productions have been shot on location in Colorado, especially prominent Westerns like &quot;True Grit&quot;, &quot;The Searchers&quot;, &quot;City Slickers,&quot; &quot;Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, and My Life With the Walter Boys&quot;. Several historic military forts, railways with trains still operating, and mining ghost towns have been used and transformed for historical accuracy in well-known films. There are also several scenic highways and mountain passes that helped to feature the open road in films such as &quot;Vanishing Point&quot;, &quot;Bingo&quot; and &quot;Starman&quot;. Some Colorado landmarks have been featured in films, such as The Stanley Hotel in &quot;Dumb and Dumber&quot; and &quot;The Shining&quot; and the Sculptured House in &quot;Sleeper&quot;. In 2015, &quot;Furious 7&quot; was to film driving sequences on Pikes Peak Highway in Colorado. The TV adult-animated series &quot;South Park&quot; takes place in central Colorado in the titular town. Additionally, The TV series &quot;Good Luck Charlie&quot; was set, but not filmed, in Denver, Colorado. The Colorado Office of Film and Television has noted that more than 400 films have been shot in Colorado.

There are also several established film festivals in Colorado, including Aspen Filmfest and Aspen Shortsfest, Boulder International Film Festival, Castle Rock Film Festival, Denver Film Festival, Festivus Film Festival, Mile High Horror Film Festival, Moondance International Film Festival, Mountainfilm in Telluride, Rocky Mountain Women&#x27;s Film Festival, and Telluride Film Festival.

Many notable writers have lived or spent extended periods in Colorado. Beat Generation writers Jack Kerouac and Neal Cassady lived in and around Denver for several years each. Irish playwright Oscar Wilde visited Colorado on his tour of the United States in 1882, writing in his 1906 &quot;Impressions of America&quot; that Leadville was &quot;the richest city in the world. It has also got the reputation of being the roughest, and every man carries a revolver.&quot;

===Cuisine===

Colorado is known for its Southwest and Rocky Mountain cuisine, with Mexican restaurants found throughout the state.

Boulder was named America&#x27;s Foodiest Town 2010 by Bon Appétit. Boulder, and Colorado in general, is home to several national food and beverage companies, top-tier restaurants and farmers&#x27; markets. Boulder also has more Master Sommeliers per capita than any other city, including San Francisco and New York. Denver is known for steak, but now has a diverse culinary scene with many restaurants.

Polidori Sausage is a brand of pork products available in supermarkets, which originated in Colorado, in the early 20th century.

The Food &amp; Wine Classic is held annually each June in Aspen. Aspen also has a reputation as the culinary capital of the Rocky Mountain region.

===Wine and beer===

Colorado wines include varietals that have attracted favorable notice from outside the state. With wines made from traditional &quot;Vitis vinifera&quot; grapes along with wines made from cherries, peaches, plums, and honey, Colorado wines have won top national and international awards for their quality. Colorado&#x27;s grape growing regions contain the highest elevation vineyards in the United States, with most viticulture in the state practiced between above sea level. The mountain climate ensures warm summer days and cool nights. Colorado is home to two designated American Viticultural Areas of the Grand Valley AVA and the West Elks AVA, where most of the vineyards in the state are located. However, an increasing number of wineries are located along the Front Range. In 2018, Wine Enthusiast Magazine named Colorado&#x27;s Grand Valley AVA in Mesa County, Colorado, as one of the Top Ten wine travel destinations in the world.

Colorado is home to many nationally praised microbreweries, including New Belgium Brewing Company, Odell Brewing Company, Great Divide Brewing Company, and Bristol Brewing Company. The area of northern Colorado near and between the cities of Denver, Boulder, and Fort Collins is known as the &quot;Napa Valley of Beer&quot; due to its high density of craft breweries.

===Marijuana and hemp===

Colorado is open to cannabis (marijuana) tourism. With the adoption of the 64th state amendment in 2012, Colorado became the first state in the union to legalize marijuana for medicinal (2000), industrial (referring to hemp, 2012), and recreational (2012) use. Colorado&#x27;s marijuana industry sold $1.31 billion worth of marijuana in 2016 and $1.26 billion in the first three-quarters of 2017. The state generated tax, fee, and license revenue of $194 million in 2016 on legal marijuana sales. Colorado regulates hemp as any part of the plant with less than 0.3% THC.

On April 4, 2014, Senate Bill 14–184 addressing oversight of Colorado&#x27;s industrial hemp program was first introduced, ultimately being signed into law by Governor John Hickenlooper on May 31, 2014.

====Medicinal use====

On November 7, 2000, 54% of Colorado voters passed Amendment 20, which amends the Colorado State constitution to allow the medical use of marijuana. A patient&#x27;s medical use of marijuana, within the following limits, is lawful:
* (I) No more than of a usable form of marijuana; and
* (II) No more than twelve marijuana plants, with six or fewer being mature, flowering plants that are producing a usable form of marijuana.
Currently, Colorado has listed &quot;eight medical conditions for which patients can use marijuana—cancer, glaucoma, HIV/AIDS, muscle spasms, seizures, severe pain, severe nausea and cachexia, or dramatic weight loss and muscle atrophy&quot;. While governor, John Hickenlooper allocated about half of the state&#x27;s $13 million &quot;Medical Marijuana Program Cash Fund&quot; to medical research in the 2014 budget. By 2018, the Medical Marijuana Program Cash Fund was the &quot;largest pool of pot money in the state&quot; and was used to fund programs including research into pediatric applications for controlling autism symptoms.

====Recreational use====

On November 6, 2012, voters amended the state constitution to protect &quot;personal use&quot; of marijuana for adults, establishing a framework to regulate marijuana in a manner similar to alcohol. The first recreational marijuana shops in Colorado, and by extension the United States, opened their doors on January 1, 2014.

==Transportation==


Colorado&#x27;s primary mode of transportation (in terms of passengers) is its highway system. Interstate 25 (I-25) is the primary north–south highway in the state, connecting Pueblo, Colorado Springs, Denver, and Fort Collins, and extending north to Wyoming and south to New Mexico. I-70 is the primary east–west corridor. It connects Grand Junction and the mountain communities with Denver and enters Utah and Kansas. The state is home to a network of US and Colorado highways that provide access to all principal areas of the state. Many smaller communities are connected to this network only via county roads.
Denver International Airport (DIA) is the third-busiest domestic U.S. and international airport in the world by passenger traffic. DIA handles by far the largest volume of commercial air traffic in Colorado and is the busiest U.S. hub airport between Chicago and the Pacific coast, making Denver the most important airport for connecting passenger traffic in the western United States.

Public transportation bus services are offered both intra-city and inter-city—including the Denver metro area&#x27;s RTD services. The Regional Transportation District (RTD) operates the popular RTD Bus &amp; Rail transit system in the Denver Metropolitan Area. the RTD rail system had 170 light-rail vehicles, serving of track. In addition to local public transit, intercity bus service is provided by Burlington Trailways, Bustang, Express Arrow, and Greyhound Lines.

Amtrak operates two passenger rail lines in Colorado, the &quot;California Zephyr&quot; and &quot;Southwest Chief&quot;. Colorado&#x27;s contribution to world railroad history was forged principally by the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad which began in 1870 and wrote the book on mountain railroading. In 1988 the &quot;Rio Grande&quot; was acquired, but was merged into, the Southern Pacific Railroad by their joint owner Philip Anschutz. On September 11, 1996, Anschutz sold the combined company to the Union Pacific Railroad, creating the largest railroad network in the United States. The Anschutz sale was partly in response to the earlier merger of Burlington Northern and Santa Fe which formed the large Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway (BNSF), Union Pacific&#x27;s principal competitor in western U.S. railroading. Both Union Pacific and BNSF have extensive freight operations in Colorado.

Colorado&#x27;s freight railroad network consists of 2,688 miles of Class I trackage. It is integral to the U.S. economy, being a critical artery for the movement of energy, agriculture, mining, and industrial commodities as well as general freight and manufactured products between the East and Midwest and the Pacific coast states.

In August 2014, Colorado began to issue driver licenses to aliens not lawfully in the United States who lived in Colorado. In September 2014, KCNC reported that 524 non-citizens were issued Colorado driver licenses that are normally issued to U.S. citizens living in Colorado.

==Education==

The first institution of higher education in the Colorado Territory was the Colorado Seminary, opened on November 16, 1864, by the Methodist Episcopal Church. The seminary closed in 1867 but reopened in 1880 as the University of Denver. In 1870, the Bishop George Maxwell Randall of the Episcopal Church&#x27;s Missionary District of Colorado and Parts Adjacent opened the first of what become the Colorado University Schools which would include the Territorial School of Mines opened in 1873 and sold to the Colorado Territory in 1874. These schools were initially run by the Episcopal Church. An 1861 territorial act called for the creation of a public university in Boulder, though it would not be until 1876 that the University of Colorado was founded. The 1876 act also renamed Territorial School of Mines as the Colorado School of Mines. An 1870 territorial act created the Agricultural College of Colorado which opened in 1879. The college was renamed the Colorado State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts in 1935, and became Colorado State University in 1957.

The first Catholic college in Colorado was the Jesuit Sacred Heart College, which was founded in New Mexico in 1877, moved to Morrison in 1884, and to Denver in 1887. The college was renamed Regis College in 1921 and Regis University in 1991. On April 1, 1924, armed students patrolled the campus after a burning cross was found, the climax of tensions between Regis College and the locally-powerful Ku Klux Klan.

Following a 1950 assessment by the Service Academy Board, it was determined that there was a need to supplement the U.S. Military and Naval Academies with a third school that would provide commissioned officers for the newly independent Air Force. On April 1, 1954, President Dwight Eisenhower signed a law that moved for the creation of a U.S. Air Force Academy. Later that year, Colorado Springs was selected to host the new institution. From its establishment in 1955, until the construction of appropriate facilities in Colorado Springs was completed and opened in 1958, the Air Force Academy operated out of Lowry Air Force Base in Denver. With the opening of the Colorado Springs facility, the cadets moved to the new campus, though not in the full-kit march that some urban and campus legends suggest. The first class of Space Force officers from the Air Force Academy commissioned on April 18, 2020.

==Indigenous People==

:&quot;See &quot;
The two Native American reservations remaining in Colorado are the Southern Ute Indian Reservation (1873; Ute dialect: &quot;Kapuuta-wa Moghwachi Núuchi-u&quot;) and Ute Mountain Ute Indian Reservation (1940; Ute dialect: &quot;Wʉgama Núuchi&quot;).

The two abolished Indian reservations in Colorado were the Cheyenne and Arapaho Indian Reservation (1851–1870) and Ute Indian Reservation (1855–1873).
==Military installations==

The major military installations in Colorado include:
* Buckley Space Force Base (1938–)
** Air Reserve Personnel Center (1953–)
* Fort Carson (U.S. Army 1942–) 
** Piñon Canyon Maneuver Site (1983–)
* Peterson Space Force Base (1942–)
** Cheyenne Mountain Space Force Station (1961–)
* Schriever Space Force Base (1983–)
* United States Air Force Academy (1954–)
Former military posts in Colorado include:
* Spanish Fort (Spanish Army 1819–1821)
* Fort Massachusetts (U.S. Army 1852–1858)
* Fort Garland (U.S. Army 1858–1883)
* Camp Collins (U.S. Army 1862–1870)
* Fort Logan (U.S. Army 1887–1946)
* Colorado National Guard Armory (1913–1933)
* Fitzsimons Army Hospital (U.S. Army 1918–1999)
* Denver Medical Depot (U.S. Army 1925–1949)
* Lowry Air Force Base (1938–1994)
* Pueblo Army Air Base (1941–1948)
* Rocky Mountain Arsenal (U.S. Army 1942–1992)
* Pueblo Chemical Depot (U.S. Army 1942–2024)
* Camp Hale (U.S. Army 1942–1945)
* La Junta Army Air Field (1942–1946)
* Leadville Army Air Field (1943–1944)
==Protected areas==
Colorado is home to:

==Sports==


Colorado has five major professional sports leagues, all based in the Denver metropolitan area. Colorado is the least populous state with a franchise in each of the major professional sports leagues.

The Colorado Springs Snow Sox professional baseball team is based in Colorado Springs. The team is a member of the Pecos League, an independent baseball league which is not affiliated with Major or Minor League Baseball.

The Pikes Peak International Hill Climb is a major hill climbing motor race held on the Pikes Peak Highway.

The Cherry Hills Country Club has hosted several professional golf tournaments, including the U.S. Open, U.S. Senior Open, U.S. Women&#x27;s Open, PGA Championship and BMW Championship.

=== Professional sports teams ===
=== College athletics ===

The following universities and colleges participate in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I.

==See also==

*Bibliography of Colorado
*Geography of Colorado
*History of Colorado
*Index of Colorado-related articles
*List of Colorado-related lists
*Outline of Colorado
==Footnotes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Explore Colorado, A Naturalist&#x27;s Handbook&quot;, The Denver Museum of Natural History and Westcliff Publishers, 1995, for an excellent guide to the ecological regions of Colorado.
* &quot;The Archeology of Colorado&quot;, Revised Edition, E. Steve Cassells, Johnson Books, Boulder, Colorado, 1997, trade paperback, .
* &quot;Chokecherry Places, Essays from the High Plains&quot;, Merrill Gilfillan, Johnson Press, Boulder, Colorado, trade paperback, .
* &quot;The Tie That Binds&quot;, Kent Haruf, 1984, hardcover, , a fictional account of farming in Colorado.
* &quot;Railroads of Colorado: Your Guide to Colorado&#x27;s Historic Trains and Railway Sites&quot;, Claude Wiatrowski, Voyageur Press, 2002, hardcover, 160 pages, 


==External links==

===State government===
*State of Colorado
**Colorado Tourism Office
**History Colorado
***Colorado Encyclopedia (partly sponsored by History Colorado)

===Federal government===
* Energy &amp; Environmental Data for Colorado
* USGS Colorado state facts, real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of Colorado
* United States Census Bureau
** Colorado QuickFacts
** 2000 Census of Population and Housing for Colorado
* USDA ERS Colorado state facts 
* Colorado State Guide, from the Library of Congress

===Other===
* List of searchable databases produced by Colorado state agencies hosted by the American Library Association Government Documents Roundtable
* Colorado County Evolution
* Ask Colorado
* Colorado Historic Newspapers Collection (CHNC)
* Mountain and Desert Plants of Colorado and the Southwest,
* Climate of Colorado 
* Holocene Volcano in Colorado (Smithsonian Institution Global Volcanism Program)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="0" end="8" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="14" end="19" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="27" end="48" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q527825" start="67" end="82" title="Mountain states" label="Mountain states"/>
<link wikidata="Q15672" start="96" end="108" title="Four Corners" label="Four Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="121" end="128" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="130" end="140" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="146" end="150" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="175" end="182" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="197" end="205" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="224" end="230" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="248" end="256" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="314" end="323" title="mountains" label="mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="325" end="332" title="forests" label="forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548512" start="334" end="345" title="High Plains (United States)" label="high plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q623319" start="347" end="352" title="mesas" label="mesas"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="354" end="361" title="canyons" label="canyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="363" end="371" title="plateaus" label="plateaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="373" end="379" title="rivers" label="rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="385" end="391" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570444" start="426" end="450" title="Southern Rocky Mountains" label="Southern Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q925906" start="495" end="511" title="Colorado Plateau" label="Colorado Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="540" end="552" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="570" end="603" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="eighth-largest U.S. state by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="612" end="630" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="21st by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="636" end="663" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="762" end="787" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="823" end="839" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="850" end="859" title="Paleo-Indians" label="ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="936" end="951" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="1055" end="1067" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="1117" end="1144" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q331895" start="1150" end="1176" title="Pike&amp;#x27;s Peak Gold Rush" label="Pike&amp;#x27;s Peak Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1243" end="1257" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="1258" end="1272" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920131" start="1280" end="1286" title="Colorado Organic Act" label="an act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111241" start="1300" end="1321" title="Territory of Colorado" label="Territory of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="1356" end="1372" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775740" start="1380" end="1396" title="Colorado Statehood Proclamation" label="Proclamation 230"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1424" end="1429" title="United States" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q783822" start="1576" end="1592" title="List of U.S. state nicknames" label="Centennial State"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="1677" end="1718" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="1721" end="1727" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q257955" start="1748" end="1766" title="Colorado municipalities by population" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="1790" end="1816" title="Front Range Urban Corridor" label="Front Range Urban Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="1818" end="1834" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632353" start="1918" end="1928" title="List of people from Colorado" label="Coloradans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333657" start="2018" end="2025" title="Economy of Colorado" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2066" end="2077" title="Economy of Colorado#Agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090464" start="2262" end="2311" title="Climate change in Colorado" label="expected to be heavily affected by climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="2396" end="2412" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="2423" end="2446" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleoamerican ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="2534" end="2549" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785630" start="2657" end="2673" title="Lindenmeier site" label="Lindenmeier site"/>
<link wikidata="Q127970" start="2677" end="2691" title="Larimer County, Colorado" label="Larimer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q478805" start="2751" end="2773" title="Ancient Pueblo peoples" label="Ancient Pueblo peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q925906" start="2812" end="2828" title="Colorado Plateau" label="Colorado Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253290" start="2863" end="2873" title="Ute Nation" label="Ute Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570444" start="2912" end="2936" title="Southern Rocky Mountains" label="Southern Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="2945" end="2968" title="Western Rocky Mountains" label="Western Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="3030" end="3036" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="3045" end="3053" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="3143" end="3150" title="Arapaho Nation" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="3155" end="3163" title="Cheyenne Nation" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="3184" end="3202" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548512" start="3222" end="3233" title="High Plains (United States)" label="High Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="3250" end="3257" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="3264" end="3278" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="3307" end="3319" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="3401" end="3419" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="3505" end="3525" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169549" start="3536" end="3548" title="Zebulon Pike" label="Zebulon Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q581638" start="3555" end="3590" title="Pike Expedition" label="U.S. Army reconnaissance expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q649768" start="3688" end="3703" title="San Luis Valley" label="San Luis Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q61302" start="3737" end="3746" title="Chihuahua, Chihuahua" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="3860" end="3874" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317511" start="3888" end="3907" title="42nd parallel north" label="42nd parallel north"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420440" start="3924" end="3943" title="100th meridian west" label="100th meridian west"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="3999" end="4016" title="Adams-Onís Treaty" label="Adams-Onís Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515638" start="4159" end="4180" title="Missouri Territory" label="Territory of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="4201" end="4218" title="Missouri" label="state of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="4397" end="4416" title="Slavery in the United States" label="question of slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q767450" start="4502" end="4519" title="Treaty of Córdoba" label="Treaty of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="4609" end="4622" title="Texian Revolt" label="Texian Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="4715" end="4735" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="4808" end="4835" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="4987" end="5001" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="5031" end="5039" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q911953" start="5048" end="5077" title="Camino Real de Tierra Adentro" label="Camino Real de Tierra Adentro"/>
<link wikidata="Q388164" start="5132" end="5146" title="Oregon Country" label="Oregon Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="5156" end="5180" title="California gold rush" label="goldfields of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="5193" end="5199" title="Mormon" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150921" start="5219" end="5235" title="State of Deseret" label="State of Deseret"/>
<link wikidata="Q377106" start="5243" end="5259" title="Salt Lake Valley" label="Salt Lake Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570444" start="5280" end="5304" title="Southern Rocky Mountains" label="Southern Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755015" start="5331" end="5349" title="North Platte River" label="North Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444096" start="5354" end="5370" title="Sweetwater River (Wyoming)" label="Sweetwater River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779610" start="5374" end="5394" title="South Pass (Wyoming)" label="South Pass (Wyoming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="5423" end="5441" title="Continental Divide" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150921" start="5582" end="5598" title="State of Deseret" label="State of Deseret"/>
<link wikidata="Q966943" start="5620" end="5631" title="Great Basin" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q952429" start="5668" end="5673" title="Green River (Colorado River)" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="5675" end="5680" title="Colorado River" label="Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="5686" end="5694" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5800" end="5810" title="History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints#Brigham Young&amp;#x27;s early theocratic leadership" label="theocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32098" start="5815" end="5825" title="Sanctions (law)" label="sanctioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="5826" end="5841" title="Mormonism and polygamy" label="plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="5856" end="5874" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="5887" end="5902" title="Mexican Cession" label="Mexican Cession"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5986" end="6005" title="state of California" label="state of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="6011" end="6034" title="Territory of New Mexico" label="Territory of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q128026" start="6044" end="6061" title="Territory of Utah" label="Territory of Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="6081" end="6088" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispano"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="6115" end="6119" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990776" start="6143" end="6151" title="San Luis, Colorado" label="San Luis"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="6165" end="6185" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="6222" end="6235" title="European American" label="Euro-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201599" start="6236" end="6246" title="settlement (migration)" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010123" start="6284" end="6303" title="New Mexican cuisine" label="New Mexican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="6308" end="6324" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q508827" start="6343" end="6372" title="Southern Rocky Mountain Front" label="Southern Rocky Mountain Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="6392" end="6410" title="Stephen A. Douglas" label="Stephen A. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="6425" end="6438" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="6487" end="6505" title="Continental Divide" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723905" start="6546" end="6565" title="Territory of Kansas" label="Territory of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q751536" start="6574" end="6595" title="Territory of Nebraska" label="Territory of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="6645" end="6661" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346993" start="6799" end="6808" title="free soil" label="free soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250661" start="6813" end="6824" title="Proslavery in the antebellum United States" label="pro-slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q999381" start="6867" end="6919" title="Jefferson Territory" label="Provisional Government of the Territory of Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="6998" end="7027" title="Congress of the United States" label="Congress of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="7082" end="7097" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="7169" end="7178" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="7196" end="7208" title="slave states" label="slave states"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="7227" end="7253" title="American Civil War" label="civil war among the states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="7301" end="7313" title="free state (United States)" label="Union states"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7319" end="7335" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723905" start="7399" end="7418" title="Territory of Kansas" label="Territory of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7428" end="7433" title="United States" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="7446" end="7461" title="Kansas" label="State of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="7675" end="7689" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="7731" end="7735" title="Free state (United States)" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111241" start="7736" end="7757" title="Territory of Colorado" label="Territory of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q14567736" start="7877" end="7905" title="Silvestre Vélez de Escalante" label="Silvestre Vélez de Escalante"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7973" end="7988" title=":es:Rio Colorado" label="el Rio Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="8082" end="8093" title="Topography" label="topographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110087223" start="8120" end="8131" title="John Navarre Macomb, Jr." label="John Macomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q952429" start="8162" end="8173" title="Green River (Colorado River)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="8183" end="8194" title="Grand River (Colorado)" label="Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q541856" start="8210" end="8235" title="Canyonlands National Park" label="Canyonlands National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="8239" end="8243" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="8345" end="8359" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737517" start="8385" end="8396" title="Fort Sumter" label="Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8410" end="8428" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="8478" end="8489" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="8540" end="8545" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="8600" end="8623" title="Territory of New Mexico" label="Territory of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="8637" end="8645" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739881" start="8678" end="8694" title="New Mexico Campaign" label="Western Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991560" start="8881" end="8912" title="Denver City, Colorado Territory" label="Denver City, Colorado Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916895" start="8917" end="8930" title="Glorieta Pass" label="Glorieta Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q580651" start="9075" end="9098" title="Battle of Glorieta Pass" label="Battle of Glorieta Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="9366" end="9377" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q29514964" start="9480" end="9500" title="Governor of Colorado" label="Territorial Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q886046" start="9501" end="9511" title="John Evans (Colorado governor)" label="John Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346538" start="9535" end="9550" title="John Chivington" label="John Chivington"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="9632" end="9640" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="9645" end="9652" title="Arapaho" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="10215" end="10229" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164344" start="10351" end="10370" title="Sand Creek massacre" label="Sand Creek massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789420" start="10630" end="10644" title="Argentine Pass" label="Argentine Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="10693" end="10715" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074891" start="10750" end="10759" title="Julesburg, Colorado" label="Julesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053930" start="10840" end="10864" title="Central Pacific Railroad" label="Central Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051006" start="10868" end="10891" title="Promontory Summit, Utah" label="Promontory Summit, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753108" start="10922" end="10953" title="First transcontinental railroad" label="First transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259759" start="10959" end="10981" title="Denver Pacific Railway" label="Denver Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192731" start="11036" end="11050" title="Kansas Pacific" label="Kansas Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165526" start="11176" end="11194" title="San Juan Mountains" label="San Juan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253290" start="11202" end="11212" title="Ute tribe" label="Ute Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637968" start="11350" end="11372" title="Forty-third United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q984109" start="11531" end="11562" title="Centennial of the United States" label="Centennial of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q286702" start="11769" end="11778" title="Leadville, Colorado" label="Leadville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148914" start="11801" end="11821" title="Colorado Silver Boom" label="Colorado Silver Boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481968" start="11827" end="11854" title="Sherman Silver Purchase Act" label="Sherman Silver Purchase Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q117605" start="11945" end="11958" title="Cripple Creek, Colorado" label="Cripple Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="12127" end="12145" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149017" start="12169" end="12181" title="1893 Colorado women&amp;#x27;s suffrage referendum" label="popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525597" start="12531" end="12550" title="Carnation Gold Rush" label="Carnation Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148731" start="12705" end="12728" title="Colorado Army National Guard" label="Colorado National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148826" start="12744" end="12789" title="Colorado Labor Wars" label="1903–1904 Western Federation of Miners Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148759" start="12794" end="12816" title="Colorado Coalfield War" label="Colorado Coalfield War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018743" start="12851" end="12866" title="Ludlow massacre" label="Ludlow massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926731" start="12948" end="12979" title="Denver streetcar strike of 1920" label="Denver streetcar strike of 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q117219851" start="13053" end="13081" title="1927–1928 Colorado Coal Strike" label="1927-28 Colorado coal strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850896" start="13188" end="13211" title="Columbine Mine massacre" label="Columbine Mine massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273744" start="13273" end="13289" title="Colorado Rangers" label="Colorado Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q74198" start="13317" end="13325" title="Trinidad, Colorado" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q592729" start="13573" end="13586" title="Crested Butte, Colorado" label="Crested Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="13617" end="13629" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13719" end="13730" title="Ku Klux Klan#Second Klan" label="Second Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="13788" end="13796" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="13801" end="13819" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003240" start="13896" end="13906" title="Canon City, Colorado" label="Cañon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012665" start="13912" end="13919" title="Durango, Colorado" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023375" start="13978" end="13991" title="Denver Police Department" label="Denver Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188444" start="13993" end="14006" title="Cross burning" label="Cross burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q289483" start="14058" end="14066" title="Florence, Colorado" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14116" end="14125" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="14176" end="14186" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184336" start="14244" end="14259" title="Philip S. Van Cise" label="Philip Van Cise"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="14466" end="14482" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085671" start="14513" end="14532" title="United States Census, 1930" label="U.S. census in 1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="14637" end="14653" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="14662" end="14671" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14728" end="14740" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="14883" end="14910" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214504" start="15041" end="15058" title="Rocky Flats Plant" label="Rocky Flats Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281228" start="15094" end="15117" title="Radioactive contamination from the Rocky Flats Plant" label="plutonium contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963346" start="15271" end="15287" title="Chicano Movement" label="Chicano Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13406660" start="15291" end="15303" title="Civil rights movements" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="15328" end="15345" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307911" start="15360" end="15367" title="Chicano" label="Chicano"/>
<link wikidata="Q125186105" start="15441" end="15476" title="Chicano Youth Liberation Conference" label="Chicano Youth Liberation Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876906" start="15578" end="15586" title="Abortion in Colorado" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q884606" start="15601" end="15610" title="John Arthur Love" label="John Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149011" start="15873" end="15887" title="List of shootings in Colorado" label="multiple major"/>
<link wikidata="Q21480300" start="15888" end="15901" title="mass shooting" label="mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="15927" end="15957" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268542" start="16003" end="16013" title="Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold" label="two gunmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753445" start="16107" end="16124" title="Columbine effect" label="copycat incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q202512" start="16146" end="16169" title="2012 Aurora, Colorado shooting" label="gunman killed 12 people"/>
<link wikidata="Q49246" start="16192" end="16198" title="Aurora, Colorado" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247256" start="16269" end="16288" title="High-capacity magazine ban" label="introducing a limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q148958" start="16292" end="16300" title="magazine (firearms)" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q106122126" start="16332" end="16355" title="2021 Boulder shooting" label="gunman killed 10 people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412065" start="16390" end="16402" title="King Soopers" label="King Soopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="16418" end="16425" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q583261" start="16445" end="16463" title="Violence against LGBT people" label="anti-LGBT violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q115301112" start="16467" end="16489" title="Colorado Springs nightclub shooting" label="gunman killed 5 people"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="16508" end="16524" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="16589" end="16598" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468938" start="16619" end="16643" title="USS Colorado" label="USS &amp;quot;Colorado&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541133" start="16755" end="16771" title="Asiatic Squadron" label="Asiatic Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q485415" start="16811" end="16828" title="United States expedition to Korea" label="Korean Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868450" start="16896" end="16914" title="USS Colorado (ACR-7)" label="an armored cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506862" start="16923" end="16958" title="USS Colorado (BB-45)" label="battleship USS &amp;quot;Colorado&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111230" start="17001" end="17010" title="Colorado-class battleship" label="her class"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="17025" end="17052" title="War in the Pacific" label="World War II in the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="17091" end="17113" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q633556" start="17304" end="17328" title="Virginia-class submarine" label="Virginia-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868451" start="17329" end="17363" title="USS Colorado (SSN-788)" label="USS &amp;quot;Colorado&amp;quot; (SSN-788)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635787" start="17567" end="17589" title="Thirty-sixth United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111241" start="17624" end="17645" title="Territory of Colorado" label="Territory of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="17670" end="17678" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="17683" end="17692" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186318" start="17710" end="17714" title="37th parallel north" label="37°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316072" start="17718" end="17722" title="41st parallel north" label="41°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972575" start="17742" end="17753" title="25th meridian west from Washington" label="102°02′48″W"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972575" start="17757" end="17768" title="32nd meridian west from Washington" label="109°02′48″W"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972575" start="17780" end="17784" title="25th meridian west from Washington" label="25°W"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972575" start="17788" end="17792" title="32nd meridian west from Washington" label="32°W"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972575" start="17802" end="17821" title="Washington Meridian" label="Washington Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q921099" start="17914" end="17929" title="boundary marker" label="boundary marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="17939" end="17962" title="Border" label="straight boundary lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="17974" end="17981" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="17987" end="17991" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888479" start="18144" end="18165" title="Four Corners Monument" label="Four Corners Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186318" start="18169" end="18179" title="37th parallel north" label="36°59′56″N"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972575" start="18181" end="18191" title="32nd meridian west from Washington" label="109°2′43″W"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888479" start="18197" end="18218" title="Four Corners Monument" label="Four Corners Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="18257" end="18267" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="18269" end="18276" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="18282" end="18286" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148801" start="18462" end="18485" title="Colorado Eastern Plains" label="Colorado Eastern Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548512" start="18493" end="18504" title="High Plains (United States)" label="High Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="18648" end="18665" title="deciduous forests" label="deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554910" start="18667" end="18672" title="butte" label="butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="18828" end="18832" title="Maize" label="Corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="18834" end="18839" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="18841" end="18844" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="18846" end="18853" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="18860" end="18863" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520009" start="18958" end="18972" title="grain elevator" label="grain elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q130892" start="19082" end="19094" title="South Platte" label="South Platte"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="19100" end="19114" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q177734" start="19190" end="19203" title="artesian well" label="artesian well"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="19551" end="19577" title="Front Range Urban Corridor" label="Front Range Urban Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39042" start="19586" end="19603" title="Cheyenne, Wyoming" label="Cheyenne, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="19609" end="19625" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="19820" end="19827" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q490732" start="19829" end="19841" title="Fort Collins, Colorado" label="Fort Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q994457" start="19853" end="19864" title="Castle Rock, Colorado" label="Castle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q989903" start="20109" end="20123" title="Grand Junction, Colorado" label="Grand Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012665" start="20125" end="20132" title="Durango, Colorado" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q994436" start="20138" end="20146" title="Montrose, Colorado" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="20242" end="20257" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317383" start="20304" end="20314" title="Longs Peak" label="Longs Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950460" start="20316" end="20330" title="Mount Blue Sky" label="Mount Blue Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q665321" start="20332" end="20342" title="Pikes Peak" label="Pikes Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573265" start="20352" end="20365" title="Spanish Peaks" label="Spanish Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778949" start="20371" end="20381" title="Walsenburg, Colorado" label="Walsenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="20479" end="20496" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="20504" end="20514" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="20524" end="20538" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567569" start="20676" end="20687" title="Colorado fourteeners" label="fourteeners"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="20744" end="20751" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087592" start="20757" end="20762" title="aspen" label="aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="20774" end="20783" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148842" start="21024" end="21045" title="Colorado Mineral Belt" label="Colorado Mineral Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165526" start="21067" end="21085" title="San Juan Mountains" label="San Juan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="21106" end="21113" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302210" start="21118" end="21130" title="Central City, Colorado" label="Central City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925528" start="21235" end="21256" title="Highest mountain peaks of the Rocky Mountains" label="highest major summits"/>
<link wikidata="Q32349" start="21367" end="21378" title="Lake County, Colorado" label="Lake County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069243" start="21555" end="21569" title="Arikaree River" label="Arikaree River"/>
<link wikidata="Q312744" start="21583" end="21604" title="Yuma County, Colorado" label="Yuma County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q376483" start="21615" end="21638" title="Cheyenne County, Kansas" label="Cheyenne County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="21863" end="21897" title="Continental Divide of the Americas" label="Continental Divide of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148981" start="22019" end="22044" title="Colorado Western Slope" label="Western Slope of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="22115" end="22129" title="Colorado River (U.S.)" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q952429" start="22138" end="22149" title="Green River (Colorado River)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q132811" start="22162" end="22180" title="Gulf of California" label="Gulf of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056279" start="22343" end="22365" title="North Park (Colorado basin)" label="North Park of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755015" start="22400" end="22418" title="North Platte River" label="North Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312648" start="22556" end="22579" title="Middle Park (Colorado basin)" label="Middle Park of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q951038" start="22625" end="22647" title="South Park (Park County, Colorado)" label="South Park of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="22669" end="22678" title="headwater" label="headwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q649768" start="22774" end="22789" title="San Luis Valley" label="San Luis Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="22819" end="22829" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858291" start="22882" end="22903" title="San Luis Closed Basin" label="San Luis Closed Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="22908" end="22923" title="endorheic basin" label="endorheic basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q609097" start="22948" end="22964" title="Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve" label="Great Sand Dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328749" start="22994" end="23020" title="Sangre de Cristo Mountains" label="Sangre de Cristo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165526" start="23025" end="23043" title="San Juan Mountains" label="San Juan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419187" start="23124" end="23146" title="Sangre de Cristo Range" label="Sangre de Cristo Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989973" start="23191" end="23210" title="Wet Mountain Valley" label="Wet Mountain Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335255" start="23274" end="23289" title="Rio Grande rift" label="Rio Grande rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q736917" start="23299" end="23319" title="geological formation" label="geological formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226698" start="23895" end="23921" title="Dinosaur National Monument" label="Dinosaur National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="23943" end="23958" title="paleontology" label="paleontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q558645" start="24202" end="24216" title="Gunnison River" label="Gunnison River"/>
<link wikidata="Q952429" start="24218" end="24229" title="Green River (Colorado River)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542874" start="24239" end="24253" title="San Juan River (Colorado River)" label="San Juan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569458" start="24289" end="24304" title="Glenwood Canyon" label="Glenwood Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273536" start="24361" end="24366" title="Rifle, Colorado" label="Rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823495" start="24370" end="24379" title="Parachute, Colorado" label="Parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244247" start="24410" end="24425" title="De Beque Canyon" label="De Beque Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595214" start="24455" end="24467" title="Grand Valley (Colorado-Utah)" label="Grand Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430721" start="24537" end="24547" title="Grand Mesa" label="Grand Mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q925906" start="24707" end="24723" title="Colorado Plateau" label="Colorado Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q989903" start="24726" end="24750" title="Grand Junction, Colorado" label="Grand Junction, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="24906" end="24929" title="television broadcasting" label="television broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q452833" start="25085" end="25098" title="Interstate 70 in Colorado" label="Interstate 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="25229" end="25242" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="25287" end="25293" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q373845" start="25307" end="25324" title="California Zephyr" label="California Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q927455" start="25518" end="25534" title="Glenwood Springs, Colorado" label="Glenwood Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="25573" end="25583" title="ski resort" label="ski resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q205842" start="25588" end="25593" title="Aspen, Colorado" label="Aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q904354" start="25595" end="25607" title="Breckenridge, Colorado" label="Breckenridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q747987" start="25609" end="25613" title="Vail, Colorado" label="Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q592729" start="25615" end="25628" title="Crested Butte, Colorado" label="Crested Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q984721" start="25630" end="25647" title="Steamboat Springs, Colorado" label="Steamboat Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641728" start="25653" end="25662" title="Telluride, Colorado" label="Telluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507218" start="25728" end="25752" title="Colorado Mesa University" label="Colorado Mesa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564975" start="25772" end="25799" title="Western Colorado University" label="Western Colorado University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438597" start="25813" end="25831" title="Fort Lewis College" label="Fort Lewis College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148844" start="25848" end="25873" title="Colorado Mountain College" label="Colorado Mountain College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888479" start="25922" end="25943" title="Four Corners Monument" label="Four Corners Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="26019" end="26029" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="26031" end="26038" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="26044" end="26048" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="26108" end="26115" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q527825" start="26171" end="26186" title="Mountain States" label="Mountain States"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="26815" end="26824" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="26826" end="26855" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="26857" end="26872" title="Cold semi-arid climate" label="&amp;quot;BSk&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283759" start="27108" end="27133" title="diurnal temperature variation" label="diurnal temperature range"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="27429" end="27449" title="rain shadow" label="precipitation shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="27478" end="27481" title="Leeward" label="lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q898845" start="28174" end="28186" title="Chinook wind" label="Chinook wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="28784" end="28798" title="alpine climate" label="alpine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q923442" start="29972" end="29985" title="Tornado Alley" label="Tornado Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074898" start="30050" end="30055" title="Limon, Colorado" label="Limon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380770" start="30056" end="30058" title="Fujita scale" label="F3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30075" end="30099" title="Tornado outbreak of May 22–27, 2008#Windsor, Colorado" label="2008 Windsor EF3 tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002856" start="30222" end="30233" title="mesocyclone" label="mesocyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q747894" start="30238" end="30247" title="supercell" label="supercell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418630" start="30284" end="30293" title="landspout" label="landspout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259699" start="30315" end="30348" title="Denver convergence vorticity zone" label="Denver convergence vorticity zone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30588" end="30605" title="1965 Denver Flood" label="1965 Denver Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q859355" start="30611" end="30629" title="Big Thompson River" label="Big Thompson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915752" start="30655" end="30675" title="2013 Colorado floods" label="2013 Colorado floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385170" start="31200" end="31211" title="Hayman Fire" label="Hayman Fire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31253" end="31273" title="Fourmile Canyon#Fourmile Canyon Fire" label="Fourmile Canyon Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961552" start="31287" end="31304" title="Waldo Canyon Fire" label="Waldo Canyon Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756005" start="31309" end="31323" title="High Park Fire" label="High Park Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13447225" start="31346" end="31363" title="Black Forest Fire" label="Black Forest Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q98354799" start="31428" end="31443" title="Pine Gulch Fire" label="Pine Gulch Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104863846" start="31445" end="31462" title="Cameron Peak Fire" label="Cameron Peak Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126112469" start="31468" end="31489" title="East Troublesome Fire" label="East Troublesome Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859194" start="31558" end="31581" title="2020 Colorado wildfires" label="2020 Colorado wildfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q110333515" start="31743" end="31756" title="Marshall Fire" label="Marshall Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599279" start="31938" end="31949" title="Yampa River" label="Yampa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="31955" end="31969" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881006" start="32646" end="32661" title="John Martin Reservoir" label="John Martin Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796970" start="32727" end="32734" title="Maybell, Colorado" label="Maybell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266735" start="33047" end="33085" title="National Earthquake Information Center" label="National Earthquake Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q983543" start="33100" end="33106" title="Golden, Colorado" label="Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620784" start="33131" end="33155" title="2011 Colorado earthquake" label="5.3 magnitude earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q74198" start="33195" end="33203" title="Trinidad, Colorado" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q125966120" start="33363" end="33387" title="1882 Fort Collins earthquake" label="magnitude 6.6 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="33691" end="33700" title="gray wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q107694898" start="33806" end="33851" title="Repopulation of wolves in Colorado" label="wolf pack recolonized Moffat County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q110300628" start="34003" end="34035" title="2020 Colorado Proposition 114" label="voted to reintroduce gray wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982785" start="34244" end="34275" title="Harrington&amp;#x27;s mountain goat" label="Harrington&amp;#x27;s mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="34347" end="34356" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="34387" end="34400" title="mountain goat" label="mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148857" start="34725" end="34752" title="Colorado Parks and Wildlife" label="Colorado Parks and Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="34794" end="34803" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="35567" end="35576" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q89875686" start="35578" end="35603" title="southwestern red squirrel" label="southwestern red squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21727451" start="35605" end="35635" title="golden-mantled ground squirrel" label="golden-mantled ground squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q838113" start="35637" end="35658" title="yellow-bellied marmot" label="yellow-bellied marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="35660" end="35665" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q469908" start="35667" end="35680" title="American pika" label="American pika"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="35686" end="35693" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="35794" end="35798" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q694296" start="35800" end="35812" title="fox squirrel" label="fox squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q608572" start="35814" end="35831" title="desert cottontail" label="desert cottontail"/>
<link wikidata="Q129773" start="35833" end="35852" title="mountain cottontail" label="mountain cottontail"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="35858" end="35864" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q247142" start="35891" end="35915" title="black-tailed prairie dog" label="black-tailed prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q263706" start="35932" end="35941" title="swift fox" label="swift fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="35943" end="35958" title="American badger" label="American badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q932186" start="35964" end="35987" title="white-tailed jackrabbit" label="white-tailed jackrabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164262" start="36100" end="36118" title="Constitution of the State of Colorado" label="state constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29514964" start="36226" end="36246" title="Governor of Colorado" label="Governor of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q935734" start="36312" end="36323" title="Jared Polis" label="Jared Polis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="36327" end="36335" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q179261" start="36404" end="36435" title="Lieutenant Governor of Colorado" label="Lieutenant Governor of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145017" start="36450" end="36456" title="Ticket (election)" label="ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444364" start="36477" end="36507" title="Secretary of State of Colorado" label="Secretary of State of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148956" start="36509" end="36533" title="Colorado State Treasurer" label="Colorado State Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148732" start="36539" end="36567" title="Attorney General of Colorado" label="Attorney General of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148967" start="36622" end="36644" title="Colorado Supreme Court" label="Colorado Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148775" start="36684" end="36709" title="Colorado Court of Appeals" label="Colorado Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148978" start="36915" end="36939" title="Colorado water courts" label="specialized water courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148810" start="37122" end="37147" title="Colorado General Assembly" label="Colorado General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494548" start="37186" end="37210" title="Colorado House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494453" start="37219" end="37225" title="Colorado Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="37281" end="37297" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q885251" start="37566" end="37587" title="John David Vanderhoof" label="John David Vanderhoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q119255" start="37618" end="37629" title="Bill Ritter" label="Bill Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148998" start="37643" end="37655" title="2006 Colorado gubernatorial election" label="his election"/>
<link wikidata="Q884606" start="37835" end="37851" title="John Arthur Love" label="John Arthur Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="37876" end="37889" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148793" start="37947" end="37977" title="Colorado Department of Revenue" label="Colorado Department of Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="38029" end="38040" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190344" start="38075" end="38085" title="Red states and blue states" label="blue state"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519428" start="38197" end="38201" title="2020 United States presidential election in Colorado" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959302" start="38225" end="38229" title="1984 United States presidential election in Colorado" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="38325" end="38334" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="38342" end="38353" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="38706" end="38718" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="38737" end="38752" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="38762" end="38771" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="38785" end="38798" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750084" start="38994" end="39013" title="Denver Metropolitan Area" label="metropolitan Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q490732" start="39036" end="39048" title="Fort Collins, Colorado" label="Fort Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="39053" end="39060" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="39314" end="39334" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39338" end="39345" title="Classes of United States Senators#Class 2" label="Class 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q430518" start="39347" end="39364" title="John Hickenlooper" label="John Hickenlooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="39366" end="39376" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39392" end="39399" title="Classes of United States Senators#Class 3" label="Class 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q554792" start="39401" end="39415" title="Michael Bennet" label="Michael Bennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="39417" end="39427" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="39490" end="39528" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148661" start="39532" end="39544" title="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="1st district"/>
<link wikidata="Q437159" start="39546" end="39559" title="Diana DeGette" label="Diana DeGette"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="39561" end="39571" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148663" start="39587" end="39599" title="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="2nd district"/>
<link wikidata="Q57242006" start="39601" end="39611" title="Joe Neguse" label="Joe Neguse"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="39613" end="39623" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148666" start="39639" end="39651" title="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="3rd district"/>
<link wikidata="Q131101500" start="39653" end="39662" title="Jeff Hurd (politician)" label="Jeff Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="39664" end="39674" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148664" start="39690" end="39702" title="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="4th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q96761544" start="39704" end="39718" title="Lauren Boebert" label="Lauren Boebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="39720" end="39730" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148668" start="39746" end="39758" title="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 5th congressional district" label="5th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q27663361" start="39760" end="39770" title="Jeff Crank" label="Jeff Crank"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="39772" end="39782" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148670" start="39798" end="39810" title="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="6th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q58323071" start="39812" end="39822" title="Jason Crow" label="Jason Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="39824" end="39834" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148672" start="39850" end="39862" title="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="7th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734469" start="39864" end="39882" title="Brittany Pettersen" label="Brittany Pettersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="39884" end="39894" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106795675" start="39910" end="39922" title="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 8th congressional district" label="8th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q115458993" start="39924" end="39934" title="Gabe Evans" label="Gabe Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="39936" end="39946" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149017" start="40194" end="40209" title="1893 Colorado women&amp;#x27;s suffrage referendum" label="a law extending"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="40210" end="40218" title="suffrage" label="suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313937" start="40362" end="40391" title="Repeal of Prohibition" label="repeal of alcohol prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q213443" start="40420" end="40476" title="Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577025" start="40637" end="40656" title="1972 Denver Winter Olympics referendum" label="referendum proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9651" start="40669" end="40689" title="1976 Winter Olympics" label="1976 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="40771" end="40802" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251299" start="41125" end="41140" title="protected class" label="protected class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441204" start="41176" end="41190" title="Romer v. Evans" label="Romer v. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="41288" end="41299" title="bisexuality" label="bisexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="41320" end="41343" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148706" start="41369" end="41381" title="2006 Colorado Amendment 43" label="Amendment 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q17483911" start="41396" end="41425" title="same-sex marriage in Colorado" label="same-sex marriage in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="41464" end="41482" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866992" start="41513" end="41533" title="Obergefell v. Hodges" label="Obergefell v. Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876906" start="41609" end="41629" title="abortion in Colorado" label="abortion in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="41862" end="41870" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="41876" end="41883" title="Alcoholic beverage" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276279" start="42234" end="42253" title="Real ID Act" label="Real ID Act of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148967" start="42421" end="42443" title="Colorado Supreme Court" label="Colorado Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="42455" end="42467" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="42494" end="42534" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="42580" end="42618" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack" label="January 6 United States Capitol attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="42642" end="42669" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q123935148" start="42670" end="42679" title="Trump v. Anderson" label="overruled"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="42761" end="42769" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q492819" start="42798" end="42827" title="Broomfield, Colorado" label="City and County of Broomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="42836" end="42861" title="Denver" label="City and County of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="42868" end="42908" title="consolidated city-county" label="consolidated city and county governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394476" start="42984" end="42998" title="civil township" label="civil township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995480" start="43009" end="43029" title="minor civil division" label="minor civil division"/>
<link wikidata="Q111774" start="43073" end="43087" title="El Paso County, Colorado" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="43105" end="43129" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="City of Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="43170" end="43195" title="Denver" label="City and County of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="43383" end="43409" title="Front Range Urban Corridor" label="Front Range Urban Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q153251" start="43411" end="43422" title="Mesa County, Colorado" label="Mesa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148981" start="43458" end="43480" title="Colorado Western Slope" label="Colorado Western Slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="43522" end="43556" title="municipal corporation" label="active incorporated municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="43573" end="43577" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="43583" end="43589" title="City" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="43599" end="43639" title="Consolidated city-county" label="consolidated city and county governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="43648" end="43673" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148990" start="43827" end="43851" title="List of census-designated places in Colorado" label="census-designated places"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44074" end="44118" title="List of municipalities in Colorado#Consolidated city and county" label="two consolidated city and county governments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44120" end="44139" title="List of municipalities in Colorado#Home rule municipality" label="61 home rule cities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44141" end="44160" title="List of municipalities in Colorado#Statutory city" label="12 statutory cities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44162" end="44180" title="List of municipalities in Colorado#Home rule municipality" label="35 home rule towns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44182" end="44201" title="List of municipalities in Colorado#Statutory town" label="161 statutory towns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44207" end="44243" title="List of municipalities in Colorado#Territorial charter municipality" label="one territorial charter municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="44284" end="44309" title="Denver" label="City and County of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="44482" end="44508" title="Front Range Urban Corridor" label="Front Range Urban Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q989903" start="44514" end="44536" title="Grand Junction, Colorado" label="City of Grand Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148981" start="44578" end="44600" title="Colorado Western Slope" label="Colorado Western Slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q30766090" start="44606" end="44623" title="Carbonate, Colorado" label="Town of Carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095711" start="44667" end="44678" title="1890 United States census" label="1890 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="44826" end="44840" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="44841" end="44872" title="Census-designated place" label="census-designated places (CDPs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q750935" start="44965" end="44980" title="Highlands Ranch, Colorado" label="Highlands Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="45046" end="45072" title="Front Range Urban Corridor" label="Front Range Urban Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101367" start="45078" end="45089" title="Clifton, Colorado" label="Clifton CDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148981" start="45122" end="45144" title="Colorado Western Slope" label="Colorado Western Slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q610237" start="45199" end="45216" title="Special district (United States)" label="special districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="45228" end="45240" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309183" start="45841" end="45873" title="Regional Transportation District" label="Regional Transportation District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433784" start="46012" end="46055" title="Scientific and Cultural Facilities District" label="Scientific and Cultural Facilities District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189960" start="46873" end="46890" title="Denver Art Museum" label="Denver Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003810" start="46896" end="46918" title="Denver Botanic Gardens" label="Denver Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330052" start="46924" end="46959" title="Denver Museum of Nature and Science" label="Denver Museum of Nature and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q581344" start="46965" end="46975" title="Denver Zoo" label="Denver Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259689" start="46985" end="47022" title="Denver Center for the Performing Arts" label="Denver Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="47752" end="47766" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046135" start="47781" end="47807" title="Empower Field at Mile High" label="Empower Field at Mile High"/>
<link wikidata="Q388858" start="48015" end="48031" title="Colorado Rockies" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129916" start="48046" end="48057" title="Coors Field" label="Coors Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="48248" end="48279" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985090" start="48338" end="48363" title="combined statistical area" label="combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="48372" end="48401" title="metropolitan statistical area" label="metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270419" start="48412" end="48441" title="micropolitan statistical area" label="micropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="48476" end="48505" title="metropolitan statistical area" label="metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750084" start="48536" end="48592" title="Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area" label="Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="48631" end="48656" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="48691" end="48702" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259818" start="48734" end="48777" title="Denver-Aurora, CO Combined Statistical Area" label="Denver-Aurora, CO Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="48964" end="48990" title="Front Range Urban Corridor" label="Front Range Urban Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570444" start="49023" end="49047" title="Southern Rocky Mountains" label="Southern Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="49206" end="49233" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="49329" end="49354" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714387" start="49359" end="49390" title="Hispanics and Latinos in Colorado" label="Coloradan Hispanics and Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="49525" end="49531" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="49539" end="49546" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="49554" end="49559" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="49571" end="49578" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="49767" end="49775" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="49784" end="49800" title="Mexican-American" label="Mexican-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="50340" end="50358" title="Non-Hispanic White" label="Non-Hispanic White"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899636" start="50647" end="50656" title="Mongolian American" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="50658" end="50665" title="Chinese American" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="50667" end="50675" title="Filipino American" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="50677" end="50683" title="Korean American" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="50685" end="50700" title="Southeast Asian" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="50706" end="50714" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="51272" end="51278" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="51280" end="51285" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="51287" end="51292" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="51294" end="51301" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="51303" end="51308" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="51310" end="51317" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="51322" end="51328" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="51746" end="51757" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="51843" end="51853" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="51883" end="51888" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="51898" end="51905" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="51915" end="51921" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="52185" end="52193" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="52700" end="52714" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="White Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="52948" end="52954" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810119" start="53056" end="53087" title="Title X" label="Title X Family Planning Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q899868" start="53095" end="53114" title="intrauterine device" label="intrauterine device"/>
<link wikidata="Q47213" start="53126" end="53140" title="Warren Buffett" label="Warren Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="53177" end="53193" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="53342" end="53358" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13260" start="53364" end="53393" title="Colorado River Numic language" label="Colorado River Numic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902619" start="53413" end="53424" title="Ute dialect" label="Ute dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="53596" end="53610" title="Roman Catholicism in the United States" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="53615" end="53621" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="53630" end="53646" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="53720" end="53727" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="53732" end="53738" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="53743" end="53751" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="53767" end="53774" title="Secularity" label="Secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="54221" end="54227" title="Mormons" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="54232" end="54248" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="54254" end="54261" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="54336" end="54373" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="54455" end="54470" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="54548" end="54595" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632352" start="54870" end="54876" title="Hinduism in the United States" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="54884" end="54895" title="Yoga" label="Hindu Yogis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051578" start="54908" end="54917" title="Buddhism in the United States" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436399" start="55110" end="55117" title="Conejos, Colorado" label="Conejos"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="55119" end="55131" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364433" start="55176" end="55197" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Denver" label="Archdiocese of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q868105" start="55206" end="55234" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Colorado Springs" label="Dioceses of Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q874610" start="55239" end="55245" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Pueblo" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722898" start="55293" end="55352" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Colorado" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q115556" start="55792" end="55799" title="Douglas County, Colorado" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q312475" start="55804" end="55810" title="Pitkin County, Colorado" label="Pitkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127973" start="55895" end="55903" title="Huerfano County, Colorado" label="Huerfano"/>
<link wikidata="Q128075" start="55908" end="55918" title="Las Animas County, Colorado" label="Las Animas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470970" start="56228" end="56271" title="Journal of the American Medical Association" label="Journal of the American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="56306" end="56321" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="56404" end="56407" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="56420" end="56453" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q106880950" start="56486" end="56513" title="Homelessness in Colorado" label="homeless people in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="56750" end="56776" title="List of U.S. states by GDP per capita (nominal)" label="Per capita personal income"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="57166" end="57179" title="dairy product" label="dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="57182" end="57186" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="57192" end="57195" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="57202" end="57220" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q748010" start="57281" end="57286" title="NORAD" label="NORAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="57331" end="57362" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q772391" start="57419" end="57442" title="Peterson Air Force Base" label="Peterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q602739" start="57448" end="57459" title="Fort Carson" label="Fort Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="57477" end="57493" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="57517" end="57521" title="NOAA" label="NOAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856153" start="57565" end="57569" title="NREL" label="NREL"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="57590" end="57636" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="57640" end="57647" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="57649" end="57671" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259722" start="57709" end="57730" title="Denver Federal Center" label="Denver Federal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q462804" start="57736" end="57744" title="Lakewood, Colorado" label="Lakewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956452" start="57750" end="57761" title="Denver Mint" label="Denver Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499338" start="57763" end="57787" title="Buckley Space Force Base" label="Buckley Space Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q286918" start="57793" end="57823" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit" label="Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004359" start="57833" end="57894" title="Byron G. Rogers Federal Building and United States Courthouse" label="Byron G. Rogers Federal Building and United States Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q75721" start="57920" end="57935" title="ADX Florence" label="Supermax Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003240" start="57967" end="57977" title="Cañon City, Colorado" label="Cañon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752939" start="58010" end="58026" title="Independent Agencies of the United States Government" label="federal agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="58050" end="58065" title="United States National Forest" label="National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="58080" end="58094" title="List of National Parks of the United States" label="National Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="58446" end="58461" title="food processing" label="food processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="58489" end="58498" title="Mechanical engineering" label="machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="58500" end="58517" title="chemical engineering" label="chemical products"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578942" start="58562" end="58585" title="Gold mining in Colorado" label="Gold mining in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="58600" end="58610" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535134" start="58753" end="58762" title="Geography of Colorado" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59062" end="59068" title="Denver#Economy" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273147" start="59117" end="59122" title="Qwest Corporation" label="Qwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203426" start="59132" end="59141" title="Samsonite" label="Samsonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527100" start="59159" end="59164" title="Gates Corporation" label="Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381799" start="59194" end="59216" title="Russell Stover Candies" label="Russell Stover Candies"/>
<link wikidata="Q252949" start="59259" end="59267" title="Brighton, Colorado" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q983543" start="59282" end="59288" title="Golden, Colorado" label="Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407305" start="59294" end="59299" title="Coors Brewing Company" label="Coors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168054" start="59314" end="59322" title="CoorsTek" label="CoorsTek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980826" start="59356" end="59369" title="Jolly Rancher" label="Jolly Rancher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271784" start="59385" end="59393" title="Colorado Fuel and Iron" label="CF&amp;amp;I"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="59443" end="59449" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006894" start="59459" end="59470" title="Imperial Sugar" label="Holly Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072070" start="59502" end="59507" title="Holly, Colorado" label="Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808939" start="59587" end="59592" title="Swift &amp;amp; Company" label="Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q94274" start="59608" end="59615" title="Greeley, Colorado" label="Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369970" start="59677" end="59682" title="Estes Industries" label="Estes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290504" start="59714" end="59721" title="Penrose, Colorado" label="Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q490732" start="59731" end="59743" title="Fort Collins, Colorado" label="Fort Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033550" start="59765" end="59790" title="Woodward Governor Company" label="Woodward Governor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457473" start="59844" end="59852" title="Oral irrigator" label="Waterpik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057918" start="59899" end="59919" title="Celestial Seasonings" label="Celestial Seasonings"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="59950" end="59957" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355878" start="59970" end="60002" title="Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory" label="Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012665" start="60027" end="60034" title="Durango, Colorado" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="60071" end="60081" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="60459" end="60468" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689692" start="60579" end="60602" title="Taxpayer Bill of Rights" label="Taxpayer Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866660" start="61247" end="61271" title="2018–19 education workers&amp;#x27; strikes in the United States" label="teachers in other states"/>
<link wikidata="Q55390752" start="61283" end="61291" title="2018 Colorado teachers&amp;#x27; strike" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="61338" end="61342" title="Corn" label="Corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148801" start="61359" end="61373" title="Eastern Plains" label="Eastern Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="61512" end="61523" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133499" start="61552" end="61585" title="Energy Information Administration" label="Energy Information Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="61687" end="61696" title="oil field" label="oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q221378" start="61880" end="61889" title="oil shale" label="oil shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q732607" start="62015" end="62025" title="bituminous coal" label="bituminous"/>
<link wikidata="Q790674" start="62027" end="62040" title="sub-bituminous coal" label="subbituminous"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="62046" end="62053" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972805" start="62084" end="62110" title="Uranium mining in Colorado" label="Uranium mining in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="62242" end="62251" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="62402" end="62408" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="62447" end="62455" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598694" start="62507" end="62521" title="Superfund site" label="Superfund site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899800" start="62522" end="62528" title="Uravan, Colorado" label="Uravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304167" start="62697" end="62705" title="Naturita, Colorado" label="Naturita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134433" start="62710" end="62717" title="Paradox, Colorado" label="Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q422141" start="62746" end="62756" title="yellowcake" label="yellowcake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023993" start="63151" end="63161" title="Wind power in Colorado" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548581" start="63244" end="63260" title="Geothermal energy in the United States" label="geothermal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556752" start="63319" end="63330" title="Solar power in Colorado" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404287" start="63384" end="63403" title="List of dams and reservoirs in Colorado" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629753" start="63452" end="63479" title="List of museums in Colorado" label="List of museums in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777292" start="63482" end="63510" title="List of theaters in Colorado" label="List of theaters in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942050" start="63513" end="63530" title="Music of Colorado" label="Music of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="63618" end="63626" title="Western (genre)" label="Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q603263" start="63638" end="63647" title="True Grit (1969 film)" label="True Grit"/>
<link wikidata="Q276769" start="63661" end="63674" title="The Searchers (film)" label="The Searchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094020" start="63688" end="63701" title="City Slickers" label="City Slickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q232000" start="63715" end="63749" title="Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" label="Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q113570499" start="63755" end="63783" title="My Life with the Walter Boys" label="My Life With the Walter Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255228" start="63873" end="63884" title="List of ghost towns in Colorado" label="ghost towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q586880" start="64080" end="64095" title="Vanishing Point (1971 film)" label="Vanishing Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q863847" start="64109" end="64114" title="Bingo (1991 film)" label="Bingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341009" start="64131" end="64138" title="Starman (film)" label="Starman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766239" start="64207" end="64224" title="The Stanley Hotel" label="The Stanley Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q462418" start="64234" end="64249" title="Dumb and Dumber" label="Dumb and Dumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811161" start="64266" end="64277" title="The Shining (miniseries)" label="The Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293996" start="64292" end="64308" title="Sculptured House" label="Sculptured House"/>
<link wikidata="Q750003" start="64318" end="64325" title="Sleeper (1973 film)" label="Sleeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14650496" start="64348" end="64357" title="Furious 7" label="Furious 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193651" start="64397" end="64415" title="Pikes Peak Highway" label="Pikes Peak Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="64464" end="64474" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q366375" start="64568" end="64585" title="Good Luck Charlie" label="Good Luck Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807842" start="64818" end="64832" title="Aspen Filmfest" label="Aspen Filmfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807842" start="64837" end="64853" title="Aspen Shortsfest" label="Aspen Shortsfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949570" start="64855" end="64890" title="Boulder International Film Festival" label="Boulder International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050270" start="64892" end="64917" title="Castle Rock Film Festival" label="Castle Rock Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259723" start="64919" end="64939" title="Denver Film Festival" label="Denver Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445856" start="64941" end="64963" title="Festivus Film Festival" label="Festivus Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851085" start="64965" end="64995" title="Mile High Horror Film Festival" label="Mile High Horror Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070713" start="64997" end="65034" title="Moondance International Film Festival" label="Moondance International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866482" start="65036" end="65061" title="Mountainfilm in Telluride" label="Mountainfilm in Telluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355945" start="65063" end="65104" title="Rocky Mountain Women&amp;#x27;s Film Festival" label="Rocky Mountain Women&amp;#x27;s Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402350" start="65110" end="65133" title="Telluride Film Festival" label="Telluride Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="65207" end="65222" title="Beat Generation" label="Beat Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="65231" end="65243" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q167518" start="65248" end="65260" title="Neal Cassady" label="Neal Cassady"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="65329" end="65340" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q286702" start="65460" end="65469" title="Leadville, Colorado" label="Leadville"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="65589" end="65597" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192808" start="65647" end="65656" title="Cuisine of the Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884647" start="65661" end="65683" title="Rocky Mountain cuisine" label="Rocky Mountain cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="65739" end="65746" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940946" start="65794" end="65805" title="Bon Appétit" label="Bon Appétit"/>
<link wikidata="Q191493" start="65975" end="65984" title="Sommelier" label="Sommelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="66056" end="66062" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q105962696" start="66144" end="66160" title="Polidori Sausage" label="Polidori Sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465279" start="66278" end="66301" title="Food &amp;amp; Wine Classic" label="Food &amp;amp; Wine Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205842" start="66332" end="66337" title="Aspen, Colorado" label="Aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555763" start="66443" end="66456" title="Colorado wine" label="Colorado wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30046" start="66576" end="66590" title="Vitis vinifera" label="Vitis vinifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="66817" end="66825" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q253140" start="66859" end="66870" title="viticulture" label="viticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="66902" end="66917" title="above sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="66932" end="66939" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q166247" start="67017" end="67043" title="American Viticultural Area" label="American Viticultural Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542895" start="67052" end="67068" title="Grand Valley AVA" label="Grand Valley AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q602661" start="67077" end="67090" title="West Elks AVA" label="West Elks AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470027" start="67210" end="67221" title="Front Range" label="Front Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024890" start="67232" end="67256" title="Wine Enthusiast Magazine" label="Wine Enthusiast Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542895" start="67279" end="67295" title="Grand Valley AVA" label="Grand Valley AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="67428" end="67442" title="microbreweries" label="microbreweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685020" start="67454" end="67481" title="New Belgium Brewing Company" label="New Belgium Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077636" start="67483" end="67504" title="Odell Brewing Company" label="Odell Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599065" start="67506" end="67534" title="Great Divide Brewing Company" label="Great Divide Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67540" end="67563" title="Bristol Brewing Company" label="Bristol Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="67634" end="67641" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q490732" start="67647" end="67659" title="Fort Collins" label="Fort Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="67735" end="67750" title="craft breweries" label="craft breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="67799" end="67807" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="67820" end="67827" title="Recreational drug use" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148724" start="67854" end="67874" title="Colorado Amendment 64" label="64th state amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517635" start="67932" end="67950" title="Legality of cannabis by U.S. jurisdiction" label="legalize marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806482" start="67955" end="67964" title="Medical cannabis in the United States" label="medicinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="67998" end="68002" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148724" start="68015" end="68027" title="2012 Colorado Amendment 64" label="recreational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="68701" end="68725" title="medical use of cannabis" label="medical use of marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q430518" start="69264" end="69281" title="John Hickenlooper" label="John Hickenlooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="69858" end="69865" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139231" start="70111" end="70124" title="Interstate 25 in Colorado" label="Interstate 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q452833" start="70300" end="70304" title="Interstate 70 in Colorado" label="I-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q330015" start="70630" end="70658" title="Denver International Airport" label="Denver International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q935262" start="70704" end="70759" title="World&amp;#x27;s busiest airports by passenger traffic" label="international airport in the world by passenger traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309183" start="71152" end="71184" title="Regional Transportation District" label="Regional Transportation District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309183" start="71212" end="71230" title="RTD Bus &amp;amp; Rail" label="RTD Bus &amp;amp; Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750084" start="71253" end="71277" title="Denver Metropolitan Area" label="Denver Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999300" start="71420" end="71440" title="Burlington Trailways" label="Burlington Trailways"/>
<link wikidata="Q85749670" start="71442" end="71449" title="Bustang" label="Bustang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71451" end="71464" title="Express Arrow" label="Express Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="71470" end="71485" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="71488" end="71494" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q373845" start="71552" end="71569" title="California Zephyr" label="California Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q770386" start="71586" end="71601" title="Southwest Chief" label="Southwest Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190006" start="71694" end="71732" title="Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad" label="Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="71871" end="71896" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133456" start="71918" end="71933" title="Philip Anschutz" label="Philip Anschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="72000" end="72022" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q473741" start="72796" end="72802" title="Alien (law)" label="aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q185367" start="72803" end="72836" title="Illegal immigration to the United States" label="not lawfully in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327023" start="72879" end="72883" title="KCNC" label="KCNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887889" start="73055" end="73071" title="Higher education in the United States" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q519427" start="73106" end="73123" title="Colorado Seminary" label="Colorado Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="73161" end="73187" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q519427" start="73245" end="73265" title="University of Denver" label="University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065482" start="73287" end="73309" title="George M. Randall (bishop)" label="George Maxwell Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="73317" end="73333" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383361" start="73341" end="73391" title="Episcopal Diocese of Colorado" label="Missionary District of Colorado and Parts Adjacent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148976" start="73428" end="73455" title="Colorado University Schools" label="Colorado University Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111367" start="73480" end="73507" title="Colorado School of Mines" label="Territorial School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="73751" end="73773" title="University of Colorado Boulder" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111367" start="73848" end="73872" title="Colorado School of Mines" label="Colorado School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111640" start="73910" end="73942" title="Colorado State University" label="Agricultural College of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111640" start="73993" end="74048" title="Colorado State University" label="Colorado State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111640" start="74069" end="74094" title="Colorado State University" label="Colorado State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595841" start="74115" end="74131" title="List of Catholic universities and colleges in the United States" label="Catholic college"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="74152" end="74158" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275047" start="74231" end="74239" title="Morrison, Colorado" label="Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q649299" start="74322" end="74338" title="Regis University" label="Regis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188444" start="74410" end="74423" title="cross burning" label="burning cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="74636" end="74649" title="U.S. Military Academy" label="U.S. Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="74654" end="74669" title="U.S. Naval Academy" label="Naval Academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="74796" end="74813" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="74860" end="74882" title="U.S. Air Force Academy" label="U.S. Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694148" start="75133" end="75153" title="Lowry Air Force Base" label="Lowry Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088961" start="75348" end="75359" title="United States Space Force" label="Space Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="75360" end="75368" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="75478" end="75506" title="Indian reservation" label="Native American reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570586" start="75537" end="75568" title="Southern Ute Indian Reservation" label="Southern Ute Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902619" start="75576" end="75587" title="Ute dialect" label="Ute dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902611" start="75636" end="75671" title="Ute Mountain Ute Indian Reservation" label="Ute Mountain Ute Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902619" start="75679" end="75690" title="Ute dialect" label="Ute dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094611" start="75780" end="75819" title="Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes" label="Cheyenne and Arapaho Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570586" start="75836" end="75858" title="Ute Indian Reservation" label="Ute Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="75910" end="75931" title="military installation" label="military installation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499338" start="75956" end="75980" title="Buckley Space Force Base" label="Buckley Space Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698166" start="75992" end="76020" title="Air Reserve Personnel Center" label="Air Reserve Personnel Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q602739" start="76031" end="76042" title="Fort Carson" label="Fort Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="76044" end="76053" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200065" start="76065" end="76091" title="Piñon Canyon Maneuver Site" label="Piñon Canyon Maneuver Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q772391" start="76102" end="76127" title="Peterson Space Force Base" label="Peterson Space Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094587" start="76139" end="76176" title="Cheyenne Mountain Space Force Station" label="Cheyenne Mountain Space Force Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249926" start="76187" end="76213" title="Schriever Space Force Base" label="Schriever Space Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="76224" end="76255" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573212" start="76309" end="76321" title="Spanish Fort (Colorado)" label="Spanish Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322103" start="76323" end="76335" title="Spanish Army" label="Spanish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457899" start="76349" end="76367" title="Fort Massachusetts (Colorado)" label="Fort Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471193" start="76392" end="76404" title="Fort Garland" label="Fort Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027078" start="76429" end="76441" title="Camp Collins" label="Camp Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471534" start="76466" end="76476" title="Fort Logan" label="Fort Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148850" start="76501" end="76531" title="Colorado National Guard Armory" label="Colorado National Guard Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455733" start="76546" end="76570" title="Fitzsimons Army Hospital" label="Fitzsimons Army Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694148" start="76640" end="76660" title="Lowry Air Force Base" label="Lowry Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258455" start="76675" end="76695" title="Pueblo Army Air Base" label="Pueblo Army Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355871" start="76710" end="76732" title="Rocky Mountain Arsenal" label="Rocky Mountain Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258429" start="76757" end="76778" title="Pueblo Chemical Depot" label="Pueblo Chemical Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935217" start="76803" end="76812" title="Camp Hale" label="Camp Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6463288" start="76837" end="76860" title="La Junta Army Air Field" label="La Junta Army Air Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508800" start="76875" end="76899" title="Leadville Army Air Field" label="Leadville Army Air Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="76985" end="77017" title="Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="major professional sports league"/>
<link wikidata="Q107599172" start="77172" end="77197" title="Colorado Springs Snow Sox" label="Colorado Springs Snow Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158798" start="77283" end="77295" title="Pecos League" label="Pecos League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053079" start="77300" end="77320" title="independent baseball" label="independent baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="77357" end="77362" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="77366" end="77387" title="Minor League Baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092059" start="77394" end="77429" title="Pikes Peak International Hill Climb" label="Pikes Peak International Hill Climb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092397" start="77503" end="77528" title="Cherry Hills Country Club" label="Cherry Hills Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="77593" end="77602" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779476" start="77604" end="77620" title="U.S. Senior Open" label="U.S. Senior Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300124" start="77622" end="77644" title="U.S. Women&amp;#x27;s Open" label="U.S. Women&amp;#x27;s Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q828160" start="77646" end="77662" title="PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505370" start="77667" end="77683" title="BMW Championship (PGA Tour)" label="BMW Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="77806" end="77846" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="77847" end="77857" title="NCAA Division I" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903338" start="77875" end="77899" title="Bibliography of Colorado" label="Bibliography of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535134" start="77901" end="77922" title="Geography of Colorado" label="Geography of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775740" start="77924" end="77943" title="History of Colorado" label="History of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018029" start="77945" end="77979" title="Index of Colorado-related articles" label="Index of Colorado-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q118131324" start="77981" end="78011" title="List of Colorado-related lists" label="List of Colorado-related lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112232" start="78013" end="78032" title="Outline of Colorado" label="Outline of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769230" start="78555" end="78573" title="The Tie That Binds (novel)" label="The Tie That Binds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391763" start="78581" end="78591" title="Kent Haruf" label="Kent Haruf"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5401" wikidata="Q133738" url="?curid=5401" title="Carboniferous">
<text>The Carboniferous ( ) is a geologic period and system of the Paleozoic era that spans 60 million years, from the end of the Devonian Period Ma (million years ago) to the beginning of the Permian Period, Ma. It is the fifth and penultimate period of the Paleozoic era and the fifth period of the Phanerozoic eon. In North America, the Carboniferous is often treated as two separate geological periods, the earlier Mississippian and the later Pennsylvanian.

The name &quot;Carboniferous&quot; means &quot;coal-bearing&quot;, from the Latin (&quot;coal&quot;) and (&quot;bear, carry&quot;), and refers to the many coal beds formed globally during that time. The first of the modern &quot;system&quot; names, it was coined by geologists William Conybeare and William Phillips in 1822, based on a study of the British rock succession.

Carboniferous is the period during which both terrestrial animal and land plant life was well established. Stegocephalia (four-limbed vertebrates including true tetrapods), whose forerunners (tetrapodomorphs) had evolved from lobe-finned fish during the preceding Devonian period, became pentadactylous during the Carboniferous. The period is sometimes called the Age of Amphibians because of the diversification of early amphibians such as the temnospondyls, which became dominant land vertebrates, as well as the first appearance of amniotes including synapsids (the clade to which modern mammals belong) and sauropsids (which include modern reptiles and birds) during the late Carboniferous. Land arthropods such as arachnids (e.g. trigonotarbids and &quot;Pulmonoscorpius&quot;), myriapods (e.g. &quot;Arthropleura&quot;) and especially insects (particularly flying insects) also underwent a major evolutionary radiation during the late Carboniferous. Vast swaths of forests and swamps covered the land, which eventually became the coal beds characteristic of the Carboniferous stratigraphy evident today.

The later half of the period experienced glaciations, low sea level, and mountain building as the continents collided to form Pangaea. A minor marine and terrestrial extinction event, the Carboniferous rainforest collapse, occurred at the end of the period, caused by climate change. Atmospheric oxygen levels, originally thought to be consistently higher than today throughout the Carboniferous, have been shown to be more variable, increasing from low levels at the beginning of the Period to highs of 25–30%.

== Etymology and history ==
The development of a Carboniferous chronostratigraphic timescale began in the late 18th century. The term &quot;Carboniferous&quot; was first used as an adjective by Irish geologist Richard Kirwan in 1799 and later used in a heading entitled &quot;Coal-measures or Carboniferous Strata&quot; by John Farey Sr. in 1811. Four units were originally ascribed to the Carboniferous, in ascending order, the Old Red Sandstone, Carboniferous Limestone, Millstone Grit and the Coal Measures. These four units were placed into a formalised Carboniferous unit by William Conybeare and William Phillips in 1822 and then into the Carboniferous System by Phillips in 1835. The Old Red Sandstone was later considered Devonian in age.

The similarity in successions between the British Isles and Western Europe led to the development of a common European timescale with the Carboniferous System divided into the lower Dinantian, dominated by carbonate deposition and the upper Silesian with mainly siliciclastic deposition. The Dinantian was divided into the Tournaisian and Viséan stages. The Silesian was divided into the Namurian, Westphalian and Stephanian stages. The Tournaisian is the same length as the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) stage, but the Viséan is longer, extending into the lower Serpukhovian.

North American geologists recognised a similar stratigraphy but divided it into two systems rather than one. These are the lower carbonate-rich sequence of the Mississippian System and the upper siliciclastic and coal-rich sequence of the Pennsylvanian. The United States Geological Survey officially recognised these two systems in 1953. In Russia, in the 1840s British and Russian geologists divided the Carboniferous into the Lower, Middle and Upper series based on Russian sequences. In the 1890s these became the Dinantian, Moscovian and Uralian stages. The Serpukivian was proposed as part of the Lower Carboniferous, and the Upper Carboniferous was divided into the Moscovian and Gzhelian. The Bashkirian was added in 1934.

In 1975, the ICS formally ratified the Carboniferous System, with the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian subsystems from the North American timescale, the Tournaisian and Visean stages from the Western European and the Serpukhovian, Bashkirian, Moscovian, Kasimovian and Gzhelian from the Russian. With the formal ratification of the Carboniferous System, the Dinantian, Silesian, Namurian, Westphalian and Stephanian became redundant terms, although the latter three are still in common use in Western Europe.

== Geology ==

=== Stratigraphy ===
Stages can be defined globally or regionally. For global stratigraphic correlation, the ICS ratify global stages based on a Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) from a single formation (a stratotype) identifying the lower boundary of the stage. Only the boundaries of the Carboniferous System and three of the stage bases are defined by global stratotype sections and points because of the complexity of the geology. The ICS subdivisions from youngest to oldest are as follows:
==== Mississippian ====
The Mississippian was proposed by Alexander Winchell in 1870 named after the extensive exposure of lower Carboniferous limestone in the upper Mississippi River valley. During the Mississippian, there was a marine connection between the Paleo-Tethys and Panthalassa through the Rheic Ocean resulting in the near worldwide distribution of marine faunas and so allowing widespread correlations using marine biostratigraphy. However, there are few Mississippian volcanic rocks, and so obtaining radiometric dates is difficult.

The Tournaisian Stage is named after the Belgian city of Tournai. It was introduced in scientific literature by Belgian geologist André Dumont in 1832. The GSSP for the base of the Carboniferous System, Mississippian Subsystem and Tournaisian Stage is located at the La Serre section in Montagne Noire, southern France. It is defined by the first appearance of the conodont &quot;Siphonodella sulcata&quot; within the evolutionary lineage from &quot;Siphonodella praesulcata&quot; to &quot;Siphonodella sulcata&quot;. This was ratified by the ICS in 1990. However, in 2006 further study revealed the presence of &quot;Siphonodella sulcata&quot; below the boundary, and the presence of &quot;Siphonodella&quot; &quot;praesulcata&quot; and &quot;Siphonodella sulcata&quot; together above a local unconformity. This means the evolution of one species to the other, the definition of the boundary, is not seen at the La Serre site making precise correlation difficult.The Viséan Stage was introduced by André Dumont in 1832 and is named after the city of Visé, Liège Province, Belgium. In 1967, the base of the Visean was officially defined as the first black limestone in the Leffe facies at the Bastion Section in the Dinant Basin. These changes are now thought to be ecologically driven rather than caused by evolutionary change, and so this has not been used as the location for the GSSP. Instead, the GSSP for the base of the Visean is located in Bed 83 of the sequence of dark grey limestones and shales at the Pengchong section, Guangxi, southern China. It is defined by the first appearance of the fusulinid &quot;Eoparastaffella simplex&quot; in the evolutionary lineage &quot;Eoparastaffella ovalis – Eoparastaffella simplex&quot; and was ratified in 2009.

The Serpukhovian Stage was proposed in 1890 by Russian stratigrapher Sergei Nikitin. It is named after the city of Serpukhov, near Moscow and currently lacks a defined GSSP. The Visean-Serpukhovian boundary coincides with a major period of glaciation. The resulting sea level fall and climatic changes led to the loss of connections between marine basins and endemism of marine fauna across the Russian margin. This means changes in biota are environmental rather than evolutionary making wider correlation difficult. Work is underway in the Urals and Nashui, Guizhou Province, southwestern China for a suitable site for the GSSP with the proposed definition for the base of the Serpukhovian as the first appearance of conodont &quot;Lochriea ziegleri.&quot;

==== Pennsylvanian ====
The Pennsylvanian was proposed by J.J.Stevenson in 1888, named after the widespread coal-rich strata found across the state of Pennsylvania. The closure of the Rheic Ocean and formation of Pangea during the Pennsylvanian, together with widespread glaciation across Gondwana led to major climate and sea level changes, which restricted marine fauna to particular geographic areas thereby reducing widespread biostratigraphic correlations. Extensive volcanic events associated with the assembling of Pangea means more radiometric dating is possible relative to the Mississippian.

The Bashkirian Stage was proposed by Russian stratigrapher Sofia Semikhatova in 1934. It was named after Bashkiria, the then Russian name of the republic of Bashkortostan in the southern Ural Mountains of Russia. The GSSP for the base of the Pennsylvanian Subsystem and Bashkirian Stage is located at Arrow Canyon in Nevada, US and was ratified in 1996. It is defined by the first appearance of the conodont &quot;Declinognathodus noduliferus&quot;. Arrow Canyon lay in a shallow, tropical seaway which stretched from Southern California to Alaska. The boundary is within a cyclothem sequence of transgressive limestones and fine sandstones, and regressive mudstones and brecciated limestones.

The Moscovian Stage is named after shallow marine limestones and colourful clays found around Moscow, Russia. It was first introduced by Sergei Nikitin in 1890. The Moscovian currently lacks a defined GSSP. The fusulinid &quot;Aljutovella aljutovica&quot; can be used to define the base of the Moscovian across the northern and eastern margins of Pangea, however, it is restricted in geographic area, which means it cannot be used for global correlations. The first appearance of the conodonts &quot;Declinognathodus donetzianus&quot; or &quot;Idiognathoides postsulcatus&quot; have been proposed as a boundary marking species and potential sites in the Urals and Nashui, Guizhou Province, southwestern China are being considered.

The Kasimovian is the first stage in the Upper Pennsylvanian. It is named after the Russian city of Kasimov, and was originally included as part of Nikitin&#x27;s 1890 definition of the Moscovian. It was first recognised as a distinct unit by A.P. Ivanov in 1926, who named it the &quot;Tiguliferina&quot; Horizon after a type of brachiopod. The boundary of the Kasimovian covers a period of globally low sea level, which has resulted in disconformities within many sequences of this age. This has created difficulties in finding suitable marine fauna that can used to correlate boundaries worldwide. The Kasimovian currently lacks a defined GSSP; potential sites in the southern Urals, southwest USA and Nashui, Guizhou Province, southwestern China are being considered.

The Gzhelian is named after the Russian village of Gzhel (selo), Moscow Oblast, near Ramenskoye, not far from Moscow. The name and type locality were defined by Sergei Nikitin in 1890. The Gzhelian currently lacks a defined GSSP. The first appearance of the fusulinid &quot;Rauserites rossicus&quot; and &quot;Rauserites&quot; &quot;stuckenbergi&quot; can be used in the Boreal Sea and Paleo-Tethyan regions but not eastern Pangea or Panthalassa margins. Potential sites in the Urals and Nashui, Guizhou Province, southwestern China for the GSSP are being considered.

The GSSP for the base of the Permian is located in the Aidaralash River valley near Aqtöbe, Kazakhstan and was ratified in 1996. The beginning of the stage is defined by the first appearance of the conodont &quot;Streptognathodus postfusus.&quot;

=== Cyclothems ===
A cyclothem is a succession of non-marine and marine sedimentary rocks, deposited during a single sedimentary cycle, with an erosional surface at its base. Whilst individual cyclothems are often only metres to a few tens of metres thick, cyclothem sequences can be many hundreds to thousands of metres thick and contain tens to hundreds of individual cyclothems. Cyclothems were deposited along continental shelves where the very gentle gradient of the shelves meant even small changes in sea level led to large advances or retreats of the sea. Cyclothem lithologies vary from mudrock and carbonate-dominated to coarse siliciclastic sediment-dominated sequences depending on the paleo-topography, climate and supply of sediments to the shelf.

The main period of cyclothem deposition occurred during the Late Paleozoic Ice Age from the Late Mississippian to early Permian, when the waxing and waning of ice sheets led to rapid changes in eustatic sea level. The growth of ice sheets led global sea levels to fall as water was locked away in glaciers. Falling sea levels exposed large tracts of the continental shelves across which river systems eroded channels and valleys and vegetation broke down the surface to form soils. The non-marine sediments deposited on this erosional surface form the base of the cyclothem. As sea levels began to rise, the rivers flowed through increasingly water-logged landscapes of swamps and lakes. Peat mires developed in these wet and oxygen-poor conditions, leading to coal formation. With continuing sea level rise, coastlines migrated landward and deltas, lagoons and esturaries developed; their sediments deposited over the peat mires. As fully marine conditions were established, limestones succeeded these marginal marine deposits. The limestones were in turn overlain by deep water black shales as maximum sea levels were reached.

Ideally, this sequence would be reversed as sea levels began to fall again; however, sea level falls tend to be protracted, whilst sea level rises are rapid, ice sheets grow slowly but melt quickly. Therefore, the majority of a cyclothem sequence occurred during falling sea levels, when rates of erosion were high, meaning they were often periods of non-deposition. Erosion during sea level falls could also result in the full or partial removal of previous cyclothem sequences. Individual cyclothems are generally less than 10 m thick because the speed at which sea level rose gave only limited time for sediments to accumulate.

During the Pennsylvanian, cyclothems were deposited in shallow, epicontinental seas across the tropical regions of Laurussia (present day western and central US, Europe, Russia and central Asia) and the North and South China cratons. The rapid sea levels fluctuations they represent correlate with the glacial cycles of the Late Paleozoic Ice Age. The advance and retreat of ice sheets across Gondwana followed a 100 kyr Milankovitch cycle, and so each cyclothem represents a cycle of sea level fall and rise over a 100 kyr period.

=== Coal formation ===

Coal forms when organic matter builds up in waterlogged, anoxic swamps, known as peat mires, and is then buried, compressing the peat into coal. The majority of Earth&#x27;s coal deposits were formed during the late Carboniferous and early Permian. The plants from which they formed contributed to changes in the Carboniferous Earth&#x27;s atmosphere.

During the Pennsylvanian, vast amounts of organic debris accumulated in the peat mires that formed across the low-lying, humid equatorial wetlands of the foreland basins of the Central Pangean Mountains in Laurussia, and around the margins of the North and South China cratons. During glacial periods, low sea levels exposed large areas of the continental shelves. Major river channels, up to several kilometres wide, stretched across these shelves feeding a network of smaller channels, lakes and peat mires. These wetlands were then buried by sediment as sea levels rose during interglacials. Continued crustal subsidence of the foreland basins and continental margins allowed this accumulation and burial of peat deposits to continue over millions of years resulting in the formation of thick and widespread coal formations. During the warm interglacials, smaller coal swamps with plants adapted to the temperate conditions formed on the Siberian craton and the western Australian region of Gondwana.

There is ongoing debate as to why this peak in the formation of Earth&#x27;s coal deposits occurred during the Carboniferous. The first theory, known as the delayed fungal evolution hypothesis, is that a delay between the development of trees with the wood fibre lignin and the subsequent evolution of lignin-degrading fungi gave a period of time where vast amounts of lignin-based organic material could accumulate. Genetic analysis of basidiomycete fungi, which have enzymes capable of breaking down lignin, supports this theory by suggesting this fungi evolved in the Permian. However, significant Mesozoic and Cenozoic coal deposits formed after lignin-digesting fungi had become well established, and fungal degradation of lignin may have already evolved by the end of the Devonian, even if the specific enzymes used by basidiomycetes had not. The second theory is that the geographical setting and climate of the Carboniferous were unique in Earth&#x27;s history: the co-occurrence of the position of the continents across the humid equatorial zone, high biological productivity, and the low-lying, water-logged and slowly subsiding sedimentary basins that allowed the thick accumulation of peat were sufficient to account for the peak in coal formation.

==Palaeogeography==
During the Carboniferous, there was an increased rate in tectonic plate movements as the supercontinent Pangea assembled. The continents themselves formed a near circle around the opening Paleo-Tethys Ocean, with the massive Panthalassic Ocean beyond. Gondwana covered the south polar region. To its northwest was Laurussia. These two continents slowly collided to form the core of Pangea. To the north of Laurussia lay Siberia and Amuria. To the east of Siberia, Kazakhstania, North China and South China formed the northern margin of the Paleo-Tethys, with Annamia laying to the south.

=== Variscan-Alleghanian-Ouachita orogeny ===
The Central Pangean Mountains were formed during the Variscan-Alleghanian-Ouachita orogeny. Today their remains stretch over 10,000 km from the Gulf of Mexico in the west to Turkey in the east. The orogeny was caused by a series of continental collisions between Laurussia, Gondwana and the Armorican terrane assemblage (much of modern-day Central and Western Europe including Iberia) as the Rheic Ocean closed and Pangea formed. This mountain building process began in the Middle Devonian and continued into the early Permian.

The Armorican terranes rifted away from Gondwana during the Late Ordovician. As they drifted northwards the Rheic Ocean closed in front of them, and they began to collide with southeastern Laurussia in the Middle Devonian. The resulting Variscan orogeny involved a complex series of oblique collisions with associated metamorphism, igneous activity, and large-scale deformation between these terranes and Laurussia, which continued into the Carboniferous.

During the mid Carboniferous, the South American sector of Gondwana collided obliquely with Laurussia&#x27;s southern margin resulting in the Ouachita orogeny. The major strike-slip faulting that occurred between Laurussia and Gondwana extended eastwards into the Appalachian Mountains where early deformation in the Alleghanian orogeny was predominantly strike-slip. As the West African sector of Gondwana collided with Laurussia during the Late Pennsylvanian, deformation along the Alleghanian orogen became northwesterly-directed compression.

=== Uralian orogeny ===
The Uralian orogeny is a north–south trending fold and thrust belt that forms the western edge of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt. The Uralian orogeny began in the Late Devonian and continued, with some hiatuses, into the Jurassic. From the Late Devonian to early Carboniferous, the Magnitogorsk island arc, which lay between Kazakhstania and Laurussia in the Ural Ocean, collided with the passive margin of northeastern Laurussia (Baltica craton). The suture zone between the former island arc complex and the continental margin formed the Main Uralian Fault, a major structure that runs for more than 2,000 km along the orogen. Accretion of the island arc was complete by the Tournaisian, but subduction of the Ural Ocean between Kazakhstania and Laurussia continued until the Bashkirian when the ocean finally closed and continental collision began. Significant strike-slip movement along this zone indicates the collision was oblique. Deformation continued into the Permian and during the late Carboniferous and Permian the region was extensively intruded by granites.

=== Laurussia ===
The Laurussian continent was formed by the collision between Laurentia, Baltica and Avalonia during the Devonian. At the beginning of the Carboniferous, some models show it at the equator, while others place it further south. In either case, the continent drifted northwards, reaching low latitudes in the northern hemisphere by the end of the Period. The Central Pangean Mountain drew in moist air from the Paleo-Tethys Ocean resulting in heavy precipitation and a tropical wetland environment. Extensive coal deposits developed within the cyclothem sequences that dominated the Pennsylvanian sedimentary basins associated with the growing orogenic belt.

Subduction of the Panthalassic oceanic plate along its western margin resulted in the Antler orogeny in the Late Devonian to Early Mississippian. Further north along the margin, slab roll-back, beginning in the Early Mississippian, led to the rifting of the Yukon–Tanana terrane and the opening of the Slide Mountain Ocean. Along the northern margin of Laurussia, orogenic collapse of the Late Devonian to Early Mississippian Innuitian orogeny led to the development of the Sverdrup Basin.

=== Gondwana ===
Much of Gondwana lay in the southern polar region during the Carboniferous. As the plate moved, the South Pole drifted from southern Africa in the early Carboniferous to eastern Antarctica by the end of the period. Glacial deposits are widespread across Gondwana and indicate multiple ice centres and long-distance movement of ice. The northern to northeastern margin of Gondwana (northeast Africa, Arabia, India and northeastern West Australia) was a passive margin along the southern edge of the Paleo-Tethys with cyclothem deposition including, during more temperate intervals, coal swamps in Western Australia. The Mexican terranes along the northwestern Gondwana margin, were affected by the subduction of the Rheic Ocean. However, they lay to west of the Ouachita orogeny and were not impacted by continental collision but became part of the active margin of the Pacific. The Moroccan margin was affected by periods of widespread dextral strike-slip deformation, magmatism and metamorphism associated with the Variscan orogeny.

Towards the end of the Carboniferous, extension and rifting across the northern margin of Gondwana led to the breaking away of the Cimmerian terrane during the early Permian and the opening of the Neo-Tethys Ocean. Along the southeastern and southern margin of Gondwana (eastern Australia and Antarctica), northward subduction of Panthalassa continued. Changes in the relative motion of the plates resulted in the early Carboniferous Kanimblan Orogeny. Continental arc magmatism continued into the late Carboniferous and extended round to connect with the developing proto-Andean subduction zone along the western South American margin of Gondwana.

=== Siberia and Amuria ===
Shallow seas covered much of the Siberian craton in the early Carboniferous. These retreated as sea levels fell in the Pennsylvanian and as the continent drifted north into more temperate zones extensive coal deposits formed in the Kuznetsk Basin. The northwest to eastern margins of Siberia were passive margins along the Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean on the far side of which lay Amuria. From the mid Carboniferous, subduction zones with associated magmatic arcs developed along both margins of the ocean.

The southwestern margin of Siberia was the site of a long lasting and complex accretionary orogen. The Devonian to early Carboniferous Siberian and South Chinese Altai accretionary complexes developed above an east-dipping subduction zone, whilst further south, the Zharma-Saur arc formed along the northeastern margin of Kazakhstania. By the late Carboniferous, all these complexes had accreted to the Siberian craton as shown by the intrusion of post-orogenic granites across the region. As Kazakhstania had already accreted to Laurussia, Siberia was effectively part of Pangea by 310 Ma, although major strike-slip movements continued between it and Laurussia into the Permian.

=== Central and East Asia ===
The Kazakhstanian microcontinent is composed of a series of Devonian and older accretionary complexes. It was strongly deformed during the Carboniferous as its western margin collided with Laurussia during the Uralian orogen and its northeastern margin collided with Siberia. Continuing strike-slip motion between Laurussia and Siberia led the formerly elongate microcontinent to bend into an orocline.

During the Carboniferous, the Tarim craton lay along the northwestern edge of North China. Subduction along the Kazakhstanian margin of the Turkestan Ocean resulted in collision between northern Tarim and Kazakhstania during the mid Carboniferous as the ocean closed. The South Tian Shan fold and thrust belt, which extends over 2,000 km from Uzbekistan to northwest China, is the remains of this accretionary complex and forms the suture between Kazakhstania and Tarim. A continental magmatic arc above a south-dipping subduction zone lay along the northern North China margin, consuming the Paleoasian Ocean. Northward subduction of the Paleo-Tethys beneath the southern margins of North China and Tarim continued during the Carboniferous, with the South Qinling block accreted to North China during the mid to late Carboniferous. No sediments are preserved from the early Carboniferous in North China. However, bauxite deposits immediately above the regional mid Carboniferous unconformity indicate warm tropical conditions and are overlain by cyclothems including extensive coals.

South China and Annamia (Southeast Asia) rifted from Gondwana during the Devonian. During the Carboniferous, they were separated from each other and North China by the Paleoasian Ocean with the Paleo-Tethys to the southwest and Panthalassa to the northeast. Cyclothem sediments with coal and evaporites were deposited across the passive margins that surrounded both continents.

==Climate==

The Carboniferous climate was dominated by the Late Paleozoic Ice Age (LPIA), the most extensive and longest icehouse period of the Phanerozoic, which lasted from the Late Devonian to the Permian (365 Ma-253 Ma). Temperatures began to drop during the late Devonian with a short-lived glaciation in the late Famennian through Devonian–Carboniferous boundary, before the Early Tournaisian Warm Interval. Following this, a reduction in atmospheric CO2 levels, caused by the increased burial of organic matter and widespread ocean anoxia led to climate cooling and glaciation across the south polar region. During the Visean Warm Interval glaciers nearly vanished retreating to the proto-Andes in Bolivia and western Argentina and the Pan-African mountain ranges in southeastern Brazil and southwest Africa.

The main phase of the LPIA (c. 335–290 Ma) began in the late Visean, as the climate cooled and atmospheric CO2 levels dropped. Its onset was accompanied by a global fall in sea level and widespread multimillion-year unconformities. This main phase consisted of a series of discrete several million-year-long glacial periods during which ice expanded out from up to 30 ice centres that stretched across mid- to high latitudes of Gondwana in eastern Australia, northwestern Argentina, southern Brazil, and central and Southern Africa.

Isotope records indicate this drop in CO2 levels was triggered by tectonic factors with increased weathering of the growing Central Pangean Mountains and the influence of the mountains on precipitation and surface water flow. Closure of the oceanic gateway between the Rheic and Tethys oceans in the early Bashkirian also contributed to climate cooling by changing ocean circulation and heat flow patterns.

Warmer periods with reduced ice volume within the Bashkirian, the late Moscovian and the latest Kasimovian to mid-Gzhelian are inferred from the disappearance of glacial sediments, the appearance of deglaciation deposits and rises in sea levels.

In the early Kasimovian there was short-lived (&lt;1 million years) intense period of glaciation, with atmospheric CO2 concentration levels dropping as low as 180 ppm. This ended suddenly as a rapid increase in CO2 concentrations to c. 600 ppm resulted in a warmer climate. This rapid rise in CO2 may have been due to a peak in pyroclastic volcanism and/or a reduction in burial of terrestrial organic matter.

The LPIA peaked across the Carboniferous-Permian boundary. Widespread glacial deposits are found across South America, western and central Africa, Antarctica, Australia, Tasmania, the Arabian Peninsula, India, and the Cimmerian blocks, indicating trans-continental ice sheets across southern Gondwana that reached to sea-level. In response to the uplift and erosion of the more mafic basement rocks of the Central Pangea Mountains at this time, CO2 levels dropped as low as 175 ppm and remained under 400 ppm for 10 Ma.

=== Temperatures ===
Temperatures across the Carboniferous reflect the phases of the LPIA. At the extremes, during the Permo-Carboniferous Glacial Maximum (299–293 Ma) the global average temperature (GAT) was c. 13 °C (55 °F), the average temperature in the tropics c. 24 °C (75 °F) and in polar regions c. -23 °C (-10 °F), whilst during the Early Tournaisian Warm Interval (358–353 Ma) the GAT was c. 22 °C (72 °F), the tropics c. 30 °C (86 °F) and polar regions c. 1.5 °C (35 °F). Overall, for the Ice Age the GAT was c. 17 °C (62 °F), with tropical temperatures c. 26 °C and polar temperatures c. -9.0 °C (16 °F).

=== Atmospheric oxygen levels ===
There are a variety of methods for reconstructing past atmospheric oxygen levels, including the charcoal record, halite gas inclusions, burial rates of organic carbon and pyrite, carbon isotopes of organic material, isotope mass balance and forward modelling. Depending on the preservation of source material, some techniques represent moments in time (e.g. halite gas inclusions), whilst others have a wider time range (e.g. the charcoal record and pyrite). Results from these different methods for the Carboniferous vary. For example: the increasing occurrence of charcoal produced by wildfires from the Late Devonian into the Carboniferous indicates increasing oxygen levels, with calculations showing oxygen levels above 21% for most of the Carboniferous; halite gas inclusions from sediments dated 337–335 Ma give estimates for the Visean of c. 15.3%, although with large uncertainties; and, pyrite records suggest levels of c. 15% early in the Carboniferous, to over 25% during the Pennsylvanian, before dropping back below 20% towards the end. However, whilst exact numbers vary, all models show an overall increase in atmospheric oxygen levels from a low of between 15–20% at the beginning of the Carboniferous to highs of 25–30% during the Period. This was not a steady rise, but included peaks and troughs reflecting the dynamic climate conditions of the time. How the atmospheric oxygen concentrations influenced the large body size of arthropods and other fauna and flora during the Carboniferous is also a subject of ongoing debate.

=== Effects of climate on sedimentation ===
The changing climate was reflected in regional-scale changes in sedimentation patterns. In the relatively warm waters of the Early to Middle Mississippian, carbonate production occurred to depth across the gently dipping continental slopes of Laurussia and North and South China (carbonate ramp architecture) and evaporites formed around the coastal regions of Laurussia, Kazakhstania, and northern Gondwana.

From the late Visean, the cooling climate restricted carbonate production to depths of less than c. 10 m forming carbonate shelves with flat-tops and steep sides. By the Moscovian, the waxing and waning of the ice sheets led to cyclothem deposition with mixed carbonate-siliciclastic sequences deposited on continental platforms and shelves.

Seasonal melting of glaciers resulted in near freezing waters around the margins of Gondwana. This is evidenced by the occurrence of glendonite (a pseudomorph of ikaite; a form of calcite deposited in glacial waters) in fine-grained, shallow marine sediments.

The glacial grinding and erosion of siliciclastic rocks across Gondwana and the Central Pangaean Mountains produced vast amounts of silt-sized sediment. Redistributed by the wind, this formed widespread deposits of loess across equatorial Pangea.

=== Effects of climate on biodiversity ===
The main phase of the LPIA was considered a crisis for marine biodiversity with the loss of many genera, followed by low biodiversity. However, recent studies of marine life suggest the rapid climate and environmental changes that accompanied the onset of the main glacial phase resulted in an adaptive radiation with a rapid increase in the number of species.

The oscillating climate conditions also led to repeated restructuring of Laurasian tropical forests between wetlands and seasonally dry ecosystems, and the appearance and diversification of tetrapods species. There was a major restructuring of wetland forests during the Kasimovian glacial interval, with the loss of arborescent (tree-like) lycopisids and other wetland groups, and a general decline in biodiversity. These events are attributed to the drop in CO2 levels below 400 ppm. Although referred to as the Carboniferous rainforest collapse, this was a complex replacement of one type of rainforest by another, not a complete disappearance of rainforest vegetation.

Across the Carboniferous–Permian boundary interval, a rapid drop in CO2 levels and increasingly arid conditions at low-latitudes led to a permanent shift to seasonally dry woodland vegetation. Tetrapods acquired new terrestrial adaptations and there was a radiation of dryland-adapted amniotes.

== Geochemistry ==
As the continents assembled to form Pangea, the growth of the Central Pangean Mountains led to increased weathering and carbonate sedimentation on the ocean floor, whilst the distribution of continents across the paleo-tropics meant vast areas of land were available for the spread of tropical rainforests. Together these two factors significantly increased CO2 drawdown from the atmosphere, lowering global temperatures, increasing ocean pH and triggering the Late Paleozoic Ice Age. The growth of the supercontinent also changed seafloor spreading rates and led to a decrease in the length and volume of mid-ocean ridge systems.

=== Magnesium/calcium isotope ratios in seawater ===
During the early Carboniferous, the Mg2+/Ca2+ ratio in seawater began to rise and by the Middle Mississippian aragonite seas had replaced calcite seas. The concentration of calcium in seawater is largely controlled by ocean pH, and as this increased the calcium concentration was reduced. At the same time, the increase in weathering, increased the amount of magnesium entering the marine environment. As magnesium is removed from seawater and calcium added along mid-ocean ridges where seawater reacts with the newly formed lithosphere, the reduction in length of mid-ocean ridge systems increased the Mg2+/Ca2+ ratio further. The Mg2+/Ca2+ ratio of the seas also affects the ability of organisms to biomineralize. The Carboniferous aragonite seas favoured those that secreted aragonite and the dominant reef builders of the time were aragonitic sponges and corals.

=== Strontium isotopic composition of seawater ===
The strontium isotopic composition (87Sr/86Sr) of seawater represents a mix of strontium derived from continental weathering which is rich in 87Sr and from mantle sources e.g. mid-ocean ridges, which are relatively depleted in 87Sr. 87Sr/86Sr ratios above 0.7075 indicate continental weathering is the main source of 87Sr, whilst ratios below indicate mantle-derived sources are the principal contributor.

87Sr/86Sr values varied through the Carboniferous, although they remained above 0.775, indicating continental weathering dominated as the source of 87Sr throughout. The 87Sr/86Sr during the Tournaisian was c. 0.70840, it decreased through the Visean to 0.70771 before increasing during the Serpukhovian to the lowermost Gzhelian where it plateaued at 0.70827, before decreasing again to 0.70814 at the Carboniferous-Permian boundary. These variations reflect the changing influence of weathering and sediment supply to the oceans of the growing Central Pangean Mountains. By the Serpukhovian basement rocks, such as granite, had been uplifted and exposed to weathering. The decline towards the end of the Carboniferous is interpreted as a decrease in continental weathering due to the more arid conditions.

=== Oxygen and carbon isotope ratios in seawater ===
Unlike Mg2+/Ca2+ and 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratios, which are consistent across the world&#x27;s oceans at any one time, δ18O and δ13C preserved in the fossil record can be affected by regional factors. Carboniferous δ18O and δ13C records show regional differences between the South China open-water setting and the epicontinental seas of Laurussia. These differences are due to variations in seawater salinity and evaporation between epicontinental seas relative to the more open waters. However, large scale trends can still be determined. δ13C rose rapidly from c. 0 to 1‰ (parts per thousand) to c. 5 to 7‰ in the Early Mississippian and remained high for the duration of the Late Paleozoic Ice Age (c. 3–6‰) into the early Permian. Similarly from the Early Mississippian there was a long-term increase in δ18O values as the climate cooled.

Both δ13C and δ18O records show significant global isotope changes (known as excursions) during the Carboniferous. The mid-Tournaisian positive δ13C and δ18O excursions lasted between 6 and 10 million years and were also accompanied by c. 6‰ positive excursion in organic matter δ15N values, a negative excursion in carbonate δ238U and a positive excursion in carbonate-associated sulphate δ34S. These changes in seawater geochemistry are interpreted as a decrease in atmospheric CO2 due to increased organic matter burial and widespread ocean anoxia triggering climate cooling and onset of glaciation.

The Mississippian-Pennsylvanian boundary positive δ18O excursion occurred at the same time as global sea level falls and widespread glacial deposits across southern Gondwana, indicating climate cooling and ice build-up. The rise in 87Sr/86Sr just before the δ18O excursion suggests climate cooling in this case was caused by increased continental weathering of the growing Central Pangean Mountains and the influence of the orogeny on precipitation and surface water flow rather than increased burial of organic matter. δ13C values show more regional variation, and it is unclear whether there is a positive δ13C excursion or a readjustment from previous lower values.

During the early Kasimovian there was a short (&lt;1myr), intense glacial period, which came to a sudden end as atmospheric CO2 concentrations rapidly rose. There was a steady increase in arid conditions across tropical regions and a major reduction in the extent of tropical rainforests, as shown by the widespread loss of coal deposits from this time. The resulting reduction in productivity and burial of organic matter led to increasing atmospheric CO2 levels, which were recorded by a negative δ13C excursion and an accompanying, but smaller decrease in δ18O values.

==Life==

===Plants===

Early Carboniferous land plants, some of which were preserved in coal balls, were very similar to those of the preceding Late Devonian, but new groups also appeared at this time. The main early Carboniferous plants were the Equisetales (horse-tails), Sphenophyllales (scrambling plants), Lycopodiales (club mosses), Lepidodendrales (scale trees), Filicales (ferns), Medullosales (informally included in the &quot;seed ferns&quot;, an assemblage of a number of early gymnosperm groups) and the Cordaitales. These continued to dominate throughout the period, but during the late Carboniferous, several other groups, Cycadophyta (cycads), the Callistophytales (another group of &quot;seed ferns&quot;), and the Voltziales, appeared.
The Carboniferous lycophytes of the order Lepidodendrales, which are cousins (but not ancestors) of the tiny club-moss of today, were huge trees with trunks 30 meters high and up to 1.5 meters in diameter. These included &quot;Lepidodendron&quot; (with its cone called Lepidostrobus), &quot;Anabathra&quot;, &quot;Lepidophloios&quot; and &quot;Sigillaria&quot;. The roots of several of these forms are known as Stigmaria. Unlike present-day trees, their secondary growth took place in the cortex, which also provided stability, instead of the xylem. The Cladoxylopsids were large trees, that were ancestors of ferns, first arising in the Carboniferous.

The fronds of some Carboniferous ferns are almost identical with those of living species. Probably many species were epiphytic. Fossil ferns and &quot;seed ferns&quot; include &quot;Pecopteris&quot;, &quot;Cyclopteris&quot;, &quot;Neuropteris&quot;, &quot;Alethopteris&quot;, and &quot;Sphenopteris&quot;; &quot;Megaphyton&quot; and &quot;Caulopteris&quot; were tree ferns.

The Equisetales included the common giant form &quot;Calamites&quot;, with a trunk diameter of 30 to and a height of up to . &quot;Sphenophyllum&quot; was a slender climbing plant with whorls of leaves, which was probably related both to the calamites and the lycopods.

&quot;Cordaites&quot;, a tall plant (6 to over 30 meters) with strap-like leaves, was related to the cycads and conifers; the catkin-like reproductive organs, which bore ovules/seeds, is called &quot;Cardiocarpus&quot;. These plants were thought to live in swamps. True coniferous trees (&quot;Walchia&quot;, of the order Voltziales) appear later in the Carboniferous, and preferred higher drier ground.

===Marine invertebrates===
In the oceans the marine invertebrate groups are the Foraminifera, corals, Bryozoa, Ostracoda, brachiopods, ammonoids, hederelloids, microconchids and echinoderms (especially crinoids). The diversity of brachiopods and fusilinid foraminiferans, surged beginning in the Visean, continuing through the end of the Carboniferous, although cephalopod and nektonic conodont diversity declined. This evolutionary radiation was known as the Carboniferous-Earliest Permian Biodiversification Event. For the first time foraminifera took a prominent part in the marine faunas. The large spindle-shaped genus Fusulina and its relatives were abundant in what is now Russia, China, Japan, North America; other important genera include &quot;Valvulina&quot;, &quot;Endothyra&quot;, &quot;Archaediscus&quot;, and &quot;Saccammina&quot; (the latter common in Britain and Belgium). Some Carboniferous genera are still extant. The first true priapulids appeared during this period.

The microscopic shells of radiolarians are found in cherts of this age in the Culm of Devon and Cornwall, and in Russia, Germany and elsewhere. Sponges are known from spicules and anchor ropes, and include various forms such as the Calcispongea &quot;Cotyliscus&quot; and &quot;Girtycoelia&quot;, the demosponge &quot;Chaetetes&quot;, and the genus of unusual colonial glass sponges &quot;Titusvillia&quot;. Both reef-building and solitary corals diversify and flourish; these include both rugose (for example, &quot;Caninia&quot;, &quot;Corwenia&quot;, &quot;Neozaphrentis&quot;), heterocorals, and tabulate (for example, &quot;Chladochonus&quot;, &quot;Michelinia&quot;) forms. Conularids were well represented by &quot;Conularia&quot;

Bryozoa are abundant in some regions; the fenestellids including &quot;Fenestella&quot;, &quot;Polypora&quot;, and &quot;Archimedes&quot;, so named because it is in the shape of an Archimedean screw. Brachiopods are also abundant; they include productids, some of which reached very large for brachiopods size and had very thick shells (for example, the -wide &quot;Gigantoproductus&quot;), while others like &quot;Chonetes&quot; were more conservative in form. Athyridids, spiriferids, rhynchonellids, and terebratulids are also very common. Inarticulate forms include &quot;Discina&quot; and &quot;Crania&quot;. Some species and genera had a very wide distribution with only minor variations.

Annelids such as &quot;Serpulites&quot; are common fossils in some horizons. Among the mollusca, the bivalves continue to increase in numbers and importance. Typical genera include &quot;Aviculopecten&quot;, &quot;Posidonomya&quot;, &quot;Nucula&quot;, &quot;Carbonicola&quot;, &quot;Edmondia&quot;, and &quot;Modiola&quot;. Gastropods are also numerous, including the genera &quot;Murchisonia&quot;, &quot;Euomphalus&quot;, &quot;Naticopsis&quot;. Nautiloid cephalopods are represented by tightly coiled nautilids, with straight-shelled and curved-shelled forms becoming increasingly rare. Goniatite ammonoids such as Aenigmatoceras are common.

Trilobites are rarer than in previous periods, on a steady trend towards extinction, represented only by the proetid group. Ostracoda, a class of crustaceans, were abundant as representatives of the meiobenthos; genera included &quot;Amphissites&quot;, &quot;Bairdia&quot;, &quot;Beyrichiopsis&quot;, &quot;Cavellina&quot;, &quot;Coryellina&quot;, &quot;Cribroconcha&quot;, &quot;Hollinella&quot;, &quot;Kirkbya&quot;, &quot;Knoxiella&quot;, and &quot;Libumella&quot;. Crinoids were highly numerous during the Carboniferous, though they suffered a gradual decline in diversity during the Middle Mississippian. Dense submarine thickets of long-stemmed crinoids appear to have flourished in shallow seas, and their remains were consolidated into thick beds of rock. Prominent genera include &quot;Cyathocrinus&quot;, &quot;Woodocrinus&quot;, and &quot;Actinocrinus&quot;. Echinoids such as &quot;Archaeocidaris&quot; and &quot;Palaeechinus&quot; were also present. The blastoids, which included the Pentreinitidae and Codasteridae and superficially resembled crinoids in the possession of long stalks attached to the seabed, attain their maximum development at this time.

===Freshwater and lagoonal invertebrates===
Freshwater Carboniferous invertebrates include various bivalve molluscs that lived in brackish or fresh water, such as &quot;Anthraconaia&quot;, &quot;Naiadites&quot;, and &quot;Carbonicola&quot;; diverse crustaceans such as &quot;Candona&quot;, &quot;Carbonita&quot;, &quot;Darwinula&quot;, &quot;Estheria&quot;, &quot;Acanthocaris&quot;, &quot;Dithyrocaris&quot;, and &quot;Anthrapalaemon&quot;. The eurypterids were also diverse, and are represented by such genera as &quot;Adelophthalmus&quot;, &quot;Megarachne&quot; (originally misinterpreted as a giant spider, hence its name) and the specialised very large &quot;Hibbertopterus&quot;. Many of these were amphibious. Frequently a temporary return of marine conditions resulted in marine or brackish water genera such as &quot;Lingula&quot;, &quot;Orbiculoidea&quot;, and &quot;Productus&quot; being found in the thin beds known as marine bands.

=== Terrestrial invertebrates ===
Fossil remains of air-breathing insects, myriapods, and arachnids are known from the Carboniferous. Their diversity when they do appear, however, shows that these arthropods were both well-developed and numerous. Some arthropods grew to large sizes with the up to millipede-like &quot;Arthropleura&quot; being the largest-known land invertebrate of all time. Among the insect groups are the huge predatory Protodonata (griffinflies), among which was &quot;Meganeura&quot;, a giant dragonfly-like insect and with a wingspan of ca. —the largest flying insect ever to roam the planet. Further groups are the Syntonopterodea (relatives of present-day mayflies), the abundant and often large sap-sucking Palaeodictyopteroidea, the diverse herbivorous Protorthoptera, and numerous basal Dictyoptera (ancestors of cockroaches).

Many insects have been obtained from the coalfields of Saarbrücken and Commentry, and from the hollow trunks of fossil trees in Nova Scotia. Some British coalfields have yielded good specimens: &quot;Archaeoptilus&quot;, from the Derbyshire coalfield, had a large wing with preserved part, and some specimens (&quot;Brodia&quot;) still exhibit traces of brilliant wing colors. In the Nova Scotian tree trunks land snails (&quot;Archaeozonites&quot;, &quot;Dendropupa&quot;) have been found.

===Fish===
Many fish inhabited the Carboniferous seas; predominantly Elasmobranchs (sharks and their relatives). These included some, like &quot;Psammodus&quot;, with crushing pavement-like teeth adapted for grinding the shells of brachiopods, crustaceans, and other marine organisms. Other groups of elasmobranchs, like the ctenacanthiformes grew to large sizes, with some genera like &quot;Saivodus&quot; reaching around 6–9 meters (20–30 feet). Other fish had piercing teeth, such as the Symmoriida; some, the petalodonts, had peculiar cycloid cutting teeth. Most of the other cartilaginous fish were marine, but others like the Xenacanthida, and several genera like &quot;Bandringa&quot; invaded fresh waters of the coal swamps. Among the bony fish, the Palaeonisciformes found in coastal waters also appear to have migrated to rivers. Sarcopterygian fish were also prominent, and one group, the Rhizodonts, reached very large size.

Most species of Carboniferous marine fish have been described largely from teeth, fin spines and dermal ossicles, with smaller freshwater fish preserved whole. Freshwater fish were abundant, and include the genera &quot;Ctenodus&quot;, &quot;Uronemus&quot;, &quot;Acanthodes&quot;, &quot;Cheirodus&quot;, and &quot;Gyracanthus&quot;. Chondrichthyes (especially holocephalans like the Stethacanthids) underwent a major evolutionary radiation during the Carboniferous. It is believed that this evolutionary radiation occurred because the decline of the placoderms at the end of the Devonian caused many environmental niches to become unoccupied and allowed new organisms to evolve and fill these niches. As a result of the evolutionary radiation Carboniferous holocephalans assumed a wide variety of bizarre shapes including &quot;Stethacanthus&quot; which possessed a flat brush-like dorsal fin with a patch of denticles on its top. &quot;Stethacanthus&quot; unusual fin may have been used in mating rituals.

Other groups like the eugeneodonts filled in the niches left by large predatory placoderms. These fish were unique as they only possessed one row of teeth in their upper or lower jaws in the form of elaborate tooth whorls. The first members of the helicoprionidae, a family eugeneodonts that were characterized by the presence of one circular tooth whorl in the lower jaw, appeared during the early Carboniferous. Perhaps the most bizarre radiation of holocephalans at this time was that of the iniopterygiformes, an order of holocephalans that greatly resembled modern day flying fish that could have also &quot;flown&quot; in the water with their massive, elongated pectoral fins. They were further characterized by their large eye sockets, club-like structures on their tails, and spines on the tips of their fins.

===Tetrapods===
Carboniferous amphibians were diverse and common by the middle of the period, more so than they are today; some were as long as 6 meters, and those fully terrestrial as adults had scaly skin. They included basal tetrapod groups classified in early books under the Labyrinthodontia. These had a long body, a head covered with bony plates, and generally weak or undeveloped limbs. The largest were over 2 meters long. They were accompanied by an assemblage of smaller amphibians included under the Lepospondyli, often only about long. Some Carboniferous amphibians were aquatic and lived in rivers (&quot;Loxomma&quot;, &quot;Eogyrinus&quot;, &quot;Proterogyrinus&quot;); others may have been semi-aquatic (&quot;Ophiderpeton&quot;, &quot;Amphibamus&quot;, &quot;Hyloplesion&quot;) or terrestrial (&quot;Dendrerpeton&quot;, &quot;Tuditanus&quot;, &quot;Anthracosaurus&quot;).

The Carboniferous rainforest collapse slowed the evolution of amphibians who could not survive as well in the cooler, drier conditions. Amniotes, however, prospered because of specific key adaptations. One of the greatest evolutionary innovations of the Carboniferous was the amniote egg, which allowed the laying of eggs in a dry environment, as well as keratinized scales and claws, allowing for the further exploitation of the land by certain tetrapods. These included the earliest sauropsid reptiles (&quot;Hylonomus&quot;), and the earliest known synapsid (&quot;Archaeothyris&quot;). Synapsids quickly became huge and diversified in the Permian, only for their dominance to stop during the Mesozoic. Sauropsids (reptiles, and also, later, birds) also diversified but remained small until the Mesozoic, during which they dominated the land, as well as the water and sky, only for their dominance to stop during the Cenozoic.

Reptiles underwent a major evolutionary radiation in response to the drier climate that preceded the rainforest collapse. By the end of the Carboniferous amniotes had already diversified into a number of groups, including several families of synapsid pelycosaurs, protorothyridids, captorhinids, saurians and araeoscelids.

===Fungi===
As plants and animals were growing in size and abundance in this time, land fungi diversified further. Marine fungi still occupied the oceans. All modern classes of fungi were present in the late Carboniferous.

==Extinction events==
===Romer&#x27;s gap===

The first 15 million years of the Carboniferous had very limited terrestrial fossils. While it has long been debated whether the gap is a result of fossilisation or relates to an actual event, recent work indicates there was a drop in atmospheric oxygen levels, indicating some sort of ecological collapse. The gap saw the demise of the Devonian fish-like ichthyostegalian labyrinthodonts and the rise of the more advanced temnospondylian and reptiliomorphan amphibians that so typify the Carboniferous terrestrial vertebrate fauna.

===Carboniferous rainforest collapse===

Before the end of the Carboniferous, an extinction event occurred. On land this event is referred to as the Carboniferous rainforest collapse. Vast tropical rainforests collapsed suddenly as the climate changed from hot and humid to cool and arid. This was likely caused by intense glaciation and a drop in sea levels. The new climatic conditions were not favorable to the growth of rainforest and the animals within them. Rainforests shrank into isolated islands, surrounded by seasonally dry habitats. Towering lycopsid forests with a heterogeneous mixture of vegetation were replaced by much less diverse tree fern dominated flora.

Amphibians, the dominant vertebrates at the time, fared poorly through this event with large losses in biodiversity; reptiles continued to diversify through key adaptations that let them survive in the drier habitat, specifically the hard-shelled egg and scales, both of which retain water better than their amphibian counterparts.

==See also==
* List of Carboniferous tetrapods
* Important Carboniferous Lagerstätten
** Granton Shrimp Bed; 359 mya; Edinburgh, Scotland
** East Kirkton Quarry; c. 350 mya; Bathgate, Scotland
** Bear Gulch Limestone; 324 mya; Montana, US
** Mazon Creek; 309 mya; Illinois, US
** Hamilton Quarry; 300 mya; Kansas, US
* List of fossil sites

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
*
* 
*
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Rainer Zangerl and Gerard Ramon Case: &quot;Iniopterygia: a new order of Chondrichthyan fishes from the Pennsylvanian of North America.&quot; Fieldiana Geology Memoirs, v. 6, Field Museum of Natural History, 1973 Biodiversity Heritage Library (Volltext, engl.)
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Examples of Carboniferous Fossils
*60+ images of Carboniferous Foraminifera
*Carboniferous (Chronostratography scale)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="4" end="17" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="27" end="42" title="Geologic time scale" label="geologic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q403523" start="47" end="53" title="System (stratigraphy)" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="61" end="70" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="71" end="74" title="era (geology)" label="era"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="124" end="132" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="187" end="194" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101313" start="295" end="306" title="Phanerozoic" label="Phanerozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="307" end="310" title="eon (geology)" label="eon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="315" end="328" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="413" end="426" title="Mississippian (geology)" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="441" end="454" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="504" end="508" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="533" end="538" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="546" end="550" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143830" start="734" end="751" title="William Conybeare (geologist)" label="William Conybeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568882" start="756" end="772" title="William Phillips (geologist)" label="William Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="878" end="896" title="terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192154" start="901" end="911" title="Embryophyte" label="land plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460384" start="939" end="952" title="Stegocephalia" label="Stegocephalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="966" end="976" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="993" end="1001" title="tetrapod" label="tetrapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209254" start="1024" end="1038" title="tetrapodomorph" label="tetrapodomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q160830" start="1058" end="1074" title="lobe-finned fish" label="lobe-finned fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917156" start="1120" end="1134" title="pentadactylous" label="pentadactylous"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="1196" end="1213" title="Carboniferous" label="Age of Amphibians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230536" start="1229" end="1244" title="genetic divergence" label="diversification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="1254" end="1263" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131447" start="1277" end="1289" title="temnospondyl" label="temnospondyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q181537" start="1367" end="1374" title="amniote" label="amniote"/>
<link wikidata="Q189069" start="1386" end="1394" title="synapsid" label="synapsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="1401" end="1406" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="1423" end="1429" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q329457" start="1443" end="1452" title="sauropsid" label="sauropsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="1532" end="1541" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="1551" end="1559" title="arachnid" label="arachnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19107" start="1567" end="1580" title="trigonotarbid" label="trigonotarbid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19888319" start="1592" end="1607" title="Pulmonoscorpius" label="Pulmonoscorpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q25823" start="1616" end="1624" title="myriapod" label="myriapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q131789" start="1638" end="1650" title="Arthropleura" label="Arthropleura"/>
<link wikidata="Q22708" start="1695" end="1709" title="Pterygota" label="flying insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q946437" start="1734" end="1756" title="evolutionary radiation" label="evolutionary radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137814" start="1788" end="1821" title="Coal forest" label="Vast swaths of forests and swamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="1914" end="1926" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="1984" end="1995" title="Glacial period" label="glaciations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925465" start="2016" end="2033" title="Mountain formation" label="mountain building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="2069" end="2076" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038049" start="2131" end="2164" title="Carboniferous rainforest collapse" label="Carboniferous rainforest collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q973297" start="2519" end="2538" title="Chronostratigraphy" label="chronostratigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q901070" start="2666" end="2680" title="Richard Kirwan" label="Richard Kirwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q355803" start="2779" end="2793" title="John Farey Sr." label="John Farey Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1517523" start="2885" end="2902" title="Old Red Sandstone" label="Old Red Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038050" start="2904" end="2927" title="Carboniferous Limestone" label="Carboniferous Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860042" start="2929" end="2943" title="Millstone Grit" label="Millstone Grit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137826" start="2952" end="2965" title="Coal measures" label="Coal Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143830" start="3036" end="3053" title="William Conybeare (geologist)" label="William Conybeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568882" start="3058" end="3074" title="William Phillips (geologist)" label="William Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="3186" end="3194" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226266" start="3386" end="3395" title="Dinantian" label="Dinantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q777913" start="3410" end="3419" title="Carbonate rock" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514730" start="3445" end="3453" title="Silesian (series)" label="Silesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514925" start="3466" end="3479" title="siliciclastic" label="siliciclastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q940381" start="3527" end="3538" title="Tournaisian" label="Tournaisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q647290" start="3543" end="3549" title="Viséan" label="Viséan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131468" start="3592" end="3600" title="Namurian" label="Namurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568709" start="3602" end="3613" title="Westphalian (stage)" label="Westphalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130885" start="3618" end="3628" title="Stephanian (stage)" label="Stephanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q402104" start="3679" end="3719" title="International Commission on Stratigraphy" label="International Commission on Stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068088" start="3784" end="3796" title="Serpukhovian" label="Serpukhovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="3959" end="3972" title="Mississippian (geology)" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="4038" end="4051" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="4057" end="4088" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179385" start="4328" end="4337" title="Moscovian (Carboniferous)" label="Moscovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030848" start="4486" end="4494" title="Gzhelian" label="Gzhelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q639443" start="4500" end="4510" title="Bashkirian" label="Bashkirian"/>
<link wikidata="Q545853" start="4784" end="4794" title="Kasimovian" label="Kasimovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37402" start="5200" end="5244" title="Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point" label="Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q736917" start="5266" end="5275" title="Geological formation" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911158" start="5279" end="5289" title="stratotype" label="stratotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520978" start="5627" end="5645" title="Alexander Winchell" label="Alexander Winchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="5712" end="5721" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="5735" end="5752" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432114" start="5829" end="5841" title="Paleo-Tethys Ocean" label="Paleo-Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q208378" start="5846" end="5857" title="Panthalassa" label="Panthalassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891116" start="5870" end="5881" title="Rheic Ocean" label="Rheic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q864826" start="5997" end="6012" title="biostratigraphy" label="biostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="6051" end="6064" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="6084" end="6101" title="Radiometric dating" label="radiometric dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q173219" start="6174" end="6181" title="Tournai" label="Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q519775" start="6247" end="6259" title="André Dumont (geologist)" label="André Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418733" start="6384" end="6392" title="La Serre" label="La Serre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509963" start="6404" end="6418" title="Montagne Noire" label="Montagne Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q586245" start="6482" end="6490" title="conodont" label="conodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350379" start="6497" end="6517" title="Siphonodella" label="Siphonodella sulcata"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350379" start="6567" end="6591" title="Siphonodella" label="Siphonodella praesulcata"/>
<link wikidata="Q876798" start="6911" end="6923" title="unconformity" label="unconformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q49743" start="7168" end="7172" title="Visé" label="Visé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127" start="7174" end="7188" title="Liège Province" label="Liège Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q742139" start="7296" end="7302" title="facies" label="facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q108247" start="7333" end="7345" title="Dinant" label="Dinant Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="7601" end="7610" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="7616" end="7621" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q986124" start="7630" end="7639" title="Peng Chong" label="Pengchong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="7649" end="7656" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134577" start="7719" end="7728" title="Fusulinida" label="fusulinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17333360" start="7950" end="7964" title="Sergei Nikitin (geologist)" label="Sergei Nikitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194067" start="7996" end="8005" title="Serpukhov" label="Serpukhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="8240" end="8248" title="endemism" label="endemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="8314" end="8319" title="Biome" label="biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="8423" end="8428" title="Ural Mountains" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="8441" end="8448" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q28431134" start="8615" end="8632" title="Lochriea" label="Lochriea ziegleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q15489424" start="8699" end="8712" title="J. J. Stevenson (geologist)" label="J.J.Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="8930" end="8938" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9303" end="9320" title="Sofia Semikhatova" label="Sofia Semikhatova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080196" start="9349" end="9358" title="Bashkiria (1917–1919)" label="Bashkiria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="9401" end="9414" title="Bashkortostan" label="Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796116" start="9545" end="9557" title="Arrow Canyon Range" label="Arrow Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="9561" end="9567" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q28431145" start="9658" end="9686" title="Declinognathodus" label="Declinognathodus noduliferus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245586" start="9818" end="9827" title="Cyclothems" label="cyclothem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732190" start="9840" end="9853" title="Sequence stratigraphy" label="transgressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="9874" end="9883" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732190" start="9890" end="9900" title="Sequence stratigraphy" label="regressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="9901" end="9909" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="9915" end="9922" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="10014" end="10019" title="Clay" label="clays"/>
<link wikidata="Q145457" start="10771" end="10778" title="Kasimov" label="Kasimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q178272" start="11001" end="11011" title="brachiopod" label="brachiopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q876798" start="11109" end="11124" title="Unconformity" label="disconformities"/>
<link wikidata="Q221858" start="11495" end="11522" title="Gzhel (selo), Moscow Oblast" label="Gzhel (selo), Moscow Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q163643" start="11529" end="11539" title="Ramenskoye, Moscow Oblast" label="Ramenskoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944777" start="11815" end="11825" title="Boreal Sea" label="Boreal Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q477232" start="12097" end="12103" title="Aqtöbe" label="Aqtöbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887929" start="12226" end="12252" title="Streptognathodus" label="Streptognathodus postfusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="12333" end="12349" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580164" start="12405" end="12422" title="Erosion surface" label="erosional surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="12675" end="12694" title="Continental shelf" label="continental shelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931872" start="12857" end="12864" title="mudrock" label="mudrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q685167" start="13084" end="13106" title="Late Paleozoic icehouse" label="Late Paleozoic Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12599" start="13183" end="13192" title="ice sheet" label="ice sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643016" start="13218" end="13236" title="eustatic sea level" label="eustatic sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="13499" end="13503" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q36449705" start="13712" end="13722" title="Peatland" label="Peat mires"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="13866" end="13872" title="River delta" label="deltas"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="13874" end="13880" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="13886" end="13896" title="Estuary" label="esturaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="14451" end="14458" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578218" start="14850" end="14864" title="Inland sea" label="epicontinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q132033" start="14901" end="14910" title="Laurasia" label="Laurussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990126" start="14989" end="14994" title="North China Craton" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050273" start="14999" end="15018" title="South China Craton" label="South China cratons"/>
<link wikidata="Q211446" start="15207" end="15225" title="Milankovitch cycles" label="Milankovitch cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="15400" end="15406" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978695" start="15850" end="15864" title="foreland basin" label="foreland basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061582" start="15873" end="15898" title="Central Pangean Mountains" label="Central Pangean Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q487294" start="16276" end="16288" title="interglacial" label="interglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="16309" end="16319" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q926051" start="16637" end="16652" title="Siberia (continent)" label="Siberian craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="16964" end="16970" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174698" start="17138" end="17151" title="Basidiomycota" label="basidiomycete"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="17170" end="17176" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="18040" end="18054" title="Plate tectonics" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q55833" start="18072" end="18086" title="supercontinent" label="supercontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q208378" start="18208" end="18226" title="Panthalassa" label="Panthalassic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="18256" end="18267" title="South Pole" label="south polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="18403" end="18410" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q481751" start="18415" end="18421" title="Amurian Plate" label="Amuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283292" start="18447" end="18459" title="Kazakhstania" label="Kazakhstania"/>
<link wikidata="Q840828" start="18671" end="18679" title="Variscan orogeny" label="Variscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761223" start="18680" end="18691" title="Alleghanian orogeny" label="Alleghanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110152" start="18692" end="18700" title="Ouachita orogeny" label="Ouachita"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="18762" end="18776" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="18792" end="18798" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q688887" start="18909" end="18937" title="Armorican terrane" label="Armorican terrane assemblage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="18995" end="19001" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891116" start="19010" end="19021" title="Rheic Ocean" label="Rheic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="19161" end="19168" title="terrane" label="terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="19170" end="19174" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="19212" end="19222" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="19465" end="19477" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="19479" end="19486" title="Igneous rock" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672013" start="19513" end="19524" title="Deformation (geology)" label="deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="19774" end="19794" title="Fault (geology)" label="strike-slip faulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="19868" end="19889" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828108" start="20137" end="20148" title="Compression (geology)" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928905" start="20179" end="20194" title="Uralian orogeny" label="Uralian orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464261" start="20221" end="20241" title="fold and thrust belt" label="fold and thrust belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476670" start="20277" end="20304" title="Central Asian Orogenic Belt" label="Central Asian Orogenic Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="20397" end="20405" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q95449" start="20458" end="20470" title="Magnitogorsk" label="Magnitogorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="20471" end="20481" title="island arc" label="island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233441" start="20535" end="20545" title="Ural Ocean" label="Ural Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918464" start="20565" end="20579" title="passive margin" label="passive margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q805735" start="20607" end="20621" title="Baltica" label="Baltica craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509590" start="20628" end="20639" title="Suture (geology)" label="suture zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736194" start="20716" end="20734" title="Main Uralian Fault" label="Main Uralian Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553430" start="20805" end="20814" title="Accretion (geology)" label="Accretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="21238" end="21245" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q858071" start="21328" end="21337" title="Laurentia" label="Laurentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q805735" start="21339" end="21346" title="Baltica" label="Baltica"/>
<link wikidata="Q510087" start="21351" end="21359" title="Avalonia" label="Avalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q785020" start="21861" end="21878" title="sedimentary basin" label="sedimentary basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208378" start="21942" end="21954" title="Panthalassa" label="Panthalassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775375" start="22010" end="22024" title="Antler orogeny" label="Antler orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q119253" start="22102" end="22116" title="Oceanic trench" label="slab roll-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060802" start="22182" end="22202" title="Yukon–Tanana terrane" label="Yukon–Tanana terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540325" start="22226" end="22246" title="Slide Mountain Ocean" label="Slide Mountain Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231763" start="22288" end="22305" title="orogenic collapse" label="orogenic collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036411" start="22350" end="22367" title="Innuitian orogeny" label="Innuitian orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652192" start="22398" end="22412" title="Sverdrup Basin Magmatic Province" label="Sverdrup Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="22647" end="22663" title="Till" label="Glacial deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q262025" start="23598" end="23615" title="Cimmerian terrane" label="Cimmerian terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="23664" end="23680" title="Tethys Ocean" label="Neo-Tethys Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363212" start="23901" end="23918" title="Kanimblan Orogeny" label="Kanimblan Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579756" start="23920" end="23935" title="Continental arc" label="Continental arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q22672204" start="24034" end="24046" title="Andean orogeny" label="proto-Andean"/>
<link wikidata="Q203313" start="24376" end="24390" title="Kuznetsk Basin" label="Kuznetsk Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="24806" end="24811" title="Altai Mountains" label="Altai"/>
<link wikidata="Q419990" start="24812" end="24834" title="Accretionary wedge" label="accretionary complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612404" start="25749" end="25757" title="orocline" label="orocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474" start="26032" end="26068" title="Tian Shan" label="South Tian Shan fold and thrust belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="26103" end="26113" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997242" start="26511" end="26530" title="Qinling orogenic belt" label="South Qinling block"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="26674" end="26681" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="27138" end="27147" title="evaporite" label="evaporite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="30912" end="30920" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="30929" end="30935" title="halite" label="halite"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="30987" end="30993" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q691831" start="32687" end="32701" title="Carbonate platform" label="carbonate ramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q691831" start="32930" end="32947" title="Carbonate platform" label="carbonate shelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252057" start="33322" end="33328" title="ikaite" label="ikaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181537" start="35033" end="35040" title="amniote" label="amniote"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="35168" end="35178" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="35421" end="35424" title="Carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579916" start="35425" end="35433" title="Drawdown (climate)" label="drawdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="35485" end="35504" title="Ocean" label="increasing ocean pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q215920" start="35594" end="35612" title="seafloor spreading" label="seafloor spreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="35669" end="35684" title="mid-ocean ridge" label="mid-ocean ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783732" start="35858" end="35871" title="aragonite sea" label="aragonite sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018792" start="35886" end="35897" title="calcite sea" label="calcite sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q610457" start="36449" end="36462" title="Biomineralization" label="biomineralize"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="36526" end="36535" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q938" start="36671" end="36680" title="strontium" label="strontium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143968" start="37666" end="37674" title="Basement (geology)" label="basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="37690" end="37697" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q344117" start="38051" end="38055" title="Δ18O" label="δ18O"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278929" start="38060" end="38064" title="Δ13C" label="δ13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083977" start="39055" end="39059" title="Δ15N" label="δ15N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="39103" end="39107" title="Uranium-238" label="238U"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325416" start="39166" end="39170" title="Δ34S" label="δ34S"/>
<link wikidata="Q900291" start="39277" end="39291" title="Total organic carbon" label="organic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136650" start="40699" end="40708" title="permineralisation" label="preserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q574636" start="40712" end="40721" title="coal ball" label="coal ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291566" start="40871" end="40882" title="Equisetales" label="Equisetales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899203" start="40898" end="40913" title="Sphenophyllales" label="Sphenophyllales"/>
<link wikidata="Q739565" start="40935" end="40947" title="Lycopodiales" label="Lycopodiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q144837" start="40963" end="40978" title="Lepidodendrales" label="Lepidodendrales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395756" start="40994" end="41003" title="Filicales" label="Filicales"/>
<link wikidata="Q978608" start="41013" end="41025" title="Medullosales" label="Medullosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130372" start="41060" end="41070" title="Pteridospermatophyta" label="seed ferns"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="41113" end="41123" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q422417" start="41140" end="41151" title="Cordaitales" label="Cordaitales"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="41261" end="41272" title="Cycadophyta" label="Cycadophyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027330" start="41287" end="41303" title="Callistophytales" label="Callistophytales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136812" start="41355" end="41365" title="Voltziales" label="Voltziales"/>
<link wikidata="Q576530" start="41604" end="41617" title="Lepidodendron" label="Lepidodendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q576530" start="41646" end="41659" title="Lepidostrobus" label="Lepidostrobus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41668" end="41677" title="Anabathra (plant)" label="Anabathra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41691" end="41704" title="Lepidophloios" label="Lepidophloios"/>
<link wikidata="Q21233645" start="41721" end="41731" title="Sigillaria" label="Sigillaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277036" start="41788" end="41797" title="Stigmaria" label="Stigmaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209966" start="41831" end="41847" title="secondary growth" label="secondary growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293511" start="41866" end="41872" title="Cortex (botany)" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="41920" end="41925" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134965" start="41931" end="41945" title="Cladoxylopsida" label="Cladoxylopsids"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="42148" end="42157" title="Epiphyte" label="epiphytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q144285" start="42213" end="42223" title="Pecopteris" label="Pecopteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q17489287" start="42237" end="42248" title="Cyclopteris" label="Cyclopteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002606" start="42262" end="42273" title="Neuropteris" label="Neuropteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716512" start="42287" end="42299" title="Alethopteris" label="Alethopteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576662" start="42317" end="42329" title="Sphenopteris" label="Sphenopteris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42343" end="42353" title="Megaphyton" label="Megaphyton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42370" end="42381" title="Caulopteris" label="Caulopteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707255" start="42459" end="42468" title="Calamites" label="Calamites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295931" start="42537" end="42550" title="Sphenophyllum" label="Sphenophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q869081" start="42683" end="42692" title="Cordaites" label="Cordaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q217753" start="42803" end="42809" title="catkin" label="catkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q869081" start="42877" end="42889" title="Cardiocarpus" label="Cardiocarpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185543" start="42971" end="42978" title="Walchia" label="Walchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108555493" start="43127" end="43146" title="marine invertebrate" label="marine invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027" start="43162" end="43174" title="Foraminifera" label="Foraminifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q28524" start="43176" end="43182" title="Anthozoa" label="corals"/>
<link wikidata="Q148134" start="43184" end="43191" title="Bryozoa" label="Bryozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q276412" start="43193" end="43202" title="Ostracoda" label="Ostracoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q178272" start="43204" end="43214" title="brachiopod" label="brachiopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q228002" start="43217" end="43226" title="Ammonoidea" label="ammonoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982809" start="43228" end="43240" title="hederellid" label="hederelloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839384" start="43242" end="43255" title="microconchids" label="microconchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="43260" end="43270" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q33666" start="43284" end="43291" title="crinoid" label="crinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q647290" start="43378" end="43384" title="Visean" label="Visean"/>
<link wikidata="Q134577" start="43706" end="43714" title="Fusulinida" label="Fusulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="44009" end="44015" title="Extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184" start="44032" end="44041" title="priapulid" label="priapulid"/>
<link wikidata="Q107920" start="44099" end="44109" title="radiolaria" label="radiolaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="44125" end="44130" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193075" start="44151" end="44155" title="Culm Measures" label="Culm"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="44159" end="44164" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="44169" end="44177" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="44217" end="44224" title="Porifera" label="Sponges"/>
<link wikidata="Q520831" start="44240" end="44247" title="spicule (sponge)" label="spicule"/>
<link wikidata="Q248530" start="44374" end="44384" title="demosponge" label="demosponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q263211" start="44442" end="44455" title="Hexactinellid" label="glass sponges"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948341" start="44462" end="44473" title="Titusvillia" label="Titusvillia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="44486" end="44490" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q133091" start="44563" end="44569" title="Rugosa" label="rugose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032424" start="44590" end="44597" title="Caninia (genus)" label="Caninia"/>
<link wikidata="Q135282" start="44673" end="44681" title="Tabulata" label="tabulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567954" start="44753" end="44763" title="Conularids" label="Conularids"/>
<link wikidata="Q148134" start="44812" end="44819" title="Bryozoa" label="Bryozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q776475" start="44933" end="44943" title="Archimedes (bryozoan)" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189155" start="44993" end="45010" title="Archimedean screw" label="Archimedean screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q178272" start="45012" end="45022" title="Brachiopod" label="Brachiopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q16349661" start="45056" end="45066" title="Productida" label="productids"/>
<link wikidata="Q426603" start="45178" end="45194" title="Gigantoproductus" label="Gigantoproductus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26160" start="45227" end="45235" title="Chonetes" label="Chonetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4815733" start="45274" end="45284" title="Athyridida" label="Athyridids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509529" start="45286" end="45297" title="Spiriferida" label="spiriferids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885825" start="45299" end="45313" title="Rhynchonellida" label="rhynchonellids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273708" start="45319" end="45332" title="Terebratulida" label="terebratulids"/>
<link wikidata="Q959191" start="45388" end="45395" title="Discina (brachiopod)" label="Discina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182118" start="45412" end="45418" title="Crania (genus)" label="Crania"/>
<link wikidata="Q25522" start="45508" end="45515" title="Annelid" label="Annelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="45609" end="45616" title="bivalve" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q127715" start="45695" end="45708" title="Aviculopecten" label="Aviculopecten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105647" start="45722" end="45733" title="Posidonomya" label="Posidonomya"/>
<link wikidata="Q127873" start="45747" end="45753" title="Nucula" label="Nucula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269944" start="45767" end="45778" title="Carbonicola (bivalve)" label="Carbonicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="45833" end="45842" title="Gastropod" label="Gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q59741" start="45915" end="45925" title="Euomphalus" label="Euomphalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q840536" start="45957" end="45966" title="Nautiloid" label="Nautiloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="45967" end="45977" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188550" start="46013" end="46022" title="Nautilida" label="nautilids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116552" start="46099" end="46108" title="Goniatite" label="Goniatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q228002" start="46109" end="46118" title="Ammonoidea" label="ammonoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141497" start="46127" end="46141" title="Aenigmatoceras" label="Aenigmatoceras"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="46155" end="46164" title="Trilobite" label="Trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934211" start="46264" end="46271" title="Proetida" label="proetid"/>
<link wikidata="Q276412" start="46279" end="46287" title="Ostracod" label="Ostracod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="46301" end="46311" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q336458" start="46354" end="46365" title="meiobenthos" label="meiobenthos"/>
<link wikidata="Q33666" start="46624" end="46631" title="Crinoid" label="Crinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272315" start="47049" end="47063" title="Archaeocidaris" label="Archaeocidaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566901" start="47122" end="47130" title="blastoid" label="blastoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="47425" end="47432" title="bivalve" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="47433" end="47440" title="mollusc" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q102799731" start="47521" end="47530" title="Naiadites" label="Naiadites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269944" start="47548" end="47559" title="Carbonicola (bivalve)" label="Carbonicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="47575" end="47585" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557480" start="47601" end="47608" title="Candona" label="Candona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038052" start="47622" end="47631" title="Carbonita (crustacean)" label="Carbonita"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570761" start="47645" end="47654" title="Darwinula" label="Darwinula"/>
<link wikidata="Q22285356" start="47668" end="47676" title="Estheria (crustacean)" label="Estheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19436" start="47772" end="47782" title="eurypterid" label="eurypterid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682031" start="47847" end="47861" title="Adelophthalmus" label="Adelophthalmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q141230" start="47875" end="47885" title="Megarachne" label="Megarachne"/>
<link wikidata="Q141251" start="47991" end="48005" title="Hibbertopterus" label="Hibbertopterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q150580" start="48153" end="48160" title="Lingula (genus)" label="Lingula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14648564" start="48204" end="48213" title="Productus" label="Productus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="48339" end="48345" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q25823" start="48348" end="48356" title="Myriapoda" label="myriapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="48363" end="48371" title="arachnid" label="arachnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131789" start="48592" end="48604" title="Arthropleura" label="Arthropleura"/>
<link wikidata="Q164689" start="48713" end="48724" title="Protodonata" label="Protodonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q283596" start="48763" end="48772" title="Meganeura" label="Meganeura"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="48788" end="48797" title="dragonfly" label="dragonfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q174273" start="48954" end="48962" title="Ephemeroptera" label="mayflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912508" start="49006" end="49027" title="Palaeodictyopteroidea" label="Palaeodictyopteroidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q999198" start="49053" end="49067" title="Protorthoptera" label="Protorthoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="49082" end="49087" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087279" start="49088" end="49099" title="Dictyoptera" label="Dictyoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661828" start="49114" end="49123" title="cockroach" label="cockroach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724" start="49184" end="49195" title="Saarbrücken" label="Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q510013" start="49200" end="49209" title="Commentry" label="Commentry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49445" end="49451" title="Brodia" label="Brodia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49557" end="49571" title="Archaeozonites" label="Archaeozonites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49585" end="49595" title="Dendropupa" label="Dendropupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q194257" start="49690" end="49702" title="Elasmobranch" label="Elasmobranch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49766" end="49775" title="Psammodus" label="Psammodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q796196" start="49946" end="49963" title="ctenacanthiformes" label="ctenacanthiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q115800953" start="50013" end="50021" title="Saivodus" label="Saivodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21608447" start="50112" end="50122" title="Symmoriida" label="Symmoriida"/>
<link wikidata="Q148523" start="50134" end="50144" title="petalodont" label="petalodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q119359" start="50253" end="50265" title="Xenacanthida" label="Xenacanthida"/>
<link wikidata="Q21224110" start="50297" end="50306" title="Bandringa" label="Bandringa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27207" start="50364" end="50373" title="Osteichthyes" label="bony fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q144538" start="50379" end="50396" title="Palaeonisciformes" label="Palaeonisciformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160830" start="50461" end="50474" title="Sarcopterygii" label="Sarcopterygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934109" start="50521" end="50530" title="Rhizodont" label="Rhizodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191658" start="50779" end="50787" title="Ctenodus" label="Ctenodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335100" start="50823" end="50833" title="Acanthodes" label="Acanthodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625383" start="50874" end="50885" title="Gyracanthus" label="Gyracanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25371" start="50893" end="50907" title="Chondrichthyes" label="Chondrichthyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q149104" start="50920" end="50933" title="Holocephali" label="holocephalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339753" start="50943" end="50957" title="Stethacanthidae" label="Stethacanthids"/>
<link wikidata="Q946437" start="50977" end="50999" title="evolutionary radiation" label="evolutionary radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130932" start="51110" end="51120" title="Placodermi" label="placoderms"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="51160" end="51180" title="Niche (ecology)" label="environmental niches"/>
<link wikidata="Q133370" start="51388" end="51401" title="Stethacanthus" label="Stethacanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454665" start="51469" end="51478" title="Dermal denticle" label="denticles"/>
<link wikidata="Q133370" start="51497" end="51510" title="Stethacanthus" label="Stethacanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25803969" start="51590" end="51602" title="Eugeneodontida" label="eugeneodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q533487" start="51816" end="51831" title="helicoprionidae" label="helicoprionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q148509" start="52063" end="52080" title="iniopterygiformes" label="iniopterygiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="52417" end="52426" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q753235" start="52667" end="52681" title="Labyrinthodont" label="Labyrinthodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q133023" start="52899" end="52911" title="Lepospondyli" label="Lepospondyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694327" start="53006" end="53013" title="Loxomma" label="Loxomma"/>
<link wikidata="Q596350" start="53027" end="53036" title="Eogyrinus" label="Eogyrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134526" start="53050" end="53064" title="Proterogyrinus" label="Proterogyrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572225" start="53114" end="53126" title="Ophiderpeton" label="Ophiderpeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351015" start="53140" end="53150" title="Amphibamus" label="Amphibamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956267" start="53164" end="53175" title="Hyloplesion" label="Hyloplesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566901" start="53205" end="53217" title="Dendrerpeton" label="Dendrerpeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765464" start="53231" end="53240" title="Tuditanus" label="Tuditanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219896" start="53254" end="53268" title="Anthracosaurus" label="Anthracosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="53724" end="53732" title="tetrapod" label="tetrapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q329457" start="53763" end="53772" title="Sauropsida" label="sauropsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q132458" start="53789" end="53798" title="Hylonomus" label="Hylonomus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189069" start="53830" end="53838" title="synapsid" label="synapsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133034" start="53846" end="53859" title="Archaeothyris" label="Archaeothyris"/>
<link wikidata="Q319520" start="54460" end="54470" title="pelycosaur" label="pelycosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q137521" start="54473" end="54489" title="Protorothyrididae" label="protorothyridids"/>
<link wikidata="Q141936" start="54491" end="54503" title="captorhinidae" label="captorhinids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254408" start="54505" end="54511" title="sauria" label="sauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q136663" start="54518" end="54529" title="Araeoscelidia" label="araeoscelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="54621" end="54626" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56708726" start="55089" end="55108" title="ecological collapse" label="ecological collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364269" start="55159" end="55174" title="ichthyostegalia" label="ichthyostegalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q753235" start="55176" end="55190" title="labyrinthodont" label="labyrinthodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q131447" start="55226" end="55238" title="temnospondyl" label="temnospondyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q134683" start="55246" end="55260" title="reptiliomorpha" label="reptiliomorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="55262" end="55271" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="55418" end="55434" title="extinction event" label="extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149748" start="55891" end="55899" title="lycopsid" label="lycopsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282035" start="55986" end="55995" title="tree fern" label="tree fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038053" start="56362" end="56393" title="List of Carboniferous tetrapods" label="List of Carboniferous tetrapods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122699" start="56420" end="56432" title="Lagerstätten" label="Lagerstätten"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120734" start="56436" end="56454" title="Granton Shrimp Bed" label="Granton Shrimp Bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="56465" end="56474" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328735" start="56488" end="56507" title="East Kirkton Quarry" label="East Kirkton Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q810794" start="56521" end="56529" title="Bathgate" label="Bathgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q812979" start="56543" end="56563" title="Bear Gulch Limestone" label="Bear Gulch Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="56574" end="56581" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564342" start="56589" end="56600" title="Mazon Creek" label="Mazon Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="56611" end="56619" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645112" start="56627" end="56642" title="Hamilton Quarry" label="Hamilton Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="56653" end="56659" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828615" start="56666" end="56686" title="List of fossil sites" label="List of fossil sites"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5403" wikidata="Q970" url="?curid=5403" title="Comoros">
<text>The Comoros, officially the Union of the Comoros, is an archipelagic country made up of three islands in Southeastern Africa, located at the northern end of the Mozambique Channel in the Indian Ocean. Its capital and largest city is Moroni. The religion of the majority of the population, and the official state religion, is Sunni Islam. Comoros proclaimed its independence from France on 6 July 1975. The Comoros is the only country of the Arab League which is entirely in the Southern Hemisphere. It is a member state of the African Union, the &quot;Organisation internationale de la Francophonie&quot;, the Organisation of Islamic Co-operation, and the Indian Ocean Commission. The country has three official languages: Shikomori, French and Arabic.

At , the Comoros is the third-smallest African country by area. In 2019, its population was estimated to be 850,886. The sovereign state consists of three major islands and numerous smaller islands, all of the volcanic Comoro Islands with the exception of Mayotte. Mayotte voted against independence from France in a referendum in 1974, and continues to be administered by France as an overseas department. France has vetoed a United Nations Security Council resolution that would have affirmed Comorian sovereignty over the island. Mayotte became an overseas department and a region of France in 2011 following a referendum which was passed overwhelmingly.

The Comoros were likely first settled by Austronesian/Malagasy peoples, Bantu speakers from East Africa, and seafaring Arab traders. From 1500 the Sultanate of Anjouan dominated the islands, with Grande Comore split between several sultans. It became part of the French colonial empire during the 19th century, before its independence in 1975. It has experienced more than 20 coups or attempted coups, with various heads of state assassinated. Along with this constant political instability, it has one of the highest levels of income inequality of any nation, and ranks in the medium quartile on the Human Development Index. Between 2009 and 2014, about 19% of the population lived below the international poverty line of US$1.90 a day by purchasing power parity.

== Etymology ==
The name &quot;Comoros&quot; derives from the Arabic word &quot;qamar&quot; (&quot;moon&quot;).

== History ==
=== Settlement ===

According to mythology, a jinni dropped a jewel, which formed a great circular inferno. This became the Karthala volcano, which created the island of Ngazidja (Grande Comore). King Solomon is also said to have visited the island accompanied by his queen Bilqis.

The first attested human inhabitants of the Comoro Islands are now thought to have been Austronesian settlers travelling by boat from islands in Southeast Asia. These people arrived in the area no later than the eighth century AD, the date of the earliest known archaeological site, found on Mayotte, although settlement beginning in the first century has been postulated.

Subsequent settlers came from the east coast of Africa, the Arabian Peninsula and the Persian Gulf, the Malay Archipelago, and Madagascar. Bantu-speaking settlers were present on the islands from the beginnings of settlement , probably brought to the islands as slaves.

Development of the Comoros is divided into phases. The earliest reliably recorded phase is the Dembeni phase (eighth to tenth centuries), during which there were several small settlements on each island. From the eleventh to the fifteenth centuries, trade with the island of Madagascar and merchants from the Swahili coast and the Middle East flourished, more villages were founded and existing villages grew. Settlers from the Arabian peninsula, particularly Hadhramaut, arrived during this period.

=== Medieval Comoros ===
According to legend, in 632, upon hearing of Islam, islanders are said to have dispatched an emissary, Mtswa-Mwindza, to Mecca—but by the time he arrived there, the Islamic prophet Muhammad had died. Nonetheless, after a stay in Mecca, he returned to Ngazidja, where he built a mosque in his home town of Ntsaweni, and led the gradual conversion of the islanders to Islam.

In 933, the Comoros was referred to by Omani sailors as the Perfume Islands.

Among the earliest accounts of East Africa, the works of Al-Masudi describe early Islamic trade routes, and how the coast and islands were frequently visited by Muslims including Persian and Arab merchants and sailors in search of coral, ambergris, ivory, tortoiseshell, gold and slaves for the Arabic slave trade. They also brought Islam to the people of the Zanj including the Comoros. As the importance of the Comoros grew along the East African coast, both small and large mosques were constructed. The Comoros are part of the Swahili cultural and economic complex and the islands became a major hub of trade and an important location in a network of trading towns that included Kilwa, in present-day Tanzania, Sofala (an outlet for Zimbabwean gold), in Mozambique, and Mombasa in Kenya.

The Portuguese arrived in the Indian Ocean at the end of the 15th century and the first Portuguese visit to the islands seems to have been that of Vasco da Gama&#x27;s second fleet in 1503. For much of the 16th century the islands provided provisions to the Portuguese fort at Mozambique and although there was no formal attempt by the Portuguese crown to take possession, a number of Portuguese traders settled and married local women.

By the end of the 16th century local rulers on the African mainland were beginning to push back and, with the support of the Omani Sultan Saif bin Sultan they began to defeat the Dutch and the Portuguese. One of his successors, Said bin Sultan, increased Omani Arab influence in the region, moving his administration to nearby Zanzibar, which came under Omani rule. Nevertheless, the Comoros remained independent, and although the three smaller islands were usually politically unified, the largest island, Ngazidja, was divided into a number of autonomous kingdoms (&quot;ntsi&quot;).

The islands were well placed to meet the needs of Europeans, initially supplying the Portuguese in Mozambique, then ships, particularly the English, on the route to India, and, later, slaves to the plantation islands in the Mascarenes.

=== European contact and French colonisation ===


In the last decade of the 18th century, Malagasy warriors, mostly Betsimisaraka and Sakalava, started raiding the Comoros for slaves and the islands were devastated as crops were destroyed and the people were slaughtered, taken into captivity or fled to the African mainland: it is said that by the time the raids finally ended in the second decade of the 19th century only one man remained on Mwali. The islands were repopulated by slaves from the mainland, who were traded to the French in Mayotte and the Mascarenes. On the Comoros, it was estimated in 1865 that as much as 40% of the population consisted of slaves.

France first established colonial rule in the Comoros by taking possession of Mayotte in 1841 when the Sakalava usurper sultan (also known as Tsy Levalo) signed the Treaty of April 1841, which ceded the island to the French authorities. After its annexation, France attempted to convert Mayotte into a sugar plantation colony.

Meanwhile, Ndzwani (or Johanna as it was known to the British) continued to serve as a way station for English merchants sailing to India and the Far East, as well as American whalers, although the British gradually abandoned it following their possession of Mauritius in 1814, and by the time the Suez Canal opened in 1869 there was no longer any significant supply trade at Ndzwani. Local commodities exported by the Comoros were, in addition to slaves, coconuts, timber, cattle and tortoiseshell. British and American settlers, as well as the island&#x27;s sultan, established a plantation-based economy that used about one-third of the land for export crops. In addition to sugar on Mayotte, ylang-ylang and other perfume plants, vanilla, cloves, coffee, cocoa beans, and sisal were introduced.

In 1886, Mwali was placed under French protection by its Sultan Mardjani Abdou Cheikh. That same year, Sultan Said Ali of Bambao, one of the sultanates on Ngazidja, placed the island under French protection in exchange for French support of his claim to the entire island, which he retained until his abdication in 1910. In 1908 the four islands were unified under a single administration (&quot;Colonie de Mayotte et dépendances&quot;) and placed under the authority of the French colonial Governor-General of Madagascar. In 1909, Sultan Said Muhamed of Ndzwani abdicated in favour of French rule and in 1912 the protectorates were abolished and the islands administered as a single colony. Two years later the colony was abolished and the islands became a province of the colony of Madagascar.

Agreement was reached with France in 1973 for the Comoros to become independent in 1978, despite the deputies of Mayotte voting for increased integration with France. A referendum was held on all four of the islands. Three voted for independence by large margins, while Mayotte voted against. On 6 July 1975, however, the Comorian parliament passed a unilateral resolution declaring independence. Ahmed Abdallah proclaimed the independence of the Comorian State (&quot;État comorien&quot;; دولة القمر) and became its first president. France did not recognise the new state until 31 December, and retained control of Mayotte.

=== Independence (1975) ===


The next 30 years were a period of political turmoil. On 3 August 1975, less than one month after independence, president Ahmed Abdallah was removed from office in an armed coup and replaced with United National Front of the Comoros (FNUK) member Said Mohamed Jaffar. Months later, in January 1976, Jaffar was ousted in favour of his Minister of Defence Ali Soilihi.

The population of Mayotte voted against independence from France in three referendums during this period. The first, held on all the islands on 22 December 1974, won 63.8% support for maintaining ties with France on Mayotte; the second, held in February 1976, confirmed that vote with an overwhelming 99.4%, while the third, in April 1976, confirmed that the people of Mayotte wished to remain a French territory. The three remaining islands, ruled by President Soilihi, instituted a number of socialist and isolationist policies that soon strained relations with France. On 13 May 1978, Bob Denard, once again commissioned by the French intelligence service (SDECE), returned to overthrow President Soilihi and reinstate Abdallah with the support of the French, Rhodesian and South African governments. Ali Soilihi was captured and executed a few weeks later.

In contrast to Soilihi, Abdallah&#x27;s presidency was marked by authoritarian rule and increased adherence to traditional Islam and the country was renamed the Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros (&quot;République Fédérale Islamique des Comores&quot;; جمهورية القمر الإتحادية الإسلامية). Bob Denard served as Abdallah&#x27;s first advisor; nicknamed the &quot;Viceroy of the Comoros,&quot; he was sometimes considered the real strongman of the regime. Very close to South Africa, which financed his &quot;presidential guard,&quot; he allowed Paris to circumvent the international embargo on the apartheid regime via Moroni. He also set up from the archipelago a permanent mercenary corps, called upon to intervene at the request of Paris or Pretoria in conflicts in Africa. Abdallah continued as president until 1989 when, fearing a probable coup, he signed a decree ordering the Presidential Guard, led by Bob Denard, to disarm the armed forces. Shortly after the signing of the decree, Abdallah was allegedly shot dead in his office by a disgruntled military officer, though later sources claim an antitank missile was launched into his bedroom and killed him. Although Denard was also injured, it is suspected that Abdallah&#x27;s killer was a soldier under his command.

A few days later, Bob Denard was evacuated to South Africa by French paratroopers. Said Mohamed Djohar, Soilihi&#x27;s older half-brother, then became president, and served until September 1995, when Bob Denard returned and attempted another coup. This time France intervened with paratroopers and forced Denard to surrender. The French removed Djohar to Reunion, and the Paris-backed Mohamed Taki Abdoulkarim became president by election. He led the country from 1996, during a time of labour crises, government suppression, and secessionist conflicts, until his death in November 1998. He was succeeded by Interim President Tadjidine Ben Said Massounde.

The islands of Ndzwani and Mwali declared their independence from the Comoros in 1997, in an attempt to restore French rule. But France rejected their request, leading to bloody confrontations between federal troops and rebels. In April 1999, Colonel Azali Assoumani, Army Chief of Staff, seized power in a bloodless coup, overthrowing the Interim President Massounde, citing weak leadership in the face of the crisis. This was the Comoros&#x27; 18th coup, or attempted coup d&#x27;état since independence in 1975.

Assoumani failed to consolidate power and reestablish control over the islands, which was the subject of international criticism. The African Union, under the auspices of President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, imposed sanctions on Ndzwani to help broker negotiations and effect reconciliation. Under the terms of the Fomboni Accords, signed in December 2001 by the leaders of all three islands, the official name of the country was changed to the Union of the Comoros; the new state was to be highly decentralised and the central union government would devolve most powers to the new island governments, each led by a president. The Union president, although elected by national elections, would be chosen in rotation from each of the islands every five years.

Assoumani stepped down in 2002 to run in the democratic election of the President of the Comoros, which he won. Under ongoing international pressure, as a military ruler who had originally come to power by force, and was not always democratic while in office, Assoumani led the Comoros through constitutional changes that enabled new elections. A &quot;Loi des compétences&quot; law was passed in early 2005 that defines the responsibilities of each governmental body, and is in the process of implementation. The elections in 2006 were won by Ahmed Abdallah Mohamed Sambi, a Sunni Muslim cleric nicknamed the &quot;Ayatollah&quot; for his time spent studying Islam in Iran. Assoumani honoured the election results, thus allowing the first peaceful and democratic exchange of power for the archipelago.

Colonel Mohammed Bacar, a French-trained former gendarme elected President of Ndzwani in 2001, refused to step down at the end of his five-year mandate. He staged a vote in June 2007 to confirm his leadership that was rejected as illegal by the Comoros federal government and the African Union. On 25 March 2008 hundreds of soldiers from the African Union and the Comoros seized rebel-held Ndzwani, generally welcomed by the population: there have been reports of hundreds, if not thousands, of people tortured during Bacar&#x27;s tenure.
Some rebels were killed and injured, but there are no official figures. At least 11 civilians were wounded. Some officials were imprisoned. Bacar fled in a speedboat to Mayotte to seek asylum. Anti-French protests followed in the Comoros (see 2008 invasion of Anjouan). Bacar was eventually granted asylum in Benin.

Since independence from France, the Comoros experienced more than 20 coups or attempted coups.

Following elections in late 2010, former Vice-president Ikililou Dhoinine was inaugurated as president on 26 May 2011. Dhoinine is the first President of the Comoros from the island of Mwali. Following the 2016 elections, Azali Assoumani, from Ngazidja, became president for a third term. In 2018 Assoumani held a referendum on constitutional reform that would permit a president to serve two terms. The amendments passed, although the vote was widely contested and boycotted by the opposition, and in April 2019, and to widespread opposition, Assoumani was re-elected president to serve the first of potentially two five-year terms. In January 2020, the legislative elections in Comoros were dominated by President Azali Assoumani&#x27;s party, the Convention for the Renewal of the Comoros, CRC. It took an overwhelming majority in the parliament.

In 2021, Comoros signed and ratified the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, making it a nuclear-weapon-free state. and in 2023, Comoros was invited as a non-member guest to the G7 summit in Hiroshima. On 18 February 2023 the Comoros assumed the presidency of the African Union.

In January 2024, President Azali Assoumani was re-elected with 63% of the vote in the disputed presidential election. In January 2025, the ruling party of president Azali Assoumani won parliamentary election, taking 28 out of 33 parliamentary seats. The opposition parties rejected the results

== Geography ==


The Comoros is formed by Ngazidja (Grande Comore), Mwali (Mohéli) and Ndzwani (Anjouan), three major islands in the Comoros Archipelago, as well as many minor islets. The islands are officially known by their Comorian language names, though international sources still use their French names (given in parentheses above). The capital and largest city, Moroni, is located on Ngazidja and the most densely populated city is Anjouan. The archipelago is situated in the Indian Ocean, in the Mozambique Channel, between the African coast (nearest to Mozambique and Tanzania) and Madagascar, with no land borders.

At , it is one of the smallest countries in the world. The Comoros also has claim to of territorial seas. The interiors of the islands vary from steep mountains to low hills.

The areas and populations (at the 2017 Census) of the main islands are as follows:
Ngazidja is the largest of the Comoros Archipelago, with an area of 1,024 km2. It is also the most recent island, and therefore has rocky soil. The island&#x27;s two volcanoes, Karthala (active) and La Grille (dormant), and the lack of good harbours are distinctive characteristics of its terrain. Mwali, with its capital at Fomboni, is the smallest of the four major islands. Ndzwani, whose capital is Mutsamudu, has a distinctive triangular shape caused by three mountain chains – Shisiwani, Nioumakele and Jimilime – emanating from a central peak, ().

The islands of the Comoros Archipelago were formed by volcanic activity. Mount Karthala, an active shield volcano located on Ngazidja, is the country&#x27;s highest point, at . It contains the Comoros&#x27; largest patch of disappearing rainforest. Karthala is currently one of the most active volcanoes in the world, with a minor eruption in May 2006, and prior eruptions as recently as April 2005 and 1991. In the 2005 eruption, which lasted from 17 to 19 April, 40,000 citizens were evacuated, and the crater lake in the volcano&#x27;s caldera was destroyed.

The Comoros also lays claim to the &quot;Îles Éparses&quot; or &quot;Îles éparses de l&#x27;océan indien&quot; (Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean) – Glorioso Islands, comprising Grande Glorieuse, Île du Lys, Wreck Rock, South Rock, (three islets) and three unnamed islets – one of France&#x27;s overseas districts. The Glorioso Islands were administered by the colonial Comoros before 1975, and are therefore sometimes considered part of the Comoros Archipelago. Banc du Geyser, a former island in the Comoros Archipelago, now submerged, is geographically located in the &quot;Îles Éparses&quot;, but was annexed by Madagascar in 1976 as an unclaimed territory. The Comoros and France each still view the Banc du Geyser as part of the Glorioso Islands and, thus, part of its particular exclusive economic zone.

=== Climate ===
The climate is generally tropical and mild, and the two major seasons are distinguishable by their raininess. The temperature reaches an average of in March, the hottest month in the rainy season (called [meaning north monsoon], which runs from November to April), and an average low of in the cool, dry season (kusi (meaning south monsoon), which proceeds from May to October). The islands are rarely subject to cyclones.

=== Biodiversity ===

The Comoros constitute an ecoregion in their own right, Comoros forests. It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.69/10, ranking it 33rd globally out of 172 countries.

In December 1952 a specimen of the West Indian Ocean coelacanth fish was re-discovered off the Comoros coast. The 66 million-year-old species was thought to have been long extinct until its first recorded appearance in 1938 off the South African coast. Between 1938 and 1975, 84 specimens were caught and recorded.

===Protected areas===
There are six national parks in the Comoros – Karthala, Coelacanth, and Mitsamiouli Ndroudi on Grande Comore, Mount Ntringui and Shisiwani on Anjouan, and Mohéli National Park on Mohéli. Karthala and Mount Ntrigui national parks cover the highest peaks on the respective islands, and Coelacanth, Mitsamiouli Ndroudi, and Shisiwani are marine national parks that protect the island&#x27;s coastal waters and fringing reefs. Mohéli National Park includes both terrestrial and marine areas.

== Government ==


Politics of the Comoros takes place in a framework of a unitary presidential republic, whereby the President of the Comoros is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. The Constitution of the Union of the Comoros was ratified by referendum on 23 December 2001, and the islands&#x27; constitutions and executives were elected in the following months. It had previously been considered a military dictatorship, and the transfer of power from Azali Assoumani to Ahmed Abdallah Mohamed Sambi in May 2006 was a watershed moment as it was the first peaceful transfer in Comorian history.

Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. The preamble of the constitution guarantees an Islamic inspiration in governance, a commitment to human rights, and several specific enumerated rights, democracy, &quot;a common destiny&quot; for all Comorians. Each of the islands (according to Title II of the Constitution) has a great amount of autonomy in the Union, including having their own constitutions (or Fundamental Law), president, and Parliament. The presidency and Assembly of the Union are distinct from each of the islands&#x27; governments. Up to a referendum on 30.7.2018 (62.7% participation, 92.34% for the amendment according to the Comorian government) the presidency of the Union rotated between the islands. 
=== Legal system ===
The Comorian legal system rests on Islamic law, an inherited French (Napoleonic Code) legal code, and customary law (mila na ntsi). Village elders, kadis or civilian courts settle most disputes. The judiciary is independent of the legislative and the executive. The Supreme Court acts as a Constitutional Council in resolving constitutional questions and supervising presidential elections. As High Court of Justice, the Supreme Court also arbitrates in cases where the government is accused of malpractice. The Supreme Court consists of two members selected by the president, two elected by the Federal Assembly, and one by the council of each island.

=== Political culture ===
Around 80 percent of the central government&#x27;s annual budget is spent on the country&#x27;s complex administrative system which provides for a semi-autonomous government and president for each of the three islands and a rotating presidency for the overarching Union government. A referendum took place on 16 May 2009 to decide whether to cut down the government&#x27;s unwieldy political bureaucracy. 52.7% of those eligible voted, and 93.8% of votes were cast in approval of the referendum. Following the implementation of the changes, each island&#x27;s president became a governor and the ministers became councillors.

=== Foreign relations ===
In November 1975, the Comoros became the 143rd member of the United Nations. The new nation was defined as comprising the entire archipelago, although the citizens of Mayotte chose to become French citizens and keep their island as a French territory.

The Comoros has repeatedly pressed its claim to Mayotte before the United Nations General Assembly, which adopted a series of resolutions under the caption &quot;Question of the Comorian Island of Mayotte&quot;, opining that Mayotte belongs to the Comoros under the principle that the territorial integrity of colonial territories should be preserved upon independence. As a practical matter, however, these resolutions have little effect and there is no foreseeable likelihood that Mayotte will become &quot;de facto&quot; part of the Comoros without its people&#x27;s consent. More recently, the Assembly has maintained this item on its agenda but deferred it from year to year without taking action. Other bodies, including the Organisation of African Unity, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, have similarly questioned French sovereignty over Mayotte. To close the debate and to avoid being integrated by force in the Union of the Comoros, the population of Mayotte overwhelmingly chose to become an overseas department and a region of France in a 2009 referendum. The new status was effective on 31 March 2011 and Mayotte has been recognised as an outermost region by the European Union on 1 January 2014. This decision legally integrates Mayotte in the French Republic.

The Comoros is a member of the United Nations, the African Union, the Arab League, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Indian Ocean Commission and the African Development Bank. On 10 April 2008, the Comoros became the 179th nation to accept the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The Comoros signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. Azali Assoumani, President of the Comoros and Chair of the African Union, attended the 2023 Russia–Africa Summit in Saint Petersburg.

In May 2013 the Union of the Comoros became known for filing a referral to the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) regarding the events of &quot;the 31 May 2010 Israeli raid on the Humanitarian Aid Flotilla bound for [the] Gaza Strip&quot;. In November 2014 the ICC Prosecutor eventually decided that the events did constitute war crimes but did not meet the gravity standards of bringing the case before ICC.

The emigration rate of skilled workers was about 21.2% in 2000.

=== Military ===

The military resources of the Comoros consist of a small standing army and a 500-member police force, as well as a 500-member defence force. A defence treaty with France provides naval resources for protection of territorial waters, training of Comorian military personnel, and air surveillance. France maintains the presence of a few senior officers in the Comoros at government request, as well as a small maritime base and a Foreign Legion Detachment (DLEM) on Mayotte.

Once the new government was installed in May–June 2011, an expert mission from UNREC (Lomé) came to the Comoros and produced guidelines for the elaboration of a national security policy, which were discussed by different actors, notably the national defence authorities and civil society. By the end of the programme in end March 2012, a normative framework agreed upon by all entities involved in SSR will have been established. This will then have to be adopted by Parliament and implemented by the authorities.

=== Human rights ===

Both male and female same-sex sexual acts are illegal in Comoros. Such acts are punished with up to five years&#x27; imprisonment.

== Economy ==

The level of poverty in the Comoros is high, but &quot;judging by the international poverty threshold of $1.9 per person per day, only two out of every ten Comorians could be classified as poor, a rate that places the Comoros ahead of other low-income countries and 30 percentage points ahead of other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.&quot; Poverty declined by about 10% between 2014 and 2018, and living conditions generally improved. Economic inequality remains widespread, with a major gap between rural and urban areas. Remittances through the sizable Comorian diaspora form a substantial part of the country&#x27;s GDP and have contributed to decreases in poverty and increases in living standards.

According to ILO&#x27;s ILOSTAT statistical database, between 1991 and 2019 the unemployment rate as a percent of the total labor force ranged from 4.38% to 4.3%. An October 2005 paper by the Comoros Ministry of Planning and Regional Development, however, reported that &quot;registered unemployment rate is 14.3 percent, distributed very unevenly among and within the islands, but with marked incidence in urban areas.&quot;

In 2019, more than 56% of the labor force was employed in agriculture, with 29% employed in industry and 14% employed in services. The islands&#x27; agricultural sector is based on the export of spices, including vanilla, cinnamon, and cloves, and thus susceptible to price fluctuations in the volatile world commodity market for these goods. The Comoros is the world&#x27;s largest producer of ylang-ylang, a plant whose extracted essential oil is used in the perfume industry; some 80% of the world&#x27;s supply comes from the Comoros.

High population densities, as much as 1000 per square kilometre in the densest agricultural zones, for what is still a mostly rural, agricultural economy may lead to an environmental crisis in the near future, especially considering the high rate of population growth. In 2004 the Comoros&#x27; real GDP growth was a low 1.9% and real GDP per capita continued to decline. These declines are explained by factors including declining investment, drops in consumption, rising inflation, and an increase in trade imbalance due in part to lowered cash crop prices, especially vanilla.

Fiscal policy is constrained by erratic fiscal revenues, a bloated civil service wage bill, and an external debt that is far above the HIPC threshold. Membership in the franc zone, the main anchor of stability, has nevertheless helped contain pressures on domestic prices.

The Comoros has an inadequate transportation system, a young and rapidly increasing population, and few natural resources. The low educational level of the labour force contributes to a subsistence level of economic activity, high unemployment, and a heavy dependence on foreign grants and technical assistance. Agriculture contributes 40% to GDP and provides most of the exports.

The government is struggling to upgrade education and technical training, to privatise commercial and industrial enterprises, to improve health services, to diversify exports, to promote tourism, and to reduce the high population growth rate.

The Comoros is a member of the Organisation for the Harmonisation of Business Law in Africa (OHADA).

== Demographics ==

With about 850,000 residents, the Comoros is one of the least populous countries in the world, but its population density is high, with an average of . In 2001, 34% of the population was considered urban, but the urban population has since grown; in recent years rural population growth has been negative, while overall population growth is still relatively high. In 1958 the population was 183,133.

In 2009, almost half the population of the Comoros was under the age of 15. Major urban centres include Moroni, Mitsamihuli, Foumbouni, Mutsamudu, Domoni, and Fomboni. There are between 200,000 and 350,000 Comorians in France.

=== Ethnic groups ===
The islands of the Comoros are 97.1% ethnically Comorian, which is a mixture of Bantu, Malagasy, and Arab people. Minorities include Makua and Indian (mostly Ismaili). There are recent immigrants of Chinese origin in Grande Comore (especially Moroni). Although most French left after independence in 1975, a small Creole community, descended from settlers from France, Madagascar and Réunion, lives in the Comoros.

=== Languages ===
The most common languages in the Comoros are the Comorian languages, collectively known as &quot;Shikomori&quot;. They are related to Swahili, and the four different variants (Shingazidja, Shimwali, Shindzwani and Shimaore) are spoken on each of the four islands. Arabic and Latin scripts are both used, Arabic being the more widely used, and an official orthography has recently been developed for the Latin script.

Arabic and French are also official languages, along with Comorian. Arabic is widely known as a second language, being the language of Quranic teaching. French is the administrative language and the language of most non-Quranic formal education.

=== Religion ===
Sunni Islam is the dominant religion, followed by as much as 99% of the population. Comoros is the only Muslim-majority country in Southern Africa and one of the three southernmost Muslim-majority territories, along with Mayotte and the Australian territory of Cocos Islands.
A minority of the population of the Comoros are Christian, both Catholic and Protestant denominations are represented, and most Malagasy residents are also Christian. Immigrants from metropolitan France are mostly Catholic.

=== Health ===

There are 15 physicians per 100,000 people. The fertility rate was 4.7 per adult woman in 2004. Life expectancy at birth is 67 for females and 62 for males.

In the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Comoros ranks 81st out of 127 countries with sufficient data, with a score of 18.8, which indicates a moderate level of hunger.

== Education ==

Almost all children attend Quran Religious schools, usually before, although increasingly in tandem with regular schooling. Children are taught about the Qur&#x27;an, and memorise it, and learn the Arabic script.: 

Most parents prefer their children to attend Koran Religious schools before moving on to the French- English based schooling system. Although the state sector is plagued by a lack of resources, and the teachers by unpaid salaries, there are numerous private and community schools of relatively good standard. The national curriculum, apart from a few years during the revolutionary period immediately post-independence, has been very much based on the French system, both because resources are French and most Comorans hope to go on to further education in France, Spain and Italy. There have recently been moves to Comorianise the syllabus and integrate the two systems, the formal and the Quran Religious Schools, into one, thus moving away from the secular educational system inherited from France.

Pre-colonisation education systems in Comoros focused on necessary skills such as agriculture, caring for livestock and completing household tasks. Religious education also taught Islam. The education system underwent a transformation during colonisation in the early 1900s which brought secular education based on the French system. This was mainly for children of the elite. After Comoros gained independence in 1975, the education system changed again. Funding for teachers&#x27; salaries was lost, and many went on strike. Thus, the public education system was not functioning between 1997 and 2001. Since gaining independence, the education system has also undergone a democratisation and options exist for those other than the elite. Enrollment has also grown.

In 2000, 44.2% of children aged 5 to 14 years were attending school. There is a general lack of facilities, equipment, qualified teachers, textbooks and other resources. Salaries for teachers are often so far in arrears that many refuse to work.

Prior to 2000, students seeking a university education had to attend school outside of the country In Europe and Americas especially: France, United Kingdom.:

However, in the early 2000s a university was created in the country. This served to help economic growth and to fight the &quot;flight&quot; of many educated people who were not returning to the islands to work.

Comorian has no native script, but both the Arabic and Latin alphabets are used. In 2004, about 57 percent of the population was literate in the Latin script while more than 90 percent were literate in the Arabic script.

== Culture ==

Traditionally, women on Ndzwani wear red and white patterned garments called &quot;shiromani&quot;, while on Ngazidja and Mwali colourful shawls called &quot;leso&quot; are worn. Many women apply a paste of ground sandalwood and coral called &quot;msindzano&quot; to their faces. Traditional male clothing is a long white shirt known as a &quot;nkandu&quot;, and a bonnet called a &quot;kofia&quot;.

=== Marriage ===
There are two types of marriages in Comoros, the little marriage (known as &quot;Mna daho&quot; on Ngazidja) and the customary marriage (known as &quot;ada&quot; on Ngazidja, &quot;harusi&quot; on the other islands). The little marriage is a simple legal marriage. It is small, intimate, and inexpensive, and the bride&#x27;s dowry is nominal. A man may undertake a number of &quot;Mna daho&quot; marriages in his lifetime, often at the same time, a woman fewer; but both men and women will usually only undertake one &quot;ada&quot;, or grand marriage, and this must generally be within the village. The hallmarks of the grand marriage are dazzling gold jewelry, two weeks of celebration and an enormous bridal dowry. Although the expenses are shared between both families as well as with a wider social circle, an ada wedding on Ngazidja can cost up to €50,000. Many couples take a lifetime to save for their ada, and it is not uncommon for a marriage to be attended by a couple&#x27;s adult children.

The &quot;ada&quot; marriage marks a man&#x27;s transition in the Ngazidja age system from youth to elder. His status in the social hierarchy greatly increases, and he will henceforth be entitled to speak in public and participate in the political process, both in his village and more widely across the island. He will be entitled to display his status by wearing a &quot;mharuma&quot;, a type of shawl, across his shoulders, and he can enter the mosque by the door reserved for elders, and sit at the front. A woman&#x27;s status also changes, although less formally, as she becomes a &quot;mother&quot; and moves into her own house. The system is less formalised on the other islands, but the marriage is nevertheless a significant and costly event across the archipelago. The &quot;ada&quot; is often criticized because of its great expense, but at the same time it is a source of social cohesion and the main reason why migrants in France and elsewhere continue to send money home. Increasingly, marriages are also being taxed for the purposes of village development.

=== Kinship and social structure ===

Comorian society has a bilateral descent system. Lineage membership and inheritance of immovable goods (land, housing) is matrilineal, passed in the maternal line, similar to many Bantu peoples who are also matrilineal, while other goods and patronymics are passed in the male line. However, there are differences between the islands, the matrilineal element being stronger on Ngazidja.

=== Music ===
Twarab music, imported from Zanzibar in the early 20th century, remains the most influential genre on the islands and is popular at &quot;ada&quot; marriages.

=== Media ===
There are two daily national newspapers published in the Comoros, the government-owned &quot;Al-Watwan&quot;, and the privately owned &quot;La Gazette des Comores&quot;, both published in Moroni. There are a number of smaller newsletters published on an irregular basis as well as a variety of news websites. The government-owned ORTC (Office de Radio et Télévision des Comores) provides national radio and television service. There is a TV station run by the Anjouan regional government, and regional governments on the islands of Grande Comore and Anjouan each operate a radio station. There are also a few independent and small community radio stations that operate on the islands of Grande Comore and Mohéli, and these two islands have access to Mayotte Radio and French TV.

== See also ==

*Index of Comoros-related articles
*Outline of the Comoros

== Notes ==

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
*
*This article incorporates text from the Library of Congress Country Studies, which is in the public domain.
== External links ==

*Union des Comores – Official government website
*Tourism website 
*Embassy des Comores – The Federal and Islamic Republic of the Comoros in New York, United States
*Comoros from the BBC News
*Key Development Forecasts for Comoros from International Futures</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="4" end="11" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="28" end="48" title="Comoros" label="Union of the Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107770" start="56" end="76" title="archipelagic country" label="archipelagic country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569281" start="105" end="124" title="Southeastern Africa" label="Southeastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="161" end="179" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="187" end="199" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901" start="233" end="239" title="Moroni, Comoros" label="Moroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="325" end="336" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q668266" start="361" end="373" title="List of sovereign states by date of formation" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="441" end="452" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="478" end="497" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="527" end="540" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="552" end="598" title="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie" label="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="610" end="646" title="Organisation of Islamic Co-operation" label="Organisation of Islamic Co-operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115631" start="656" end="679" title="Indian Ocean Commission" label="Indian Ocean Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q33077" start="723" end="732" title="Shikomori" label="Shikomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="734" end="740" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="745" end="751" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q634740" start="973" end="987" title="Comoro Islands" label="Comoro Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="1010" end="1017" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769884" start="1069" end="1089" title="1974 Comorian independence referendum" label="a referendum in 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="1140" end="1159" title="overseas department" label="overseas department"/>
<link wikidata="Q20380197" start="1172" end="1223" title="List of vetoed United Nations Security Council resolutions" label="vetoed a United Nations Security Council resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="1454" end="1466" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="1467" end="1482" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="1485" end="1490" title="Bantu language" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="1505" end="1516" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1560" end="1580" title="List of sultans on the Comoros#Sultans of Ndzuwani (Anjouan)" label="Sultanate of Anjouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q244978" start="1609" end="1622" title="Grande Comore" label="Grande Comore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1637" end="1652" title="List of sultans on the Comoros#Sultans on Ngazidja (Grande Comore)" label="several sultans"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="1676" end="1698" title="French colonial empire" label="French colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q683667" start="1941" end="1958" title="List of countries by income equality" label="income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1991" end="2006" title="List of countries by Human Development Index#Low human development" label="medium quartile"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="2014" end="2037" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2106" end="2132" title="international poverty line" label="international poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="2153" end="2176" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="2278" end="2282" title="moon" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="2339" end="2348" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465" start="2352" end="2357" title="Jinn" label="jinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="2368" end="2373" title="Gemstone" label="jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q527548" start="2430" end="2446" title="Mount Karthala" label="Karthala volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="2502" end="2514" title="King Solomon" label="King Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159888" start="2580" end="2586" title="Queen of Sheba" label="Bilqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="2677" end="2689" title="Austronesian people" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="2723" end="2748" title="Island Southeast Asia" label="islands in Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="2881" end="2888" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="3049" end="3061" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="3067" end="3084" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="3090" end="3100" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="3102" end="3107" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739014" start="3543" end="3556" title="Swahili coast" label="Swahili coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="3565" end="3576" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517159" start="3694" end="3704" title="Hadhramaut" label="Hadhramaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3805" end="3810" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="3881" end="3886" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="3941" end="3949" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="4173" end="4177" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="4269" end="4278" title="Al-Masudi" label="Al-Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="4373" end="4379" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4391" end="4397" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="4403" end="4407" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="4443" end="4448" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q188774" start="4450" end="4459" title="ambergris" label="ambergris"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="4461" end="4466" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141546" start="4468" end="4481" title="tortoiseshell" label="tortoiseshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="4483" end="4487" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905910" start="4507" end="4525" title="Arabic slave trade" label="Arabic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q146666" start="4572" end="4576" title="Zanj" label="Zanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="4689" end="4695" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739014" start="4743" end="4750" title="Swahili Coast" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741475" start="4895" end="4900" title="Kilwa" label="Kilwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="4949" end="4957" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="4970" end="4980" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q225641" start="4986" end="4993" title="Mombasa" label="Mombasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="4997" end="5002" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="5152" end="5165" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704432" start="5581" end="5596" title="Saif bin Sultan" label="Saif bin Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q506193" start="5671" end="5686" title="Said bin Sultan" label="Said bin Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="5770" end="5778" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="5797" end="5801" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641753" start="5909" end="5928" title="List of sultans on the Comoros" label="politically unified"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641753" start="5989" end="6008" title="List of sultans on the Comoros" label="autonomous kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="6254" end="6264" title="Mascarenes" label="Mascarenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309630" start="6384" end="6397" title="Betsimisaraka people" label="Betsimisaraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355221" start="6402" end="6410" title="Sakalava" label="Sakalava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="6444" end="6449" title="slave" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q124526429" start="6736" end="6757" title="Slavery in the Comoros" label="repopulated by slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q124526429" start="6786" end="6806" title="Comoros slave trade" label="traded to the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355221" start="7042" end="7050" title="Sakalava" label="Sakalava"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053604" start="7526" end="7535" title="British Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="7565" end="7575" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636790" start="8189" end="8195" title="Sultanate of Bambao" label="Bambao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611728" start="8558" end="8588" title="Governor-General of Madagascar" label="Governor-General of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501842" start="8841" end="8861" title="French Madagascar" label="colony of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="8977" end="8984" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769884" start="9033" end="9043" title="1974 Comorian independence referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q401076" start="9642" end="9656" title="Ahmed Abdallah" label="Ahmed Abdallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173401" start="9767" end="9786" title="Said Mohamed Jaffar" label="Said Mohamed Jaffar"/>
<link wikidata="Q878868" start="9874" end="9885" title="Ali Soilihi" label="Ali Soilihi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="9906" end="9913" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769884" start="9998" end="10003" title="1974 Comorian independence referendum" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734844" start="10117" end="10123" title="1976 Mahoran status referendum" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q437248" start="10476" end="10486" title="Bob Denard" label="Bob Denard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628883" start="10548" end="10553" title="SDECE" label="SDECE"/>
<link wikidata="Q109019274" start="10568" end="10577" title="1978 Comorian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="overthrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q672729" start="10919" end="10935" title="Islamic Republic" label="Islamic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q888465" start="12113" end="12132" title="Said Mohamed Djohar" label="Said Mohamed Djohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q888837" start="12415" end="12439" title="Mohamed Taki Abdoulkarim" label="Mohamed Taki Abdoulkarim"/>
<link wikidata="Q888853" start="12656" end="12684" title="Tadjidine Ben Said Massounde" label="Tadjidine Ben Said Massounde"/>
<link wikidata="Q231324" start="12702" end="12709" title="Ndzwani" label="Ndzwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q271797" start="12714" end="12719" title="Mwali" label="Mwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q515602" start="12938" end="12953" title="Azali Assoumani" label="Azali Assoumani"/>
<link wikidata="Q121289734" start="12994" end="13008" title="1999 Comorian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="bloodless coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="13337" end="13350" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q101547" start="13384" end="13395" title="Thabo Mbeki" label="Thabo Mbeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q311129" start="14509" end="14537" title="Ahmed Abdallah Mohamed Sambi" label="Ahmed Abdallah Mohamed Sambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q919913" start="14777" end="14791" title="Mohammed Bacar" label="Mohammed Bacar"/>
<link wikidata="Q660843" start="15551" end="15575" title="2008 invasion of Anjouan" label="2008 invasion of Anjouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57458" start="15777" end="15794" title="Ikililou Dhoinine" label="Ikililou Dhoinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q515602" start="15943" end="15958" title="Azali Assoumani" label="Azali Assoumani"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608214" start="16035" end="16045" title="2018 Comorian constitutional referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60917243" start="16279" end="16289" title="2019 Comorian presidential election" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q83142964" start="16388" end="16397" title="2020 Comorian legislative election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166253" start="16471" end="16512" title="Convention for the Renewal of the Comoros" label="Convention for the Renewal of the Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="16613" end="16657" title="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="16773" end="16782" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="16846" end="16859" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q83965892" start="16970" end="16978" title="2024 Comorian presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q126478386" start="17061" end="17069" title="2025 Comorian parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q244978" start="17200" end="17208" title="Ngazidja" label="Ngazidja"/>
<link wikidata="Q271797" start="17226" end="17231" title="Mwali" label="Mwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q231324" start="17245" end="17252" title="Ndzwani" label="Ndzwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901" start="17527" end="17533" title="Moroni, Comoros" label="Moroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="17662" end="17680" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="17720" end="17730" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="17735" end="17743" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="17749" end="17759" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q527548" start="18220" end="18228" title="Karthala" label="Karthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746954" start="18242" end="18251" title="La Grille" label="La Grille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002823" start="18368" end="18375" title="Fomboni" label="Fomboni"/>
<link wikidata="Q691016" start="18446" end="18455" title="Mutsamudu" label="Mutsamudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110104" start="18526" end="18535" title="Sima, Comoros" label="Shisiwani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18537" end="18547" title="Nioumakele" label="Nioumakele"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199270" start="18552" end="18560" title="Jimilime" label="Jimilime"/>
<link wikidata="Q212057" start="18698" end="18712" title="shield volcano" label="shield volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q204324" start="19104" end="19115" title="volcanic crater lake" label="crater lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="19138" end="19145" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q190571" start="19197" end="19272" title="Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean" label="&amp;quot;Îles Éparses&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;Îles éparses de l&amp;#x27;océan indien&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q236601" start="19315" end="19331" title="Glorioso Islands" label="Glorioso Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q236601" start="19344" end="19360" title="Grande Glorieuse" label="Grande Glorieuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593495" start="19362" end="19372" title="Île du Lys" label="Île du Lys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19374" end="19384" title="Wreck Rock" label="Wreck Rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19386" end="19396" title="South Rock" label="South Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882024" start="19629" end="19643" title="Banc du Geyser" label="Banc du Geyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="19782" end="19792" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="20407" end="20414" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="20466" end="20475" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023679" start="20496" end="20511" title="Comoros forests" label="Comoros forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="20527" end="20559" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q668921" start="20666" end="20694" title="West Indian Ocean coelacanth" label="West Indian Ocean coelacanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q527548" start="21015" end="21023" title="Karthala" label="Karthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q16668918" start="21079" end="21093" title="Mount Ntringui" label="Mount Ntringui"/>
<link wikidata="Q110895677" start="21098" end="21107" title="Shisiwani National Park" label="Shisiwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364399" start="21124" end="21144" title="Mohéli National Park" label="Mohéli National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="21533" end="21540" title="unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="21541" end="21553" title="Presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="21554" end="21562" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236550" start="21576" end="21600" title="President of the Comoros" label="President of the Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="21609" end="21622" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="21627" end="21645" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="21656" end="21674" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="22091" end="22106" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="22139" end="22156" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="22179" end="22189" title="Forms of government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q858700" start="22923" end="22935" title="legal system" label="legal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="22945" end="22956" title="Islamic law" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="22979" end="22994" title="Napoleonic Code" label="Napoleonic Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="23109" end="23118" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="23141" end="23152" title="legislative" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="24304" end="24318" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="24372" end="24383" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="24410" end="24417" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="24563" end="24594" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="25227" end="25256" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="25262" end="25295" title="Movement of Non-Aligned Countries" label="Movement of Non-Aligned Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="25304" end="25339" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="25548" end="25567" title="overseas department" label="overseas department"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="25574" end="25590" title="region of France" label="region of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135832" start="25596" end="25611" title="2009 Mahoran status referendum" label="2009 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q844266" start="25697" end="25713" title="outermost region" label="outermost region"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="25721" end="25735" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="25803" end="25818" title="French Republic" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="25852" end="25866" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="25872" end="25885" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="25891" end="25902" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="25908" end="25918" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="25924" end="25951" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115631" start="25957" end="25980" title="Indian Ocean Commission" label="Indian Ocean Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="25989" end="26013" title="African Development Bank" label="African Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="26083" end="26097" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="26186" end="26230" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q515602" start="26232" end="26247" title="Azali Assoumani" label="Azali Assoumani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="26291" end="26304" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q120967664" start="26319" end="26344" title="2023 Russia–Africa Summit" label="2023 Russia–Africa Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="27320" end="27334" title="French Foreign Legion" label="Foreign Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="27356" end="27363" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039947" start="27924" end="27944" title="LGBT rights in the Comoros" label="same-sex sexual acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="28063" end="28070" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="28120" end="28151" title="Poverty threshold" label="international poverty threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="28291" end="28311" title="low-income countries" label="low-income countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="28365" end="28383" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="28486" end="28505" title="Economic inequality" label="Economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="28574" end="28584" title="Remittance" label="Remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="28768" end="28771" title="ILO" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="28835" end="28852" title="unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="29377" end="29382" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="29395" end="29402" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="29404" end="29412" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26736" start="29418" end="29424" title="cloves" label="cloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922469" start="29491" end="29507" title="commodity market" label="commodity market"/>
<link wikidata="Q220963" start="29577" end="29588" title="ylang-ylang" label="ylang-ylang"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="29614" end="29627" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q131746" start="29643" end="29650" title="perfume" label="perfume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433120" start="30438" end="30442" title="Heavily indebted poor countries" label="HIPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="30808" end="30820" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="30920" end="30923" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029901" start="31296" end="31301" title="OHADA" label="OHADA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901" start="31830" end="31836" title="Moroni, Comoros" label="Moroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109029" start="31838" end="31849" title="Mitsamihuli" label="Mitsamihuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043023" start="31851" end="31860" title="Foumbouni" label="Foumbouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q691016" start="31862" end="31871" title="Mutsamudu" label="Mutsamudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721251" start="31873" end="31879" title="Domoni" label="Domoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002823" start="31885" end="31892" title="Fomboni" label="Fomboni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044333" start="32024" end="32032" title="Demographics of the Comoros" label="Comorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="32056" end="32061" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="32063" end="32071" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="32077" end="32081" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261884" start="32109" end="32114" title="Makua people" label="Makua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060646" start="32119" end="32125" title="South Asian ethnic groups" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="32134" end="32141" title="Ismaili" label="Ismaili"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="32175" end="32182" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q498640" start="32290" end="32296" title="Creole peoples" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q787068" start="32426" end="32450" title="Languages of the Comoros" label="languages in the Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q33077" start="32459" end="32477" title="Comorian languages" label="Comorian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="32544" end="32551" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="32674" end="32680" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="32685" end="32690" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068145" start="32756" end="32776" title="Official script" label="official orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="32828" end="32834" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="32839" end="32845" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="33092" end="33103" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139123" start="33107" end="33128" title="Islam in the Comoros" label="the dominant religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="33313" end="33320" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q36004" start="33353" end="33366" title="Cocos Islands" label="Cocos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682270" start="33368" end="33396" title="Roman Catholicism in the Comoros" label="A minority of the population"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="33582" end="33590" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="33657" end="33671" title="fertility rate" label="fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="33705" end="33720" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="34106" end="34117" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="34150" end="34156" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="34261" end="34267" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="34269" end="34276" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="34725" end="34731" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="34733" end="34738" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="34743" end="34748" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="34859" end="34864" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914" start="34875" end="34882" title="Schools" label="Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="34975" end="34987" title="colonization" label="colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="35151" end="35156" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="35213" end="35225" title="colonisation" label="colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="35290" end="35296" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q194489" start="35909" end="35917" title="Salaries" label="Salaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="36088" end="36094" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="36099" end="36107" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="36120" end="36126" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="36128" end="36142" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q33077" start="36359" end="36367" title="Comorian language" label="Comorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="36403" end="36409" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="36414" end="36419" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="36504" end="36516" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="36565" end="36578" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122366" start="36810" end="36820" title="sandalwood" label="sandalwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="36825" end="36830" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327284" start="36844" end="36853" title="msindzano" label="msindzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277425" start="39154" end="39171" title="bilateral descent" label="bilateral descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="39311" end="39324" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564596" start="39533" end="39539" title="Twarab" label="Twarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="39561" end="39569" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="39736" end="39745" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q12205284" start="39800" end="39809" title="Al-Watwan" label="Al-Watwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901" start="39895" end="39901" title="Moroni, Comoros" label="Moroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q231324" start="40167" end="40174" title="Anjouan" label="Anjouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q244978" start="40239" end="40252" title="Grande Comore" label="Grande Comore"/>
<link wikidata="Q271797" start="40412" end="40418" title="Mohéli" label="Mohéli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018030" start="40504" end="40537" title="Index of Comoros-related articles" label="Index of Comoros-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112234" start="40539" end="40561" title="Outline of the Comoros" label="Outline of the Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="40670" end="40689" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="40723" end="40736" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="40943" end="40951" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="40996" end="41017" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5404" wikidata="Q1789540" url="?curid=5404" title="Critical philosophy">
<text>Critical philosophy () is a movement inaugurated by Immanuel Kant (1724–1804). It is dedicated to the self-examination of reason with the aim of exposing its inherent limitations, that is, to defining the possibilities of knowledge as a prerequisite to advancing to knowledge itself. According to Kant, only after such self-criticism does it become possible to develop metaphysics in a non-dogmatic way.

The three critical texts of the Kantian corpus are the &quot;Critique of Pure Reason&quot;, &quot;Critique of Practical Reason&quot; and &quot;Critique of Judgement&quot;, published between 1781 and 1790 and primarily concerned, respectively, with metaphysics, morality, and teleology.

Contemporaries of Kant such as Johann Georg Hamann and Johann Gottfried Herder rejected the notion of &quot;pure&quot; reason upon which this project depends. They claim that reason depends upon language, which always introduces historical contingencies.

== See also ==
*Critical idealism
*Critical thinking
*Charles Bernard Renouvier
*Léon Brunschvicg

==References==
==Sources==
* &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;: Immanuel Kant</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1789540" start="0" end="19" title="Critical philosophy" label="Critical philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="52" end="65" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="386" end="398" title="dogma" label="non-dogmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q220002" start="466" end="489" title="Critique of Pure Reason" label="Critique of Pure Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q870851" start="503" end="531" title="Critique of Practical Reason" label="Critique of Practical Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056332" start="548" end="569" title="Critique of Judgement" label="Critique of Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="653" end="664" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="666" end="674" title="ethics" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="680" end="689" title="teleology" label="teleology"/>
<link wikidata="Q76499" start="723" end="742" title="Johann Georg Hamann" label="Johann Georg Hamann"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="747" end="770" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Johann Gottfried Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474384" start="964" end="981" title="Critical idealism" label="Critical idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q843894" start="983" end="1000" title="Critical thinking" label="Critical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q220856" start="1002" end="1027" title="Charles Bernard Renouvier" label="Charles Bernard Renouvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q951066" start="1029" end="1045" title="Léon Brunschvicg" label="Léon Brunschvicg"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="1082" end="1117" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5405" wikidata="Q148" url="?curid=5405" title="China">
<text>China, officially the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC), is a country in East Asia. With a population exceeding 1.4 billion, it is the second-most populous country after India, representing 17.4% of the world population. China spans the equivalent of five time zones and borders fourteen countries by land across an area of nearly , making it the third-largest country by land area. The country is divided into 33 province-level divisions: 22 provinces, 5 autonomous regions, 4 municipalities, and 2 semi-autonomous special administrative regions. Beijing is the country&#x27;s capital, while Shanghai is its most populous city by urban area and largest financial center.

China is considered one of the cradles of civilization: the first human inhabitants in the region arrived during the Paleolithic. By the late 2nd millennium BCE, the earliest dynastic states had emerged in the Yellow River basin. The 8th–3rd centuries BCE saw a breakdown in the authority of the Zhou dynasty, accompanied by the emergence of administrative and military techniques, literature, philosophy, and historiography. In 221 BCE, China was unified under an emperor, ushering in more than two millennia of imperial dynasties including the Qin, Han, Tang, Yuan, Ming, and Qing. With the invention of gunpowder and paper, the establishment of the Silk Road, and the building of the Great Wall, Chinese culture flourished and has heavily influenced both its neighbors and lands further afield. However, China began to cede parts of the country in the late 19th century to various European powers by a series of unequal treaties.

After decades of Qing China on the decline, the 1911 Revolution overthrew the Qing dynasty and the monarchy and the Republic of China (ROC) was established the following year. The country under the nascent Beiyang government was unstable and ultimately fragmented during the Warlord Era, which was ended upon the Northern Expedition conducted by the Kuomintang (KMT) to reunify the country. The Chinese Civil War began in 1927, when KMT forces purged members of the rival Chinese Communist Party (CCP), who proceeded to engage in sporadic fighting against the KMT-led Nationalist government. Following the country&#x27;s invasion by the Empire of Japan in 1937, the CCP and KMT formed the Second United Front to fight the Japanese. The Second Sino-Japanese War eventually ended in a Chinese victory; however, the CCP and the KMT resumed their civil war as soon as the war ended. In 1949, the resurgent Communists established control over most of the country, proclaiming the People&#x27;s Republic of China and forcing the Nationalist government to retreat to the island of Taiwan. The country was split, with both sides claiming to be the sole legitimate government of China. Following the implementation of land reforms, further attempts by the PRC to realize communism failed: the Great Leap Forward was largely responsible for the Great Chinese Famine that ended with millions of Chinese people having died, and the subsequent Cultural Revolution was a period of social turmoil and persecution characterized by Maoist populism. Following the Sino-Soviet split, the Shanghai Communiqué in 1972 would precipitate the normalization of relations with the United States. Economic reforms that began in 1978 moved the country away from a socialist planned economy towards an increasingly capitalist market economy, spurring significant economic growth. A movement for increased democracy and liberalization stalled after the Tiananmen Square protests and massacre in 1989.

China is a unitary one-party socialist republic led by the CCP. It is one of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council; the UN representative for China was changed from the ROC to the PRC in 1971. It is a founding member of several multilateral and regional organizations such as the AIIB, the Silk Road Fund, the New Development Bank, and the RCEP. It is a member of the BRICS, the G20, APEC, the SCO, and the East Asia Summit. Making up around one-fifth of the world economy, the Chinese economy is the world&#x27;s largest economy by PPP-adjusted GDP, the second-largest economy by nominal GDP, and the second-wealthiest country, albeit ranking poorly in measures of democracy, human rights and religious freedom. The country has been one of the fastest-growing major economies and is the world&#x27;s largest manufacturer and exporter, as well as the second-largest importer. China is a nuclear-weapon state with the world&#x27;s largest standing army by military personnel and the second-largest defense budget. It is a great power, and has been described as an emerging superpower. China is known for its cuisine and culture, and has 59 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the second-highest number of any country.

== Etymology ==


The word &quot;China&quot; has been used in English since the 16th century; however, it was not used by the Chinese themselves during this period. Its origin has been traced through Portuguese, Malay, and Persian back to the Sanskrit word , used in ancient India. &quot;China&quot; appears in Richard Eden&#x27;s 1555 translation of the 1516 journal of the Portuguese explorer Duarte Barbosa. Barbosa&#x27;s usage was derived from Persian (), which in turn derived from Sanskrit (). The origin of the Sanskrit word is a matter of debate. was first used in early Hindu scripture, including the &quot;Mahabharata&quot; (5th century BCE) and the &quot;Laws of Manu&quot; (2nd century BCE). In 1655, Martino Martini suggested that the word China is derived ultimately from the name of the Qin dynasty (221–206 BCE). Although use in Indian sources precedes this dynasty, this derivation is still given in various sources. Alternative suggestions include the names for Yelang and the Jing or Chu state.

The official name of the modern state is the &quot;People&#x27;s Republic of China&quot; (). The shorter form is &quot;China&quot; (), from (&#x27;central&#x27;) and (&#x27;state&#x27;), a term which developed under the Western Zhou dynasty in reference to its royal demesne. It was used in official documents as an synonym for the state under the Qing. The name &quot;Zhongguo&quot; is also translated as in English. China is sometimes referred to as &quot;mainland China&quot; or &quot;the Mainland&quot; when distinguishing it from the Republic of China or the PRC&#x27;s Special Administrative Regions.

== History ==

=== Prehistory ===
Archaeological evidence suggests that early hominids inhabited China 2.25 million years ago. The hominid fossils of Peking Man, a &quot;Homo erectus&quot; who used fire, have been dated to between 680,000 and 780,000 years ago. The fossilized teeth of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; (dated to 125,000–80,000 years ago) have been discovered in Fuyan Cave. Chinese proto-writing existed in Jiahu around 6600 BCE, at Damaidi around 6000 BCE, Dadiwan from 5800 to 5400 BCE, and Banpo dating from the 5th millennium BCE. Some scholars have suggested that the Jiahu symbols (7th millennium BCE) constituted the earliest Chinese writing system.

=== Early dynastic rule ===

According to traditional Chinese historiography, the Xia dynasty was established during the late 3rd millennium BCE, marking the beginning of the dynastic cycle that was understood to underpin China&#x27;s entire political history. In the modern era, the Xia&#x27;s historicity came under increasing scrutiny, in part due to the earliest known attestation of the Xia being written millennia after the date given for their collapse. In 1958, archaeologists discovered sites belonging to the Erlitou culture that existed during the early Bronze Age; they have since been characterized as the remains of the historical Xia, but this conception is often rejected. The Shang dynasty that traditionally succeeded the Xia is the earliest for which there are both contemporary written records and undisputed archaeological evidence. The Shang ruled much of the Yellow River valley until the 11th century BCE, with the earliest hard evidence dated . The oracle bone script, attested from but generally assumed to be considerably older, represents the oldest known form of written Chinese, and is the direct ancestor of modern Chinese characters.

The Shang were overthrown by the Zhou, who ruled between the 11th and 5th centuries BCE, though the centralized authority of Son of Heaven was slowly eroded by &quot;fengjian&quot; lords. Some principalities eventually emerged from the weakened Zhou and continually waged war with each other during the 300-year Spring and Autumn period. By the time of the Warring States period of the 5th–3rd centuries BCE, there were seven major powerful states left.

=== Imperial China ===
==== Qin and Han ====
The Warring States period ended in 221 BCE after the state of Qin conquered the other six states, reunited China and established the dominant order of autocracy. King Zheng of Qin proclaimed himself the Emperor of the Qin dynasty, becoming the first emperor of a unified China. He enacted Qin&#x27;s legalist reforms, notably the standardization of Chinese characters, measurements, road widths, and currency. His dynasty also conquered the Yue tribes in Guangxi, Guangdong, and Northern Vietnam. The Qin dynasty lasted only fifteen years, falling soon after the First Emperor&#x27;s death.

Following widespread revolts during which the imperial library was burned, the Han dynasty emerged to rule China between 206 BCE and 220 CE, creating a cultural identity among its populace still remembered in the ethnonym of the modern Han Chinese. The Han expanded the empire&#x27;s territory considerably, with military campaigns reaching Central Asia, Mongolia, Korea, and Yunnan, and the recovery of Guangdong and northern Vietnam from Nanyue. Han involvement in Central Asia and Sogdia helped establish the land route of the Silk Road, replacing the earlier path over the Himalayas to India. Han China gradually became the largest economy of the ancient world. Despite the Han&#x27;s initial decentralization and the official abandonment of the Qin philosophy of Legalism in favor of Confucianism, Qin&#x27;s legalist institutions and policies continued to be employed by the Han government and its successors.

==== Three Kingdoms, Jin, Northern and Southern dynasties ====
After the end of the Han dynasty, a period of strife known as Three Kingdoms followed, at the end of which Wei was swiftly overthrown by the Jin dynasty. The Jin fell to civil war upon the ascension of a developmentally disabled emperor; the Five Barbarians then rebelled and ruled northern China as the Sixteen States. The Xianbei unified them as the Northern Wei, whose Emperor Xiaowen reversed his predecessors&#x27; apartheid policies and enforced a drastic sinification on his subjects. In the south, the general Liu Yu secured the abdication of the Jin in favor of the Liu Song. The various successors of these states became known as the Northern and Southern dynasties, with the two areas finally reunited by the Sui in 581.

==== Sui, Tang and Song ====
The Sui restored the Han to power through China, reformed its agriculture, economy and imperial examination system, constructed the Grand Canal, and patronized Buddhism. However, they fell quickly when their conscription for public works and a failed war in northern Korea provoked widespread unrest.
Under the succeeding Tang and Song dynasties, Chinese economy, technology, and culture entered a golden age. The Tang dynasty retained control of the Western Regions and the Silk Road, which brought traders to as far as Mesopotamia and the Horn of Africa, and made the capital Chang&#x27;an a cosmopolitan urban center. However, it was devastated and weakened by the An Lushan rebellion in the 8th century. In 907, the Tang disintegrated completely when the local military governors became ungovernable. The Song dynasty ended the separatist situation in 960, leading to a balance of power between the Song and the Liao dynasty. The Song was the first government in world history to issue paper money and the first Chinese polity to establish a permanent navy which was supported by the developed shipbuilding industry along with the sea trade.

Between the 10th and 11th century CE, the population of China doubled to around 100 million people, mostly because of the expansion of rice cultivation in central and southern China, and the production of abundant food surpluses. The Song dynasty also saw a revival of Confucianism, in response to the growth of Buddhism during the Tang, and a flourishing of philosophy and the arts, as landscape art and porcelain were brought to new levels of complexity. However, the military weakness of the Song army was observed by the Jin dynasty. In 1127, Emperor Emeritus Huizong, Emperor Qinzong of Song and the capital Bianjing were captured during the Jin–Song wars. The remnants of the Song retreated to southern China and reestablished the Song at Jiankang.

===== Yuan =====

The Mongol conquest of China began in 1205 with the campaigns against Western Xia by Genghis Khan, who also invaded Jin territories. In 1271, the Mongol leader Kublai Khan established the Yuan dynasty, which conquered the last remnant of the Song dynasty in 1279. Before the Mongol invasion, the population of Song China was 120 million citizens; this was reduced to 60 million by the time of the census in 1300. A peasant named Zhu Yuanzhang overthrew the Yuan in 1368 and founded the Ming dynasty as the Hongwu Emperor. Under the Ming dynasty, China enjoyed another golden age, developing one of the strongest navies in the world and a rich and prosperous economy amid a flourishing of art and culture. It was during this period that admiral Zheng He led the Ming treasure voyages throughout the Indian Ocean, reaching as far as East Africa.

==== Ming ====
In the early Ming dynasty, China&#x27;s capital was moved from Nanjing to Beijing. With the budding of capitalism, philosophers such as Wang Yangming critiqued and expanded Neo-Confucianism with concepts of individualism and equality of four occupations. The scholar-official stratum became a supporting force of industry and commerce in the tax boycott movements, which, together with the famines and defense against Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598) and Later Jin incursions led to an exhausted treasury. In 1644, Beijing was captured by a coalition of peasant rebel forces led by Li Zicheng. The Chongzhen Emperor committed suicide when the city fell. The Manchu Qing dynasty, then allied with Ming dynasty general Wu Sangui, overthrew Li&#x27;s short-lived Shun dynasty and subsequently seized control of Beijing, which became the new capital of the Qing dynasty.

==== Qing ====

The Qing dynasty, which lasted from 1644 until 1912, was the last imperial dynasty of China. The Ming-Qing transition (1618–1683) cost 25 million lives, but the Qing appeared to have restored China&#x27;s imperial power and inaugurated another flowering of the arts. After the Southern Ming ended, the further conquest of the Dzungar Khanate added Mongolia, Tibet and Xinjiang to the empire. Meanwhile, China&#x27;s population growth resumed and shortly began to accelerate. It is commonly agreed that pre-modern China&#x27;s population experienced two growth spurts, one during the Northern Song period (960–1127), and other during the Qing period (around 1700–1830). By the High Qing era China was possibly the most commercialized country in the world, and imperial China experienced a second commercial revolution by the end of the 18th century. On the other hand, the centralized autocracy was strengthened in part to suppress anti-Qing sentiment with the policy of valuing agriculture and restraining commerce, like the &quot;Haijin&quot; during the early Qing period and ideological control as represented by the literary inquisition, causing some social and technological stagnation.

=== Fall of the Qing dynasty ===

In the mid-19th century, the Opium Wars with Britain and France forced China to pay compensation, open treaty ports, allow extraterritoriality for foreign nationals, and cede Hong Kong to the British under the 1842 Treaty of Nanking, the first of what have been termed as the &quot;unequal treaties&quot;. The First Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895) resulted in Qing China&#x27;s loss of influence in the Korean Peninsula, as well as the cession of Taiwan to Japan. The Qing dynasty also began experiencing internal unrest in which tens of millions of people died, especially in the White Lotus Rebellion, the failed Taiping Rebellion that ravaged southern China in the 1850s and 1860s and the Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) in the northwest. The initial success of the Self-Strengthening Movement of the 1860s was frustrated by a series of military defeats in the 1880s and 1890s.

In the 19th century, the great Chinese diaspora began. Losses due to emigration were added to by conflicts and catastrophes such as the Northern Chinese Famine of 1876–1879, in which between 9 and 13 million people died. The Guangxu Emperor drafted a reform plan in 1898 to establish a modern constitutional monarchy, but these plans were thwarted by the Empress Dowager Cixi. The ill-fated anti-foreign Boxer Rebellion of 1899–1901 further weakened the dynasty. Although Cixi sponsored a program of reforms known as the late Qing reforms, the Xinhai Revolution of 1911–1912 ended the Qing dynasty and established the Republic of China. Puyi, the last Emperor, abdicated in 1912.

=== Establishment of the Republic and World War II ===

On 1 January 1912, the Republic of China was established, and Sun Yat-sen of the Kuomintang (KMT) was proclaimed provisional president. In March 1912, the presidency was given to Yuan Shikai, a former Qing general who in 1915 proclaimed himself Emperor of China. In the face of popular condemnation and opposition from his own Beiyang Army, he was forced to abdicate and re-establish the republic in 1916. After Yuan Shikai&#x27;s death in 1916, China was politically fragmented. Its Beijing-based government was internationally recognized but virtually powerless; regional warlords controlled most of its territory. During this period, China participated in World War I and saw a far-reaching popular uprising (the May Fourth Movement).
In the late 1920s, the Kuomintang under Chiang Kai-shek was able to reunify the country under its own control with a series of deft military and political maneuverings known collectively as the Northern Expedition. The Kuomintang moved the nation&#x27;s capital to Nanjing and implemented &quot;political tutelage&quot;, an intermediate stage of political development outlined in Sun Yat-sen&#x27;s Three Principles of the People program for transforming China into a modern democratic state. The Kuomintang briefly allied with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) during the Northern Expedition, though the alliance broke down in 1927 after Chiang violently suppressed the CCP and other leftists in Shanghai, marking the beginning of the Chinese Civil War. The CCP declared areas of the country as the Chinese Soviet Republic (Jiangxi Soviet) in November 1931 in Ruijin, Jiangxi. The Jiangxi Soviet was wiped out by the KMT armies in 1934, leading the CCP to initiate the Long March and relocate to Yan&#x27;an in Shaanxi. It would be the base of the communists before major combat in the Chinese Civil War ended in 1949.

In 1931, Japan invaded and occupied Manchuria. Japan invaded other parts of China in 1937, precipitating the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945), a theater of World War II. The war forced an uneasy alliance between the Kuomintang and the CCP. Japanese forces committed numerous war atrocities against the civilian population; as many as 20 million Chinese civilians died. An estimated 40,000 to 300,000 Chinese were massacred in Nanjing alone during the Japanese occupation. China, along with the UK, the United States, and the Soviet Union, were recognized as the Allied &quot;Big Four&quot; in the Declaration by United Nations. Along with the other three great powers, China was one of the four major Allies of World War II, and was later considered one of the primary victors in the war. After the surrender of Japan in 1945, Taiwan, along with the Penghu, were handed over to Chinese control; however, the validity of this handover is controversial.

=== People&#x27;s Republic ===

China emerged victorious but war-ravaged and financially drained. The continued distrust between the Kuomintang and the Communists led to the resumption of civil war. Constitutional rule was established in 1947, but because of the ongoing unrest, many provisions of the ROC constitution were never implemented in mainland China. Afterwards, the CCP took control of most of mainland China, and the ROC government retreated offshore to Taiwan.

On 1 October 1949, CCP Chairman Mao Zedong formally proclaimed the People&#x27;s Republic of China in Tiananmen Square, Beijing. In 1950, the PRC captured Hainan from the ROC and annexed Tibet. However, remaining Kuomintang forces continued to wage an insurgency in western China throughout the 1950s. The CCP consolidated its popularity among the peasants through the Land Reform Movement, which included the state-tolerated executions of between 1 and 2 million landlords by peasants and former tenants. Though the PRC initially allied closely with the Soviet Union, the relations between the two communist nations gradually deteriorated, leading China to develop an independent industrial system and its own nuclear weapons.

The Chinese population increased from 550 million in 1950 to 900 million in 1974. However, the Great Leap Forward, an idealistic massive industrialization project, resulted in an estimated 15 to 55 million deaths between 1959 and 1961, mostly from starvation. In 1964, China detonated its first atomic bomb. In 1966, Mao and his allies launched the Cultural Revolution, sparking a decade of political recrimination and social upheaval that lasted until Mao&#x27;s death in 1976. In October 1971, the PRC replaced the ROC in the United Nations, and took its seat as a permanent member of the Security Council.

=== Reforms and contemporary history ===

After Mao&#x27;s death, the Gang of Four were arrested by Hua Guofeng and held responsible for the Cultural Revolution. The Cultural Revolution was rebuked, with millions rehabilitated. Deng Xiaoping took power in 1978, and instituted large-scale political and economic reforms, together with the &quot;Eight Elders&quot;, most senior and influential members of the party. The government loosened its control and the communes were gradually disbanded. Agricultural collectivization was dismantled and farmlands privatized. While foreign trade became a major focus, special economic zones (SEZs) were created. Inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs) were restructured and some closed. This marked China&#x27;s transition away from planned economy. China adopted its current constitution on 4 December 1982.

In 1989, there were protests such those in Tiananmen Square, and then throughout the entire nation. Zhao Ziyang was put under house arrest for his sympathies to the protests and was replaced by Jiang Zemin. Jiang continued economic reforms, closing many SOEs and trimming down &quot;iron rice bowl&quot; (life-tenure positions). China&#x27;s economy grew sevenfold during this time. British Hong Kong and Portuguese Macau returned to China in 1997 and 1999, respectively, as special administrative regions under the principle of one country, two systems. The country joined the World Trade Organization in 2001.At the 16th CCP National Congress in 2002, Hu Jintao succeeded Jiang as the general secretary. Under Hu, China maintained its high rate of economic growth, overtaking the United Kingdom, France, Germany and Japan to become the world&#x27;s second-largest economy. However, the growth also severely impacted the country&#x27;s resources and environment, and caused major social displacement. Xi Jinping succeeded Hu as paramount leader at the 18th CCP National Congress in 2012. Shortly after his ascension to power, Xi launched a vast anti-corruption crackdown, that prosecuted more than 2 million officials by 2022. During his tenure, Xi has consolidated power unseen since the initiation of economic and political reforms.

== Geography ==
China&#x27;s landscape is vast and diverse, ranging from the Gobi and Taklamakan Deserts in the arid north to the subtropical forests in the wetter south. The Himalaya, Karakoram, Pamir and Tian Shan mountain ranges separate China from much of South and Central Asia. The Yangtze and Yellow Rivers, the third- and sixth-longest in the world, respectively, run from the Tibetan Plateau to the densely populated eastern seaboard. China&#x27;s coastline along the Pacific Ocean is long and is bounded by the Bohai, Yellow, East China and South China seas. China connects through the Kazakh border to the Eurasian Steppe.

The territory of China lies between latitudes 18° and 54° N, and longitudes 73° and 135° E. The geographical center of China is marked by the Center of the Country Monument at . China&#x27;s landscapes vary significantly across its vast territory. In the east, along the shores of the Yellow Sea and the East China Sea, there are extensive and densely populated alluvial plains, while on the edges of the Inner Mongolian plateau in the north, broad grasslands predominate. Southern China is dominated by hills and low mountain ranges, while the central-east hosts the deltas of China&#x27;s two major rivers, the Yellow River and the Yangtze River. Other major rivers include the Xi, Mekong, Brahmaputra and Amur. To the west sit major mountain ranges, most notably the Himalayas. High plateaus feature among the more arid landscapes of the north, such as the Taklamakan and the Gobi Desert. The world&#x27;s highest point, Mount Everest (8,848 m), lies on the Sino-Nepalese border. The country&#x27;s lowest point, and the world&#x27;s third-lowest, is the dried lake bed of Ayding Lake (−154 m) in the Turpan Depression.

=== Climate ===


China&#x27;s climate is mainly dominated by dry seasons and wet monsoons, which lead to pronounced temperature differences between winter and summer. In the winter, northern winds coming from high-latitude areas are cold and dry; in summer, southern winds from coastal areas at lower latitudes are warm and moist.

A major environmental issue in China is the continued expansion of its deserts, particularly the Gobi Desert. Although barrier tree lines planted since the 1970s have reduced the frequency of sandstorms, prolonged drought and poor agricultural practices have resulted in dust storms plaguing northern China each spring, which then spread to other parts of East Asia, including Japan and Korea. Water quality, erosion, and pollution control have become important issues in China&#x27;s relations with other countries. Melting glaciers in the Himalayas could potentially lead to water shortages for hundreds of millions of people. According to academics, in order to limit climate change in China to electricity generation from coal in China without carbon capture must be phased out by 2045. With current policies, the GHG emissions of China will probably peak in 2025, and by 2030 they will return to 2022 levels. However, such pathway still leads to three-degree temperature rise.

Official government statistics about Chinese agricultural productivity are considered unreliable, due to exaggeration of production at subsidiary government levels. Much of China has a climate very suitable for agriculture and the country has been the world&#x27;s largest producer of rice, wheat, tomatoes, eggplant, grapes, watermelon, spinach, and many other crops. In 2021, 12 percent of global permanent meadows and pastures belonged to China, as well as 8% of global cropland.

=== Biodiversity ===

China is one of 17 megadiverse countries, lying in two of the world&#x27;s major biogeographic realms: the Palearctic and the Indomalayan. By one measure, China has over 34,687 species of animals and vascular plants, making it the third-most biodiverse country in the world, after Brazil and Colombia. The country is a party to the Convention on Biological Diversity; its National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan was received by the convention in 2010.

China is home to at least 551 species of mammals (the third-highest in the world), 1,221 species of birds (eighth), 424 species of reptiles (seventh) and 333 species of amphibians (seventh). Wildlife in China shares habitat with, and bears acute pressure from, one of the world&#x27;s largest population of humans. At least 840 animal species are threatened, vulnerable or in danger of local extinction, due mainly to human activity such as habitat destruction, pollution and poaching for food, fur and traditional Chinese medicine. Endangered wildlife is protected by law, and , the country has over 2,349 nature reserves, covering a total area of 149.95 million hectares, 15 percent of China&#x27;s total land area. Most wild animals have been eliminated from the core agricultural regions of east and central China, but they have fared better in the mountainous south and west. The Baiji was confirmed extinct on 12 December 2006.

China has over 32,000 species of vascular plants, and is home to a variety of forest types. Cold coniferous forests predominate in the north of the country, supporting animal species such as moose and Asian black bear, along with over 120 bird species. The understory of moist conifer forests may contain thickets of bamboo. In higher montane stands of juniper and yew, the bamboo is replaced by rhododendrons. Subtropical forests, which are predominate in central and southern China, support a high density of plant species including numerous rare endemics. Tropical and seasonal rainforests, though confined to Yunnan and Hainan, contain a quarter of all the animal and plant species found in China. China has over 10,000 recorded species of fungi.

=== Environment ===


In the early 2000s, China has suffered from environmental deterioration and pollution due to its rapid pace of industrialization. Regulations such as the 1979 Environmental Protection Law are fairly stringent, though they are poorly enforced, frequently disregarded in favor of rapid economic development. China has the second-highest death toll because of air pollution, after India, with approximately 1 million deaths. Although China ranks as the highest CO emitting country, it only emits 8 tons of CO per capita, significantly lower than developed countries such as the United States (16.1), Australia (16.8) and South Korea (13.6). Greenhouse gas emissions by China are the world&#x27;s largest. The country has significant water pollution problems; only 89.4% of China&#x27;s national surface water was graded suitable for human consumption by the Ministry of Ecology and Environment in 2023.

China has prioritized clamping down on pollution, bringing a significant decrease in air pollution in the 2010s. In 2020, the Chinese government announced its aims for the country to reach its peak emissions levels before 2030, and achieve carbon neutrality by 2060 in line with the Paris Agreement, which, according to Climate Action Tracker, would lower the expected rise in global temperature by 0.2–0.3 degrees – &quot;the biggest single reduction ever estimated by the Climate Action Tracker&quot;.

China is the world&#x27;s leading investor in renewable energy and its commercialization, with $546 billion invested in 2022; it is a major manufacturer of renewable energy technologies and invests heavily in local-scale renewable energy projects. Long heavily relying on non-renewable energy sources such as coal, China&#x27;s adaptation of renewable energy has increased significantly in recent years, with their share increasing from 26.3 percent in 2016 to 31.9 percent in 2022. In 2023, 60.5% of China&#x27;s electricity came from coal (largest producer in the world), 13.2% from hydroelectric power (largest), 9.4% from wind (largest), 6.2% from solar energy (largest), 4.6% from nuclear energy (second-largest), 3.3% from natural gas (fifth-largest), and 2.2% from bioenergy (largest); in total, 31% of China&#x27;s energy came from renewable energy sources. Despite its emphasis on renewables, China remains deeply connected to global oil markets and next to India, has been the largest importer of Russian crude oil in 2022.

According to China&#x27;s government, the forest coverage of the country grew from 10% of the overall territory in 1949 to 25% in 2024.

=== Political geography ===
China is the third-largest country in the world by land area after Russia, and the third- or fourth-largest country in the world by total area. China&#x27;s total area is generally stated as being approximately . Specific area figures range from according to the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, to according to the &quot;UN Demographic Yearbook&quot;, and &quot;The World Factbook&quot;.China has the longest combined land border in the world, measuring and its coastline covers approximately from the mouth of the Yalu River (Amnok River) to the Gulf of Tonkin. China borders 14 nations and covers the bulk of East Asia, bordering Vietnam, Laos, and Myanmar in Southeast Asia; India, Bhutan, Nepal, Pakistan and Afghanistan in South Asia; Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan in Central Asia; and Russia, Mongolia, and North Korea in Inner Asia and Northeast Asia. It is narrowly separated from Bangladesh and Thailand to the southwest and south, and has several maritime neighbors such as Japan, Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia.

China has resolved its land borders with 12 out of 14 neighboring countries, having pursued substantial compromises in most of them. China currently has a disputed land border with India and Bhutan. China is additionally involved in maritime disputes with multiple countries over territory in the East and South China Seas, such as the Senkaku Islands and the entirety of South China Sea Islands.

== Government and politics ==


The People&#x27;s Republic of China is a one-party state governed by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). The CCP is officially guided by socialism with Chinese characteristics, which is Marxism adapted to Chinese circumstances. The Chinese constitution states that the PRC &quot;is a socialist state governed by a people&#x27;s democratic dictatorship that is led by the working class and based on an alliance of workers and peasants&quot;, that the state institutions &quot;shall practice the principle of democratic centralism&quot;, and that &quot;the defining feature of socialism with Chinese characteristics is the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party.&quot;

The PRC officially terms itself as a democracy, using terms such as &quot;socialist consultative democracy&quot;, and &quot;whole-process people&#x27;s democracy&quot;. However, the country is commonly described as an authoritarian one-party state and a dictatorship, with among the heaviest restrictions worldwide in many areas, most notably against freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, free formation of social organizations, freedom of religion and free access to the Internet. China has consistently been ranked amongst the lowest as an &quot;authoritarian regime&quot; by the Economist Intelligence Unit&#x27;s Democracy Index, ranking at 145th out of 167 countries in 2024. Other sources suggest that terming China as &quot;authoritarian&quot; does not sufficiently account for the multiple consultation mechanisms that exist in Chinese government.

=== Chinese Communist Party ===

According to the CCP constitution, its highest body is the National Congress held every five years. The National Congress elects the Central Committee, who then elects the party&#x27;s Politburo, Politburo Standing Committee and the general secretary (party leader), the top leadership of the country. The general secretary holds ultimate power and authority over party and state and serves as the informal paramount leader. The current general secretary is Xi Jinping, who took office on 15 November 2012. At the local level, the secretary of the CCP committee of a subdivision outranks the local government level; CCP committee secretary of a provincial division outranks the governor while the CCP committee secretary of a city outranks the mayor.

=== Government ===

The government in China is under the sole control of the CCP. The CCP controls appointments in government bodies, with most senior government officials being CCP members.

The National People&#x27;s Congress (NPC), with nearly 3,000-members, is constitutionally the &quot;highest organ of state power&quot;, though it has been also described as a &quot;rubber stamp&quot; body. The NPC meets annually, while the NPC Standing Committee, around 150 members elected from NPC delegates, meets every couple of months. Elections are indirect and not pluralistic, with nominations at all levels being controlled by the CCP. The NPC is dominated by the CCP, with another eight minor parties having nominal representation under the condition of upholding CCP leadership.

The president is elected by the NPC. The presidency is the ceremonial state representative, but not the constitutional head of state. The incumbent president is Xi Jinping, who is also the general secretary of the CCP and the chairman of the Central Military Commission, making him China&#x27;s paramount leader and supreme commander of the Armed Forces. The premier is the head of government, with Li Qiang being the incumbent. The premier is officially nominated by the president and then elected by the NPC, and has generally been either the second- or third-ranking member of the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC). The premier presides over the State Council, China&#x27;s cabinet, composed of four vice premiers, state councilors, and the heads of ministries and commissions. The Chinese People&#x27;s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) is a political advisory body that is critical in China&#x27;s &quot;united front&quot; system, which aims to gather non-CCP voices to support the CCP. Similar to the people&#x27;s congresses, CPPCC&#x27;s exist at various division, with the National Committee of the CPPCC being chaired by Wang Huning, fourth-ranking member of the PSC.

The governance of China is characterized by a high degree of political centralization but significant economic decentralization. Policy instruments or processes are often tested locally before being applied more widely, resulting in a policy that involves experimentation and feedback. Generally, central government leadership refrains from drafting specific policies, instead using the informal networks and site visits to affirm or suggest changes to the direction of local policy experiments or pilot programs. The typical approach is that central government leadership begins drafting formal policies, law, or regulations after policy has been developed at local levels.

=== Administrative divisions ===
The PRC is constitutionally a unitary state divided into 23 provinces, five autonomous regions (each with a designated minority group), and four direct-administered municipalities—collectively referred to as &quot;mainland China&quot;—as well as the special administrative regions (SARs) of Hong Kong and Macau. The PRC regards the island of Taiwan as its Taiwan Province, Kinmen and Matsu as a part of Fujian Province and islands the ROC controls in the South China Sea as a part of Hainan Province and Guangdong Province, although all these territories are governed by the Republic of China (ROC). Geographically, all 31 provincial divisions of mainland China can be grouped into six regions: North China, East China, Southwestern China, Northwestern China, South Central China, and Northeast China.


=== Foreign relations ===

The PRC has diplomatic relations with 179 United Nation members states and maintains embassies in 174. , China has one of the largest diplomatic networks of any country in the world. In 1971, the PRC replaced the Republic of China (ROC) as the sole representative of China in the United Nations and as one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. It is a member of intergovernmental organizations including the G20, the SCO, the BRICS, the East Asia Summit, and the APEC. China was also a former member and leader of the Non-Aligned Movement, and still considers itself an advocate for developing countries.

The PRC officially maintains the one-China principle, which holds the view that there is only one sovereign state in the name of China, represented by the PRC, and that Taiwan is part of that China. The unique status of Taiwan has led to countries recognizing the PRC to maintain unique &quot;one-China policies&quot; that differ from each other; some countries explicitly recognize the PRC&#x27;s claim over Taiwan, while others, including the U.S. and Japan, only &quot;acknowledge&quot; the claim. Chinese officials have protested on numerous occasions when foreign countries have made diplomatic overtures to Taiwan, especially in the matter of armament sales. Most countries have switched recognition from the ROC to the PRC since the latter replaced the former in the UN in 1971.Much of current Chinese foreign policy is reportedly based on Premier Zhou Enlai&#x27;s Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and is also driven by the concept of &quot;harmony without uniformity&quot;, which encourages diplomatic relations between states despite ideological differences. This policy may have led China to support or maintain close ties with states that are regarded as dangerous and repressive by Western nations, such as Sudan, North Korea and Iran. China&#x27;s close relationship with Myanmar has involved support for its ruling governments as well as for its ethnic rebel groups, including the Arakan Army. China has a close political, economic and military relationship with Russia, and the two states often vote in unison in the UN Security Council. China&#x27;s relationship with the United States is complex, and includes deep trade ties but significant political differences.

Since the early 2000s, China has followed a policy of engaging with African nations for trade and bilateral co-operation. It maintains extensive and highly diversified trade links with the European Union, and became its largest trading partner for goods. China is increasing its influence in Central Asia and South Pacific. The country has strong trade ties with ASEAN countries and major South American economies, and is the largest trading partner of Brazil, Chile, Peru, Uruguay, Argentina, and several others.

In 2013, China initiated the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), a large global infrastructure building initiative with funding on the order of $50–100 billion per year. BRI could be one of the largest development plans in modern history. It expanded significantly over the next six years and, , included 138 countries and 30 international organizations. In addition to intensifying foreign policy relations, the focus is particularly on building efficient transport routes, especially the maritime Silk Road with its connections to East Africa and Europe. However many loans made under the program are unsustainable and China has faced a number of calls for debt relief from debtor nations.

=== Military ===

The People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA) is considered one of the world&#x27;s most powerful militaries and has rapidly modernized in the recent decades. It has also been accused of technology theft by some countries. Since 2024, it consists of four services: the Ground Force (PLAGF), the Navy (PLAN), the Air Force (PLAAF) and the Rocket Force (PLARF). It also has four independent arms: the Aerospace Force, the Cyberspace Force, the Information Support Force, and the Joint Logistics Support Force, the first three of which were split from the disbanded Strategic Support Force (PLASSF). Its nearly 2.2 million active duty personnel is the largest in the world. The PLA holds the world&#x27;s third-largest stockpile of nuclear weapons, and the world&#x27;s second-largest navy by tonnage. China&#x27;s official military budget for 2023 totalled US$224 billion (1.55 trillion Yuan), the second-largest in the world, though SIPRI estimates that its real expenditure that year was US$296 billion, making up 12% of global military spending and accounting for 1.7% of the country&#x27;s GDP. According to SIPRI, its military spending from 2012 to 2021 averaged US$215 billion per year or 1.7 per cent of GDP, behind only the United States at US$734 billion per year or 3.6 per cent of GDP. The PLA is commanded by the Central Military Commission (CMC) of the party and the state; though officially two separate organizations, the two CMCs have identical membership except during leadership transition periods and effectively function as one organization. The chairman of the CMC is the commander-in-chief of the PLA.

=== Sociopolitical issues and human rights ===

The situation of human rights in China has attracted significant criticism from foreign governments, foreign press agencies, and non-governmental organizations, alleging widespread civil rights violations such as detention without trial, forced confessions, torture, restrictions of fundamental rights, and excessive use of the death penalty. Since its inception, Freedom House has ranked China as &quot;not free&quot; in its &quot;Freedom in the World&quot; survey, while Amnesty International has documented significant human rights abuses. The Chinese constitution states that the &quot;fundamental rights&quot; of citizens include freedom of speech, freedom of the press, the right to a fair trial, freedom of religion, universal suffrage, and property rights. However, in practice, these provisions do not afford significant protection against criminal prosecution by the state. China has limited protections regarding LGBT rights.

Although some criticisms of government policies and the ruling CCP are tolerated, censorship of political speech and information are amongst the harshest in the world and routinely used to prevent collective action. China also has the most comprehensive and sophisticated Internet censorship regime in the world, with numerous websites being blocked. The government suppresses popular protests and demonstrations that it considers a potential threat to &quot;social stability&quot;. China additionally uses a massive espionage network of cameras, facial recognition software, sensors, and surveillance of personal technology as a means of social control of persons living in the country.
China is regularly accused of large-scale repression and human rights abuses in Tibet and Xinjiang, where significant numbers of ethnic minorities reside, including violent police crackdowns and religious suppression. Since 2017, the Chinese government has been engaged in a harsh crackdown in Xinjiang, with around one million Uyghurs and other ethnic and religion minorities being detained in internment camps aimed at changing the political thinking of detainees, their identities, and their religious beliefs. According to Western reports, political indoctrination, torture, physical and psychological abuse, forced sterilization, sexual abuse, and forced labor are common in these facilities. According to a 2020 Foreign Policy report, China&#x27;s treatment of Uyghurs meets the UN definition of genocide, while a separate UN Human Rights Office report said they could potentially meet the definitions for crimes against humanity. The Chinese authorities have also cracked down on dissent in Hong Kong, especially after the passage of a national security law in 2020.
In 2017 and 2020, the Pew Research Center ranked the severity of Chinese government restrictions on religion as being among the world&#x27;s highest, despite ranking religious-related social hostilities in China as low in severity. The Global Slavery Index estimated that in 2016 more than 3.8 million people (0.25% of the population) were living in &quot;conditions of modern slavery&quot;, including victims of human trafficking, forced labor, forced marriage, child labor, and state-imposed forced labor. The state-imposed re-education through labor (&quot;laojiao&quot;) system was formally abolished in 2013, but it is not clear to what extent its practices have stopped. The much larger reform through labor (&quot;laogai&quot;) system includes labor prison factories, detention centers, and re-education camps; the Laogai Research Foundation has estimated in June 2008 that there were nearly 1,422 of these facilities, though it cautioned that this number was likely an underestimate.

=== Public views of government ===
Political concerns in China include the growing gap between rich and poor and government corruption. Nonetheless, international surveys show the Chinese public have a high level of satisfaction with their government. These views are generally attributed to the material comforts and security available to large segments of the Chinese populace as well as the government&#x27;s attentiveness and responsiveness. According to the World Values Survey (2022), 91% of Chinese respondents have significant confidence in their government. A Harvard University survey published in July 2020 found that citizen satisfaction with the government had increased since 2003, also rating China&#x27;s government as more effective and capable than ever in the survey&#x27;s history.

== Economy ==

China has the world&#x27;s second-largest economy in terms of nominal GDP, and the world&#x27;s largest in terms of purchasing power parity (PPP). , China accounts for around 18% of the global economy by nominal GDP. China is one of the world&#x27;s fastest-growing major economies, with its economic growth having been almost consistently above 6 percent since the introduction of economic reforms in 1978. According to the World Bank, China&#x27;s GDP grew from $150 billion in 1978 to $17.96 trillion by 2022. It ranks 64th by nominal GDP per capita, making it an upper-middle income country. Of the world&#x27;s 500 largest companies, 135 are headquartered in China. As of at least 2024, China has the world&#x27;s second-largest equity markets and futures markets, as well as the third-largest bond market.

China was one of the world&#x27;s foremost economic powers throughout the arc of East Asian and global history. The country had one of the largest economies in the world for most of the past two millennia, during which it has seen cycles of prosperity and decline. Since economic reforms began in 1978, China has developed into a highly diversified economy and one of the most consequential players in international trade. Major sectors of competitive strength include manufacturing, retail, mining, steel, textiles, automobiles, energy generation, green energy, banking, electronics, telecommunications, real estate, e-commerce, and tourism. China has three out of the ten largest stock exchanges in the world—Shanghai, Hong Kong and Shenzhen—that together have a market capitalization of over $15.9 trillion, . China has three out of the world&#x27;s ten most competitive financial centers according to the 2024 Global Financial Centres Index—Shanghai, Hong Kong, and Shenzhen.

Modern-day China is often described as an example of state capitalism or party-state capitalism. The state dominates in strategic &quot;pillar&quot; sectors such as energy production and heavy industries, but private enterprise has expanded enormously, with around 30 million private businesses recorded in 2008. According to official statistics, privately owned companies constitute more than 60% of China&#x27;s GDP.

China has been the world&#x27;s largest manufacturing nation since 2010, after overtaking the U.S., which had been the largest for the previous hundred years. China has also been the second-largest in high-tech manufacturing country since 2012, according to US National Science Foundation. China is the second-largest retail market after the United States. China leads the world in e-commerce, accounting for over 37% of the global market share in 2021. China is the world&#x27;s leader in electric vehicle consumption and production, manufacturing and buying half of all the plug-in electric cars (BEV and PHEV) in the world . China is also the leading producer of batteries for electric vehicles as well as several key raw materials for batteries.

=== Tourism ===
China received 65.7 million international visitors in 2019, and in 2018 was the fourth-most-visited country in the world. It also experiences an enormous volume of domestic tourism; Chinese tourists made an estimated 6 billion travels within the country in 2019. China hosts the world&#x27;s second-largest number of World Heritage Sites (56) after Italy, and is one of the most popular tourist destinations (first in the Asia-Pacific).

=== Wealth ===

China accounted for 18.6% of the world&#x27;s total wealth in 2022, second highest in the world after the U.S. China brought more people out of extreme poverty than any other country in history—between 1978 and 2018, China reduced extreme poverty by 800 million. From 1990 to 2018, the proportion of the Chinese population living with an income of less than $1.90 per day (2011 PPP) decreased from 66.3% to 0.3%, the share living with an income of less than $3.20 per day from 90.0% to 2.9%, and the share living with an income of less than $5.50 per day decreased from 98.3% to 17.0%.

From 1978 to 2018, the average standard of living multiplied by a factor of twenty-six. Wages in China have grown significantly in the last 40 years—real (inflation-adjusted) wages grew seven-fold from 1978 to 2007. Per capita incomes have also risen significantly – when the PRC was founded in 1949, per capita income in China was one-fifth of the world average; per capita incomes now equal the world average itself. China&#x27;s development is highly uneven; its major cities and coastal areas are far more prosperous than its rural and interior regions. It has a high level of economic inequality, which has increased quickly since the economic reforms. Income inequality decreased in the 2010s, and China&#x27;s Gini coefficient was 0.357 in 2021.

In March 2024, China ranked second in the world, after the U.S., in total number of billionaires and total number of millionaires, with 473 Chinese billionaires and 6.2 million millionaires. In 2019, China overtook the U.S. as the home to the highest number of people who have a net personal wealth of at least $110,000, according to the global wealth report by Credit Suisse. China had 85 female billionaires , two-thirds of the global total. China has had the world&#x27;s largest middle-class population since 2015; the middle-class grew to 500 million by 2024.

=== China in the global economy ===

China has been a member of the WTO since 2001 and is the world&#x27;s largest trading power. By 2016, China was the largest trading partner of 124 countries. China became the world&#x27;s largest trading nation in 2013 by the sum of imports and exports, as well as the world&#x27;s largest commodity importer, accounting for roughly 45% of maritime&#x27;s dry-bulk market.

China&#x27;s foreign exchange reserves reached US$3.246 trillion , making its reserves by far the world&#x27;s largest. In 2022, China was amongst the world&#x27;s largest recipient of inward foreign direct investment (FDI), attracting $180 billion, though most of these were speculated to be from Hong Kong. In 2021, China&#x27;s foreign exchange remittances were $US53 billion making it the second-largest recipient of remittances in the world. China also invests abroad, with a total outward FDI of $147.9 billion in 2023, and a number of major takeovers of foreign firms by Chinese companies.

Economists have argued that the renminbi is undervalued, due to currency intervention from the Chinese government, giving China an unfair trade advantage. China has also been widely criticized for manufacturing large quantities of counterfeit goods. The U.S. government has also alleged that China does not respect intellectual property (IP) rights and steals IP through espionage operations. In 2020, Harvard University&#x27;s Economic Complexity Index ranked complexity of China&#x27;s exports 17th in the world, up from 24th in 2010.

The Chinese government has promoted the internationalization of the renminbi in order to wean itself off its dependence on the U.S. dollar as a result of perceived weaknesses of the international monetary system. The renminbi is a component of the IMF&#x27;s special drawing rights and the world&#x27;s fourth-most traded currency . However, partly due to capital controls that make the renminbi fall short of being a fully convertible currency, it remains far behind the Euro, the U.S. Dollar and the Japanese Yen in international trade volumes.

=== Science and technology ===
==== Historical ====
China was a world leader in science and technology until the Ming dynasty. Ancient and medieval Chinese discoveries and inventions, such as papermaking, printing, the compass, and gunpowder (the Four Great Inventions), became widespread across East Asia, the Middle East and later Europe. Chinese mathematicians were the first to use negative numbers. By the 17th century, the Western World surpassed China in scientific and technological advancement. The causes of this early modern Great Divergence continue to be debated by scholars.

After repeated military defeats by the European colonial powers and Imperial Japan in the 19th century, Chinese reformers began promoting modern science and technology as part of the Self-Strengthening Movement. After the Communists came to power in 1949, efforts were made to organize science and technology based on the model of the Soviet Union, in which scientific research was part of central planning. After Mao&#x27;s death in 1976, science and technology were promoted as one of the Four Modernizations, and the Soviet-inspired academic system was gradually reformed.

==== Modern era ====
Since the end of the Cultural Revolution, China has made significant investments in scientific research and is quickly catching up with the U.S. in R&amp;D spending. China officially spent around 2.7% of its GDP on R&amp;D in 2024, totaling to around $496 billion. According to the World Intellectual Property Indicators, China received more applications than the U.S. did in 2018 and 2019 and ranked first globally in patents, utility models, trademarks, industrial designs, and creative goods exports in 2021. It was ranked 11th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024, a considerable improvement from its rank of 35th in 2013. Chinese supercomputers ranked among the fastest in the world. Its efforts to develop the most advanced semiconductors and jet engines have seen delays and setbacks.

China is developing its education system with an emphasis on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Its academic publication apparatus became the world&#x27;s largest publisher of scientific papers in 2016. In 2022, China overtook the US in the Nature Index, which measures the share of published articles in leading scientific journals.

===== Space program =====
The Chinese space program started in 1958 with some technology transfers from the Soviet Union. However, it did not launch the nation&#x27;s first satellite until 1970 with the Dong Fang Hong I, which made China the fifth country to do so independently.

In 2003, China became the third country in the world to independently send humans into space with Yang Liwei&#x27;s spaceflight aboard Shenzhou 5. As of 2023, eighteen Chinese nationals have journeyed into space, including two women. In 2011, China launched its first space station testbed, Tiangong-1. In 2013, a Chinese robotic rover &quot;Yutu&quot; successfully touched down on the lunar surface as part of the Chang&#x27;e 3 mission.

In 2019, China became the first country to land a probe—Chang&#x27;e 4—on the far side of the Moon. In 2020, Chang&#x27;e 5 successfully returned Moon samples to the Earth, making China the third country to do so independently. In 2021, China became the third country to land a spacecraft on Mars and the second one to deploy a rover (&quot;Zhurong&quot;) on Mars. China completed its own modular space station, the Tiangong, in low Earth orbit on 3 November 2022. On 29 November 2022, China performed its first in-orbit crew handover aboard the &quot;Tiangong&quot;.

In May 2023, China announced a plan to land humans on the Moon by 2030. To that end, China has been developing a lunar-capable super-heavy launcher, the Long March 10, a new crewed spacecraft, and a crewed lunar lander.

China sent Chang&#x27;e 6 on 3 May 2024, which conducted the first lunar sample return from Apollo Basin on the far side of the Moon. This is China&#x27;s second lunar sample return mission, the first was achieved by Chang&#x27;e 5 from the lunar near side 4 years ago. It also carried a Chinese rover called &quot;Jinchan&quot; to conduct infrared spectroscopy of lunar surface and imaged Chang&#x27;e 6 lander on lunar surface. The lander-ascender-rover combination was separated with the orbiter and returner before landing on 1 June 2024, at 22:23 UTC. It landed on the Moon&#x27;s surface on 1 June 2024. The ascender was launched back to lunar orbit on 3 June 2024, at 23:38 UTC, carrying samples collected by the lander, which later completed another robotic rendezvous, before docking in lunar orbit. The sample container was then transferred to the returner, which landed on Inner Mongolia in June 2024, completing China&#x27;s far side extraterrestrial sample return mission.

== Infrastructure ==
After a decades-long infrastructural boom, China has produced numerous world-leading infrastructural projects: it has the largest high-speed rail network, the most supertall skyscrapers, the largest power plant (the Three Gorges Dam), the most extensive ultra-high-voltage transmission network and innovation infrastructure, and a global satellite navigation system with the largest number of satellites.

=== Telecommunications ===
China is the largest telecom market in the world and currently has the largest number of active cellphones of any country, with over 1.7 billion subscribers, . It has the largest number of internet and broadband users, with over 1.1 billion Internet users —equivalent to around 78.6% of its population. By 2018, China had more than 1 billion 4G users, accounting for 40% of world&#x27;s total. China is making rapid advances in 5G—by late 2018, China had started large-scale and commercial 5G trials. , China had over 810 million 5G users and 3.38 million base stations installed.

China Mobile, China Unicom and China Telecom, are the three large providers of mobile and internet in China. China Telecom alone served more than 145 million broadband subscribers and 300 million mobile users; China Unicom had about 300 million subscribers; and China Mobile, the largest of them all, had 925 million users, . Combined, the three operators had over 3.4 million 4G base-stations in China. Several Chinese telecommunications companies, most notably Huawei and ZTE, have been accused of spying for the Chinese military.

China has developed its own satellite navigation system, dubbed BeiDou, which began offering commercial navigation services across Asia in 2012 as well as global services by the end of 2018. Beidou followed GPS and GLONASS as the third completed global navigation satellite.

=== Transport ===


Since the late 1990s, China&#x27;s national road network has been significantly expanded through the creation of a network of national highways and expressways. In 2022, China&#x27;s highways had reached a total length of , making it the longest highway system in the world. China has the world&#x27;s largest market for automobiles, having surpassed the United States in both auto sales and production. The country is the world&#x27;s largest exporter of cars by number as of 2023. A side-effect of the rapid growth of China&#x27;s road network has been a significant rise in traffic accidents. In urban areas, bicycles remain a common mode of transport, despite the increasing prevalence of automobiles – , there are approximately 200 million bicycles in China.

China&#x27;s railways, which are operated by the state-owned China State Railway Group Company, are among the busiest in the world, handling a quarter of the world&#x27;s rail traffic volume on only 6 percent of the world&#x27;s tracks in 2006. , the country had of railways, the second-longest network in the world. The railways strain to meet enormous demand particularly during the Chinese New Year holiday, when the world&#x27;s largest annual human migration takes place. China&#x27;s high-speed rail (HSR) system started construction in the early 2000s. By the end of 2023, high speed rail in China had reached of dedicated lines alone, making it the longest HSR network in the world. Services on the Beijing–Shanghai, Beijing–Tianjin, and Chengdu–Chongqing lines reach up to , making them the fastest conventional high speed railway services in the world. With an annual ridership of over 2.3 billion passengers in 2019, it is the world&#x27;s busiest. The network includes the Beijing–Guangzhou high-speed railway, the single longest HSR line in the world, and the Beijing–Shanghai high-speed railway, which has three of longest railroad bridges in the world. The Shanghai maglev train, which reaches , is the fastest commercial train service in the world. Since 2000, the growth of rapid transit systems in Chinese cities has accelerated. , 55 Chinese cities have urban mass transit systems in operation. , China boasts the five longest metro systems in the world with the networks in Shanghai, Beijing, Guangzhou, Chengdu and Shenzhen being the largest.

The civil aviation industry in China is mostly state-dominated, with the Chinese government retaining a majority stake in the majority of Chinese airlines. The top three airlines in China are Air China, China Southern Airlines, and China Eastern Airlines, which collectively made up 71% of the market in 2018, are all state-owned. Air travel has expanded rapidly in the last decades, with the number of passengers increasing from 16.6 million in 1990 to 551.2 million in 2017. China had approximately 259 airports in 2024.

China has over 2,000 river and seaports, about 130 of which are open to foreign shipping. Of the fifty busiest container ports, 15 are located in China, of which the busiest is the Port of Shanghai, also the busiest port in the world. The country&#x27;s inland waterways are the world&#x27;s sixth-longest, and total .

=== Water supply and sanitation ===
Water supply and sanitation infrastructure in China is facing challenges such as rapid urbanization, as well as water scarcity, contamination, and pollution. According to the Joint Monitoring Program for Water Supply and Sanitation, about 36% of the rural population in China still did not have access to improved sanitation in 2015. The ongoing South–North Water Transfer Project intends to abate water shortage in the north.

== Demographics ==

The 2020 Chinese census recorded the population as approximately 1,411,778,724. About 17.95% were 14 years old or younger, 63.35% were between 15 and 59 years old, and 18.7% were over 60 years old. Between 2010 and 2020, the average population growth rate was 0.53%.

Given concerns about population growth, China implemented a two-child limit during the 1970s, and, in 1979, began to advocate for an even stricter limit of one child per family. Beginning in the mid-1980s, however, given the unpopularity of the strict limits, China began to allow some major exemptions, particularly in rural areas, resulting in what was actually a &quot;1.5&quot;-child policy from the mid-1980s to 2015; ethnic minorities were also exempt from one-child limits. The next major loosening of the policy was enacted in December 2013, allowing families to have two children if one parent is an only child. In 2016, the one-child policy was replaced in favor of a two-child policy. A three-child policy was announced on 31 May 2021, due to population aging, and in July 2021, all family size limits as well as penalties for exceeding them were removed. In 2023, the total fertility rate was reported to be 1.09, ranking among the lowest in the world. In 2023, National Bureau of Statistics estimated that the population fell 850,000 from 2021 to 2022, the first decline since 1961.

According to one group of scholars, one-child limits had little effect on population growth or total population size. However, these scholars have been challenged. The policy, along with traditional preference for boys, may have contributed to an imbalance in the sex ratio at birth. The 2020 census found that males accounted for 51.2% of the total population. However, China&#x27;s sex ratio is more balanced than it was in 1953, when males accounted for 51.8% of the population.

The cultural preference for male children, combined with the one-child policy, led to an excess of female child orphans in China, and in the 1990s through around 2007, there was an active stream of adoptions of (mainly female) babies by American and other foreign parents. However, increased restrictions by the Chinese Government slowed foreign adoptions significantly in 2007 and again in 2015.

=== Urbanization ===
China has urbanized significantly in recent decades. The percent of the country&#x27;s population living in urban areas increased from 20% in 1980 to over 67% in 2024. China has over 160 cities with a population of over one million, including the 17 megacities (cities with a population of over 10 million) of Chongqing, Shanghai, Beijing, Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Tianjin, Xi&#x27;an, Suzhou, Zhengzhou, Wuhan, Hangzhou, Linyi, Shijiazhuang, Dongguan, Qingdao and Changsha. The total permanent population of Chongqing, Shanghai, Beijing and Chengdu is above 20 million. Shanghai is China&#x27;s most populous urban area while Chongqing is its largest city proper, the only city in China with a permanent population of over 30 million. The figures in the table below are from the 2020 census, and are only estimates of the urban populations within administrative city limits; a different ranking exists for total municipal populations. The large &quot;floating populations&quot; of migrant workers make conducting censuses in urban areas difficult; the figures below include only long-term residents.

=== Ethnic groups ===

China legally recognizes 56 distinct ethnic groups, who comprise the &quot;Zhonghua minzu&quot;. The largest of these nationalities are the Han Chinese, who constitute more than 91% of the total population. The Han Chinese – the world&#x27;s largest single ethnic group – outnumber other ethnic groups in every place excluding Tibet, Xinjiang, Linxia, and autonomous prefectures like Xishuangbanna. Ethnic minorities account for less than 10% of the population of China, according to the 2020 census. Compared with the 2010 population census, the Han population increased by 60,378,693 persons, or 4.93%, while the population of the 55 national minorities combined increased by 11,675,179 persons, or 10.26%. The 2020 census recorded a total of 845,697 foreign nationals living in mainland China.

=== Languages ===

There are as many as 292 living languages in China. The languages most commonly spoken belong to the Sinitic branch of the Sino-Tibetan language family, which contains Mandarin (spoken by 80% of the population), and other varieties of Chinese language: Jin, Wu, Min, Hakka, Yue, Xiang, Gan, Hui, Ping and unclassified Tuhua (Shaozhou Tuhua and Xiangnan Tuhua). Languages of the Tibeto-Burman branch, including Tibetan, Qiang, Naxi and Yi, are spoken across the Tibetan and Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau. Other ethnic minority languages in southwestern China include Zhuang, Thai, Dong and Sui of the Tai-Kadai family, Miao and Yao of the Hmong–Mien family, and Wa of the Austroasiatic family. Across northeastern and northwestern China, local ethnic groups speak Altaic languages including Manchu, Mongolian and several Turkic languages: Uyghur, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, Salar and Western Yugur. Korean is spoken natively along the border with North Korea. Sarikoli, the language of Tajiks in western Xinjiang, is an Indo-European language. Taiwanese indigenous peoples, including a small population on the mainland, speak Austronesian languages.

Standard Chinese, a variety based on the Beijing dialect of Mandarin, is the national language of China, having de facto official status. It is used as a lingua franca between people of different linguistic backgrounds. In the autonomous regions of China, other languages may also serve as a lingua franca, such as Uyghur in Xinjiang, where governmental services in Uyghur are constitutionally guaranteed.

===Religion===
Freedom of religion is guaranteed by China&#x27;s constitution, although religious organizations that lack official approval can be subject to state persecution. The government of the country is officially atheist. Religious affairs and issues in the country are overseen by the National Religious Affairs Administration, under the United Front Work Department.

Over the millennia, the Chinese civilization has been influenced by various religious movements. The &quot;three doctrines&quot; of Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism have historically shaped Chinese culture, enriching a theological and spiritual framework of traditional religion which harks back to the early Shang and Zhou dynasty. Chinese folk religion, which is framed by the three doctrines and by other traditions, consists in allegiance to the &quot;shen&quot;, who can be deities of the surrounding nature or ancestral principles of human groups, concepts of civility, culture heroes, many of whom feature in Chinese mythology and history. Amongst the most popular cults of folk religion are those of the Yellow Emperor, embodiment of the God of Heaven and one of the two divine patriarchs of the Chinese people, of Mazu (goddess of the seas), Guandi (god of war and business), Caishen (god of prosperity and richness), Pangu and many others. In the early decades of the 21st century, the Chinese government has been engaged in a rehabilitation of folk cults—formally recognizing them as &quot;folk beliefs&quot; as distinguished from doctrinal religions, and often reconstructing them into forms of &quot;highly curated&quot; civil religion—as well as in a national and international promotion of Buddhism. China is home to many of the world&#x27;s tallest religious statues, representing either deities of Chinese folk religion or enlightened beings of Buddhism; the tallest of all is the Spring Temple Buddha in Henan.
Statistics on religious affiliation in China are difficult to gather due to complex and varying definitions of religion and the diffusive nature of Chinese religious traditions. Scholars note that in China there is no clear boundary between the three doctrines and local folk religious practices. Chinese religions or some of their currents are also definable as non-theistic and humanistic, since they do not hold that divine creativity is completely transcendent, but that it is inherent in the world and in particular in the human being. According to studies published in 2023, compiling demographic analyses conducted throughout the 2010s and the early 2020s, 70% of the Chinese population believed in or practiced Chinese folk religion—among them, with an approach of non-exclusivity, 33.4% may be identified as Buddhists, 19.6% as Taoists, and 17.7% as adherents of other types of folk religion. Of the remaining population, 25.2% are fully non-believers or atheists, 2.5% are adherents of Christianity, and 1.6% are adherents of Islam. Chinese folk religion also comprises a variety of salvationist doctrinal organized movements which emerged since the Song dynasty. There are also ethnic minorities in China who maintain their own indigenous religions, while major religions characteristic of specific ethnic groups include Tibetan Buddhism among Tibetans, Mongols and Yugurs, and Islam among the Hui, Uyghur, Kazakh, and Kyrgyz peoples, and other ethnicities in the northern and northwestern regions of the country.

=== Education ===
Compulsory education in China comprises primary and junior secondary school, which together last for nine years from the age of 6 and 15. The Gaokao, China&#x27;s national university entrance exam, is a prerequisite for entrance into most higher education institutions. Vocational education is available to students at the secondary and tertiary level. More than 10 million Chinese students graduated from vocational colleges every year. In 2023, about 91.8 percent of students continued their education at a three-year senior secondary school, while 60.2 percent of secondary school graduates were enrolled in higher education.

China has the largest education system in the world, with about 291 million students and 18.92 million full-time teachers in over 498,300 schools in 2023. Annual education investment went from less than US$50 billion in 2003 to more than US$817 billion in 2020. However, there remains an inequality in education spending. In 2010, the annual education expenditure per secondary school student in Beijing totalled ¥20,023, while in Guizhou, one of the poorest provinces, it only totalled ¥3,204. China&#x27;s literacy rate has grown dramatically, from only 20% in 1949 and 65.5% in 1979, to 97% of the population over age 15 in 2020.

, China has over 3,074 universities, with over 47.6 million students enrolled in mainland China, giving China the largest higher education system in the world. , China had the world&#x27;s highest number of top universities. Currently, China trails only the United States and the United Kingdom in terms of representation on lists of the top 200 universities according to the 2023 &quot;Aggregate Ranking of Top Universities&quot;, a composite ranking system of three world-most followed university rankings (ARWU+QS+THE). China is home to two of the highest-ranking universities (Tsinghua University and Peking University) in Asia and emerging economies, according to the Times Higher Education World University Rankings and the Academic Ranking of World Universities. These universities are members of the C9 League, an alliance of elite Chinese universities offering comprehensive and leading education.

=== Health ===

The National Health Commission, together with its counterparts in the local commissions, oversees the health needs of the population. An emphasis on public health and preventive medicine has characterized Chinese health policy since the early 1950s. The Communist Party started the Patriotic Health Campaign, which was aimed at improving sanitation and hygiene, as well as treating and preventing several diseases. Diseases such as cholera, typhoid and scarlet fever, which were previously rife in China, were nearly eradicated by the campaign.

After Deng Xiaoping began instituting economic reforms in 1978, the health of the Chinese public improved rapidly because of better nutrition, although many of the free public health services provided in the countryside disappeared. Healthcare in China became mostly privatized, and experienced a significant rise in quality. In 2009, the government began a three-year large-scale healthcare provision initiative worth US$124 billion. By 2011, the campaign resulted in 95% of China&#x27;s population having basic health insurance coverage. By 2022, China had established itself as a key producer and exporter of pharmaceuticals, producing around 40 percent of active pharmaceutical ingredients in 2017.

, the life expectancy at birth exceeds 78 years. , the infant mortality rate is 5 per thousand. Both have improved significantly since the 1950s. Rates of stunting, a condition caused by malnutrition, have declined from 33.1% in 1990 to 9.9% in 2010. Despite significant improvements in health and the construction of advanced medical facilities, China has several emerging public health problems, such as respiratory illnesses caused by widespread air pollution, hundreds of millions of cigarette smokers, and an increase in obesity among urban youths. In 2010, air pollution caused 1.2 million premature deaths in China. Chinese mental health services are inadequate. China&#x27;s large population and densely populated cities have led to serious disease outbreaks, such as SARS in 2003, although this has since been largely contained. The COVID-19 pandemic was first identified in Wuhan in December 2019; pandemic led the government to enforce strict public health measures intended to completely eradicate the virus, a goal that was eventually abandoned in December 2022 after protests against the policy.

== Culture and society==


Since ancient times, Chinese culture has been heavily influenced by Confucianism. Chinese culture, in turn, has heavily influenced East Asia and Southeast Asia. For much of the country&#x27;s dynastic era, opportunities for social advancement could be provided by high performance in the prestigious imperial examinations, which have their origins in the Han dynasty. The literary emphasis of the exams affected the general perception of cultural refinement in China, such as the belief that calligraphy, poetry and painting were higher forms of art than dancing or drama. Chinese culture has long emphasized a sense of deep history and a largely inward-looking national perspective. Examinations and a culture of merit remain greatly valued in China today.

Today, the Chinese government has accepted numerous elements of traditional Chinese culture as being integral to Chinese society. With the rise of Chinese nationalism and the end of the Cultural Revolution, various forms of traditional Chinese art, literature, music, film, fashion and architecture have seen a vigorous revival, and folk and variety art in particular have sparked interest nationally and even worldwide. Access to foreign media remains heavily restricted.

=== Architecture ===
Chinese architecture has developed over millennia in China and has remained a vestigial source of perennial influence on the development of East Asian architecture, including in Japan, Korea, and Mongolia. and minor influences on the architecture of Southeast and South Asia including the countries of Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam and the Philippines.

Chinese architecture is characterized by bilateral symmetry, use of enclosed open spaces, feng shui (e.g. directional hierarchies), a horizontal emphasis, and an allusion to various cosmological, mythological or in general symbolic elements. Chinese architecture traditionally classifies structures according to type, ranging from &quot;pagodas&quot; to palaces.

Chinese architecture varies widely based on status or affiliation, such as whether the structures were constructed for emperors, commoners, or for religious purposes. Other variations in Chinese architecture are shown in vernacular styles associated with different geographic regions and different ethnic heritages, such as the stilt houses in the south, the Yaodong buildings in the northwest, the yurt buildings of nomadic people, and the Siheyuan buildings in the north.

=== Literature ===

Chinese literature has its roots in the Zhou dynasty&#x27;s literary tradition. The classical texts of China encompass a wide range of thoughts and subjects, such as the calendar, military, astrology, herbology, and geography, as well as many others. Among the most significant early works are the &quot;I Ching&quot; and the &quot;Shujing&quot;, which are part of the Four Books and Five Classics. These texts were the cornerstone of the Confucian curriculum sponsored by the state throughout the dynastic periods. Inherited from the &quot;Classic of Poetry&quot;, classical Chinese poetry developed to its floruit during the Tang dynasty. Li Bai and Du Fu opened the forking ways for the poetic circles through romanticism and realism respectively. Chinese historiography began with the &quot;Shiji&quot;, the overall scope of the historiographical tradition in China is termed the Twenty-Four Histories, which set a vast stage for Chinese fictions along with Chinese mythology and folklore. Pushed by a burgeoning citizen class in the Ming dynasty, Chinese classical fiction rose to a boom of the historical, town and gods and demons fictions as represented by the Four Great Classical Novels which include &quot;Water Margin&quot;, &quot;Romance of the Three Kingdoms&quot;, &quot;Journey to the West&quot; and &quot;Dream of the Red Chamber&quot;. Along with the wuxia fictions of Jin Yong and Liang Yusheng, it remains an enduring source of popular culture in the Chinese sphere of influence.

In the wake of the New Culture Movement after the end of the Qing dynasty, Chinese literature embarked on a new era with written vernacular Chinese for ordinary citizens. Hu Shih and Lu Xun were pioneers in modern literature. Various literary genres, such as misty poetry, scar literature, young adult fiction and the xungen literature, which is influenced by magic realism, emerged following the Cultural Revolution. Mo Yan, a xungen literature author, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2012.

=== Music ===
Chinese music covers a highly diverse range of music from traditional music to modern music. Chinese music dates back before the pre-imperial times. Traditional Chinese musical instruments were traditionally grouped into eight categories known as &quot;bayin&quot; (八音). Traditional Chinese opera is a form of musical theatre in China originating thousands of years and has regional style forms such as Beijing and Cantonese opera. Chinese pop (C-Pop) includes mandopop and cantopop. Chinese hip hop and Hong Kong hip hop have become popular.

=== Fashion ===
Hanfu is the historical clothing of the Han people in China. The qipao or cheongsam is a popular Chinese female dress. The hanfu movement has been popular in contemporary times and seeks to revitalize Hanfu clothing. China Fashion Week is the country&#x27;s only national-level fashion festival.

=== Cinema ===
Cinema was first introduced to China in 1896 and the first Chinese film, &quot;Dingjun Mountain,&quot; was released in 1905. China has the largest number of movie screens in the world since 2016; China became the largest cinema market in 2020. The top three highest-grossing films in China were &quot;The Battle at Lake Changjin&quot; (2021), &quot;Wolf Warrior 2&quot; (2017), and &quot;Hi, Mom&quot; (2021).

=== Cuisine ===
Chinese cuisine is highly diverse, drawing on several millennia of culinary history and geographical variety, in which the most influential are known as the &quot;Eight Major Cuisines&quot;, including Sichuan, Cantonese, Jiangsu, Shandong, Fujian, Hunan, Anhui, and Zhejiang cuisines. Chinese cuisine is known for its breadth of cooking methods and ingredients. China&#x27;s staple food is rice in the northeast and south, and wheat-based breads and noodles in the north. Bean products such as tofu and soy milk remain a popular source of protein. Pork is now the most popular meat in China, accounting for about three-fourths of the country&#x27;s total meat consumption. There is also the vegetarian Buddhist cuisine and the pork-free Chinese Islamic cuisine. Chinese cuisine, due to the area&#x27;s proximity to the ocean and milder climate, has a wide variety of seafood and vegetables. Offshoots of Chinese food, such as Hong Kong cuisine and American Chinese cuisine, have emerged in the Chinese diaspora.

=== Sports ===

China has one of the oldest sporting cultures. There is evidence that archery (&quot;shèjiàn&quot;) was practiced during the Western Zhou dynasty. Swordplay (&quot;jiànshù&quot;) and &quot;cuju&quot;, a sport loosely related to association football date back to China&#x27;s early dynasties as well.

Physical fitness is widely emphasized in Chinese culture, with morning exercises such as &quot;qigong&quot; and tai chi widely practiced, and commercial gyms and private fitness clubs are gaining popularity. Basketball is the most popular spectator sport in China. The Chinese Basketball Association and the American National Basketball Association also have a huge national following amongst the Chinese populace, with native-born and NBA-bound Chinese players and well-known national household names such as Yao Ming and Yi Jianlian being held in high esteem. China&#x27;s professional football league, known as Chinese Super League, is the largest football market in East Asia. Other popular sports include martial arts, table tennis, badminton, swimming and snooker. China is home to a huge number of cyclists, with an estimated 470 million bicycles . China has the world&#x27;s largest esports market. Many more traditional sports, such as dragon boat racing, Mongolian-style wrestling and horse racing are also popular.

China has participated in the Olympic Games since 1932, although it has only participated as the PRC since 1952. China hosted the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, where its athletes received 48 gold medals – the highest number of any participating nation that year. China also won the most medals at the 2012 Summer Paralympics, with 231 overall, including 95 gold. In 2011, Shenzhen hosted the 2011 Summer Universiade. China hosted the 2013 East Asian Games in Tianjin and the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics in Nanjing, the first country to host both regular and Youth Olympics. Beijing and its nearby city Zhangjiakou collaboratively hosted the 2022 Winter Olympics, making Beijing the first dual Olympic city by holding both the Summer Olympics and the Winter Olympics. China hosted the Asian Games in 1990 (Beijing), 2010 (Guangzhou), and 2023 (Hangzhou).

== See also ==

* Outline of China

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
== Further reading ==
== External links ==


=== Government ===
* The Central People&#x27;s Government of People&#x27;s Republic of China 

=== General information ===
* China at a Glance from &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot;
* Country profile – China at BBC News
* China. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* China, People&#x27;s Republic of (archived 2012) from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;

=== Maps ===
* Google Maps—China
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="0" end="5" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="22" end="53" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="55" end="58" title="China" label="PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="77" end="86" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981379" start="93" end="105" title="population of China" label="a population"/>
<link wikidata="Q66084740" start="139" end="167" title="list of countries by population (United Nations)" label="second-most populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="174" end="179" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944710" start="275" end="309" title="Borders of China" label="borders fourteen countries by land"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="351" end="385" title="list of countries and dependencies by area" label="third-largest country by land area"/>
<link wikidata="Q119608727" start="418" end="442" title="Province-level divisions of China" label="province-level divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615742" start="447" end="456" title="provinces of China" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q57362" start="460" end="478" title="autonomous regions of China" label="autonomous regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208802" start="482" end="496" title="direct-administered municipalities of China" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="520" end="550" title="special administrative regions" label="special administrative regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="552" end="559" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="597" end="605" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735963" start="609" end="645" title="List of cities in China by population" label="its most populous city by urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="658" end="674" title="financial center" label="financial center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207629" start="708" end="731" title="cradles of civilization" label="cradles of civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="794" end="805" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857432" start="852" end="867" title="Dynasties in Chinese history" label="dynastic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="887" end="899" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="973" end="985" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="1059" end="1069" title="Chinese classics" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="1071" end="1081" title="Chinese philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133908" start="1087" end="1101" title="Chinese historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="1139" end="1149" title="Emperor of China" label="an emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="1223" end="1226" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1228" end="1231" title="Han dynasty" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1233" end="1237" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="1239" end="1243" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="1245" end="1249" title="Ming" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1255" end="1259" title="Qing" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137297" start="1270" end="1292" title="invention of gunpowder" label="invention of gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1297" end="1302" title="History of paper#Paper in China" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="1329" end="1338" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="1364" end="1374" title="Great Wall" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="1376" end="1391" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="1411" end="1448" title="Sinosphere" label="heavily influenced both its neighbors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376651" start="1504" end="1524" title="Foreign concessions in China" label="parts of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="1592" end="1608" title="unequal treaties" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="1659" end="1674" title="1911 Revolution" label="1911 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="1727" end="1744" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="1817" end="1835" title="Beiyang government" label="Beiyang government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="1886" end="1897" title="Warlord Era" label="Warlord Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="1924" end="1943" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="1961" end="1971" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="2006" end="2023" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195058" start="2055" end="2061" title="Shanghai massacre" label="purged"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="2083" end="2106" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="2179" end="2201" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="2248" end="2263" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143850" start="2300" end="2319" title="Second United Front" label="Second United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="2347" end="2371" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="2570" end="2617" title="proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="proclaiming the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="2634" end="2667" title="Retreat of the government of Republic of China to Taiwan" label="Nationalist government to retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22528" start="2675" end="2691" title="island of Taiwan" label="island of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559326" start="2721" end="2731" title="Two Chinas" label="both sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="2751" end="2786" title="One China" label="sole legitimate government of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927676" start="2820" end="2831" title="Land Reform Movement" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2873" end="2882" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="2895" end="2913" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454958" start="2946" end="2966" title="Great Chinese Famine" label="Great Chinese Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="3042" end="3061" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="3126" end="3132" title="Maoist" label="Maoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="3157" end="3174" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q874682" start="3180" end="3199" title="Shanghai Communiqué" label="Shanghai Communiqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280045" start="3247" end="3279" title="China–United States relations" label="relations with the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="3281" end="3297" title="Reform and Opening Up" label="Economic reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="3357" end="3372" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13713793" start="3381" end="3422" title="Socialist market economy" label="an increasingly capitalist market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="3534" end="3572" title="Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="Tiananmen Square protests and massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="3594" end="3601" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="3612" end="3630" title="socialist republic" label="socialist republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688521" start="3669" end="3686" title="Permanent members of the United Nations Security Council" label="permanent members"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="3694" end="3713" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109843" start="3879" end="3883" title="AIIB" label="AIIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q20063943" start="3889" end="3903" title="Silk Road Fund" label="Silk Road Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q8579145" start="3909" end="3929" title="New Development Bank" label="New Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523819" start="3939" end="3943" title="RCEP" label="RCEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q243630" start="3967" end="3972" title="BRICS" label="BRICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="3978" end="3981" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="3983" end="3987" title="APEC" label="APEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="3993" end="3996" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="SCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="4006" end="4022" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="4077" end="4092" title="Chinese economy" label="Chinese economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="4113" end="4148" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="largest economy by PPP-adjusted GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="4154" end="4191" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="second-largest economy by nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4201" end="4226" title="List of countries by total wealth#Total wealth by country" label="second-wealthiest country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054862" start="4235" end="4249" title="International rankings of China" label="ranking poorly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255519" start="4265" end="4274" title="Democracy in China" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072770" start="4276" end="4288" title="Human rights in China" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395087" start="4293" end="4310" title="Freedom of religion in China" label="religious freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764970" start="4344" end="4359" title="List of countries by real GDP growth rate" label="fastest-growing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="4400" end="4420" title="List of countries by manufacturing output" label="largest manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q383715" start="4425" end="4433" title="List of countries by exports" label="exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053969" start="4450" end="4473" title="List of countries by imports" label="second-largest importer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="4486" end="4506" title="nuclear-weapon state" label="nuclear-weapon state"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="4529" end="4572" title="List of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel" label="largest standing army by military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="4581" end="4610" title="List of countries by military expenditures" label="second-largest defense budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="4620" end="4631" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849456" start="4637" end="4681" title="China as a potential superpower" label="has been described as an emerging superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="4702" end="4713" title="Chinese cuisine" label="its cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149287" start="4735" end="4765" title="List of World Heritage Sites in China" label="59 UNESCO World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q945996" start="4771" end="4807" title="World Heritage Sites by country" label="second-highest number of any country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="5010" end="5020" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="5022" end="5027" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="5033" end="5040" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="5053" end="5061" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="5077" end="5090" title="ancient India" label="ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048314" start="5121" end="5133" title="Richard Eden (translator)" label="Richard Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150753" start="5205" end="5219" title="Duarte Barbosa" label="Duarte Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="5390" end="5395" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="5427" end="5438" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="5477" end="5489" title="Manusmriti" label="Laws of Manu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243676" start="5524" end="5539" title="Martino Martini" label="Martino Martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="5613" end="5624" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097045" start="5791" end="5797" title="Yelang" label="Yelang"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="5806" end="5810" title="Chu (state)" label="Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069609" start="6046" end="6058" title="Western Zhou" label="Western Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="6087" end="6100" title="demesne" label="royal demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="6174" end="6178" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="6284" end="6298" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="6365" end="6382" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="6390" end="6431" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="PRC&amp;#x27;s Special Administrative Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="6468" end="6491" title="Archaeological excavation" label="Archaeological evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="6512" end="6520" title="Hominidae" label="hominids"/>
<link wikidata="Q45931" start="6584" end="6594" title="Peking Man" label="Peking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="6604" end="6616" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q912205" start="6627" end="6636" title="Control of fire by early humans" label="used fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="6685" end="6694" title="Before Present" label="years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083360" start="6805" end="6815" title="Fuyan Cave" label="Fuyan Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175774" start="6825" end="6838" title="proto-writing" label="proto-writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688860" start="6850" end="6855" title="Jiahu" label="Jiahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012594" start="6876" end="6883" title="Damaidi" label="Damaidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344314" start="6901" end="6908" title="Dadiwan culture" label="Dadiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q806929" start="6936" end="6941" title="Banpo" label="Banpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351585" start="7016" end="7029" title="Jiahu symbols" label="Jiahu symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q133908" start="7155" end="7177" title="Chinese historiography" label="Chinese historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="7183" end="7194" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051663" start="7620" end="7635" title="Erlitou culture" label="Erlitou culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="7666" end="7676" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="7794" end="7807" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="7983" end="7995" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476695" start="8075" end="8093" title="oracle bone script" label="oracle bone script"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="8193" end="8208" title="written Chinese" label="written Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="8247" end="8265" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="8301" end="8305" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147432" start="8393" end="8406" title="Son of Heaven" label="Son of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275341" start="8434" end="8442" title="fengjian" label="fengjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="8580" end="8604" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="8625" end="8646" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="8821" end="8833" title="Qin (state)" label="state of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="8919" end="8928" title="autocracy" label="autocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="8930" end="8947" title="King Zheng of Qin" label="King Zheng of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="8986" end="8997" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="9068" end="9076" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="legalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q435922" start="9137" end="9149" title="Chinese units of measurement" label="measurements"/>
<link wikidata="Q672897" start="9168" end="9176" title="history of Chinese currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767890" start="9195" end="9219" title="Qin campaign against the Baiyue" label="conquered the Yue tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="9223" end="9230" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="9232" end="9241" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428694" start="9247" end="9263" title="Northern Vietnam" label="Northern Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151705" start="9370" end="9388" title="Chu–Han Contention" label="widespread revolts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9423" end="9433" title="List of destroyed libraries#Human action" label="was burned"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="9439" end="9450" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="9596" end="9607" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709899" start="9617" end="9666" title="History of the Han dynasty" label="expanded the empire&amp;#x27;s territory considerably"/>
<link wikidata="Q744969" start="9701" end="9723" title="Han–Xiongnu War" label="Central Asia, Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495612" start="9725" end="9730" title="Han conquest of Gojoseon" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840963" start="9736" end="9742" title="Han campaigns against Dian" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932349" start="9752" end="9794" title="Southward expansion of the Han dynasty" label="recovery of Guangdong and northern Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q827040" start="9800" end="9806" title="Nanyue" label="Nanyue"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="9844" end="9850" title="Sogdia" label="Sogdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="9890" end="9899" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="9937" end="9946" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="10149" end="10161" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q116123" start="10350" end="10372" title="end of the Han dynasty" label="end of the Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="10402" end="10416" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="10447" end="10450" title="Cao Wei" label="Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="10481" end="10492" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q770951" start="10510" end="10519" title="War of the Eight Princes" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357" start="10544" end="10576" title="Emperor Hui of Jin" label="developmentally disabled emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037294" start="10582" end="10597" title="Five Barbarians" label="Five Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817040" start="10603" end="10611" title="Upheaval of the Five Barbarians" label="rebelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="10644" end="10658" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen States"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="10664" end="10671" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q875305" start="10692" end="10704" title="Northern Wei" label="Northern Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327614" start="10712" end="10727" title="Emperor Xiaowen of Northern Wei" label="Emperor Xiaowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="10783" end="10830" title="Northern dynasties" label="enforced a drastic sinification on his subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q49699" start="10858" end="10864" title="Emperor Wu of Liu Song" label="Liu Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49697" start="10915" end="10923" title="Liu Song" label="Liu Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="10984" end="11015" title="Northern and Southern dynasties" label="Northern and Southern dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="11060" end="11063" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="11189" end="11209" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="11234" end="11245" title="Grand Canal of China" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="11262" end="11270" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48883" start="11346" end="11356" title="Goguryeo–Sui War" label="failed war"/>
<link wikidata="Q28370" start="11360" end="11374" title="Goguryeo" label="northern Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="11424" end="11428" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="11433" end="11447" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190423" start="11553" end="11568" title="Western Regions" label="Western Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="11623" end="11634" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="11643" end="11657" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="11680" end="11693" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q253774" start="11770" end="11789" title="An Lushan rebellion" label="An Lushan rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q242115" start="11934" end="11954" title="Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period" label="separatist situation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="12018" end="12030" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="12507" end="12530" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="revival of Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="12636" end="12649" title="landscape art" label="landscape art"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="12654" end="12663" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="12774" end="12785" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7486" start="12796" end="12820" title="Emperor Huizong of Song" label="Emperor Emeritus Huizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488" start="12822" end="12845" title="Emperor Qinzong of Song" label="Emperor Qinzong of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q208471" start="12862" end="12870" title="Kaifeng" label="Bianjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446152" start="12896" end="12909" title="Jin–Song wars" label="Jin–Song wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="12949" end="12963" title="Northern and southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="12982" end="12990" title="Southern Song Dynasty" label="the Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="12994" end="13002" title="Nanjing" label="Jiankang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301657" start="13027" end="13051" title="Mongol conquest of China" label="Mongol conquest of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q14750447" start="13075" end="13084" title="Mongol conquest of Western Xia" label="campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427" start="13093" end="13104" title="Western Xia" label="Western Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="13108" end="13120" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014253" start="13131" end="13154" title="Mongol conquest of the Jin dynasty" label="invaded Jin territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="13183" end="13194" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="13211" end="13223" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q400061" start="13231" end="13277" title="Mongol conquest of the Song dynasty" label="conquered the last remnant of the Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q112524" start="13466" end="13484" title="Red Turban Rebellions" label="overthrew the Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="13509" end="13521" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="13529" end="13543" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="13767" end="13775" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="13784" end="13805" title="Ming treasure voyages" label="Ming treasure voyages"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="13946" end="13953" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q378462" start="14019" end="14032" title="Wang Yangming" label="Wang Yangming"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="14090" end="14103" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328489" start="14120" end="14136" title="four occupations" label="four occupations"/>
<link wikidata="Q708299" start="14142" end="14158" title="scholar-official" label="scholar-official"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="14301" end="14340" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)" label="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062546" start="14345" end="14354" title="Later Jin (1616–1636)" label="Later Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q53776731" start="14444" end="14457" title="Late Ming peasant rebellions" label="peasant rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q333567" start="14472" end="14482" title="Li Zicheng" label="Li Zicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q10069" start="14488" end="14505" title="Chongzhen Emperor" label="Chongzhen Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="14555" end="14567" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q468701" start="14607" end="14616" title="Wu Sangui" label="Wu Sangui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370784" start="14650" end="14662" title="Shun dynasty" label="Shun dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427966" start="14871" end="14891" title="Transition from Ming to Qing" label="Ming-Qing transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198163" start="15051" end="15064" title="Southern Ming" label="Southern Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923401" start="15100" end="15115" title="Dzungar Khanate" label="Dzungar Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="15357" end="15370" title="Northern Song" label="Northern Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367193" start="15450" end="15463" title="High Qing era" label="High Qing era"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774261" start="15705" end="15724" title="anti-Qing sentiment" label="anti-Qing sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569008" start="15805" end="15811" title="Haijin" label="Haijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203086" start="15893" end="15913" title="literary inquisition" label="literary inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q220984" start="16029" end="16039" title="Opium Wars" label="Opium Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="16057" end="16063" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="16123" end="16142" title="extraterritoriality" label="extraterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="16175" end="16184" title="British Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q238262" start="16215" end="16232" title="Treaty of Nanking" label="Treaty of Nanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="16282" end="16298" title="Unequal treaty" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="16310" end="16333" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="16401" end="16417" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="16434" end="16451" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="cession of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="16455" end="16460" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034257" start="16503" end="16518" title="Timeline of late anti-Qing rebellions" label="internal unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q997220" start="16579" end="16600" title="White Lotus Rebellion" label="White Lotus Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192408" start="16613" end="16630" title="Taiping Rebellion" label="Taiping Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q889879" start="16690" end="16715" title="Dungan Revolt (1862–1877)" label="Dungan Revolt (1862–1877)"/>
<link wikidata="Q498117" start="16761" end="16788" title="Self-Strengthening Movement" label="Self-Strengthening Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724177" start="16905" end="16921" title="Chinese emigration" label="Chinese diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q27675" start="17010" end="17046" title="Northern Chinese Famine of 1876–1879" label="Northern Chinese Famine of 1876–1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q299710" start="17099" end="17114" title="Guangxu Emperor" label="Guangxu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q917709" start="17125" end="17136" title="Hundred Days&amp;#x27; Reform" label="reform plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="17167" end="17190" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="17229" end="17249" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="17278" end="17293" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497146" start="17395" end="17412" title="late Qing reforms" label="late Qing reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="17418" end="17435" title="1911 Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="17492" end="17509" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q185152" start="17511" end="17515" title="Puyi" label="Puyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657621" start="17535" end="17552" title="Imperial Edict of the Abdication of the Qing Emperor" label="abdicated in 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="17673" end="17684" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="17692" end="17702" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="17790" end="17801" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q175379" start="17856" end="17872" title="Empire of China (1915–1916)" label="Emperor of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144627" start="17938" end="17950" title="Beiyang Army" label="Beiyang Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="18240" end="18246" title="Warlord Era" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q56323419" start="18254" end="18269" title="China during World War I" label="participated in"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18270" end="18281" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="18327" end="18346" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="18389" end="18404" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="18543" end="18562" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="18614" end="18621" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="18748" end="18778" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Three Principles of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q588287" start="18857" end="18871" title="First United Front" label="briefly allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="18881" end="18904" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195058" start="18995" end="19015" title="Shanghai massacre" label="violently suppressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="19085" end="19102" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060072" start="19121" end="19141" title="Communist-controlled China (1927–1949)" label="areas of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135255" start="19149" end="19172" title="Chinese Soviet Republic" label="Chinese Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025459" start="19210" end="19216" title="Ruijin" label="Ruijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57052" start="19218" end="19225" title="Jiangxi" label="Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375464" start="19250" end="19259" title="Encirclement campaigns" label="wiped out"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="19319" end="19329" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q515388" start="19346" end="19357" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="19361" end="19368" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551794" start="19485" end="19515" title="Japanese invasion of Manchuria" label="invaded and occupied Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="19579" end="19603" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q718893" start="19619" end="19626" title="Theater (warfare)" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19630" end="19642" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143850" start="19662" end="19677" title="Second United Front" label="uneasy alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q701321" start="19749" end="19763" title="Japanese war crimes" label="war atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q192055" start="19887" end="19907" title="Nanjing Massacre" label="massacred in Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="19999" end="20011" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945433" start="20049" end="20057" title="Four Policemen" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q176930" start="20071" end="20100" title="Declaration by United Nations" label="Declaration by United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="20175" end="20197" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="20273" end="20291" title="surrender of Japan" label="surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="20324" end="20330" title="Penghu" label="Penghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13578439" start="20337" end="20367" title="Retrocession of Taiwan" label="handed over to Chinese control"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="20560" end="20570" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="20579" end="20589" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q213099" start="20729" end="20745" title="Constitution of the Republic of China" label="ROC constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="20856" end="20899" title="Retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan" label="ROC government retreated offshore to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708520" start="20921" end="20933" title="Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="20934" end="20944" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="20954" end="21000" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="proclaimed the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q164055" start="21004" end="21020" title="Tiananmen Square" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="21022" end="21029" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484605" start="21048" end="21063" title="Battle of Hainan Island" label="captured Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557549" start="21081" end="21094" title="Annexation of Tibet by the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="annexed Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445249" start="21151" end="21181" title="Kuomintang Islamic insurgency" label="an insurgency in western China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="21208" end="21211" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927676" start="21271" end="21291" title="Land Reform Movement" label="Land Reform Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21457" end="21469" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="21501" end="21510" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="21519" end="21541" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="gradually deteriorated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196651" start="21605" end="21628" title="China and weapons of mass destruction" label="its own nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="21726" end="21744" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="21768" end="21785" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454958" start="21807" end="21843" title="Great Chinese Famine" label="an estimated 15 to 55 million deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="21980" end="21999" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334327" start="22135" end="22151" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758" label="replaced the ROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q196341" start="22311" end="22323" title="Gang of Four" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q41570" start="22341" end="22352" title="Hua Guofeng" label="Hua Guofeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="22469" end="22482" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q11077566" start="22530" end="22539" title="Boluan Fanzheng" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="22544" end="22560" title="Reform and Opening Up" label="economic reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466972" start="22586" end="22598" title="Eight Elders" label="Eight Elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153975" start="22700" end="22708" title="People&amp;#x27;s commune" label="communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="22735" end="22764" title="Collective farming" label="Agricultural collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328727" start="22848" end="22870" title="Special economic zones of China" label="special economic zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598268" start="22904" end="22927" title="State-owned enterprises of China" label="state-owned enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q200800" start="23059" end="23071" title="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="23127" end="23152" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="those in Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q99829" start="23193" end="23204" title="Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao Ziyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="23287" end="23298" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q74279" start="23376" end="23390" title="iron rice bowl" label="iron rice bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="23476" end="23493" title="British Hong Kong" label="British Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="23498" end="23514" title="Portuguese Macau" label="Portuguese Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="23536" end="23540" title="Handover of Hong Kong" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="23545" end="23549" title="Handover of Macau" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="23568" end="23598" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="special administrative regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="23622" end="23646" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="23671" end="23695" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088062" start="23711" end="23737" title="16th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="16th CCP National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="23747" end="23756" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="24095" end="24105" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q137566" start="24146" end="24172" title="18th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="18th CCP National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10845594" start="24232" end="24264" title="Anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping" label="a vast anti-corruption crackdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q52161605" start="24328" end="24338" title="China under Xi Jinping" label="his tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="24507" end="24511" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132956" start="24516" end="24533" title="Taklamakan Desert" label="Taklamakan Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="24560" end="24571" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="24605" end="24613" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469" start="24615" end="24624" title="Karakoram" label="Karakoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="24626" end="24631" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474" start="24636" end="24645" title="Tian Shan" label="Tian Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="24690" end="24695" title="South Asia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="24700" end="24712" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="24718" end="24725" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="24815" end="24830" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="24907" end="24920" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q181969" start="24951" end="24956" title="Bohai Sea" label="Bohai"/>
<link wikidata="Q37960" start="24958" end="24964" title="Yellow Sea" label="Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341" start="24966" end="24976" title="East China Sea" label="East China"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="24981" end="24992" title="South China Sea" label="South China"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="25047" end="25062" title="Eurasian Steppe" label="Eurasian Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="25101" end="25109" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256486" start="25111" end="25114" title="18th parallel north" label="18°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255495" start="25119" end="25124" title="54th parallel north" label="54° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="25130" end="25139" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635737" start="25141" end="25144" title="73rd meridian east" label="73°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349678" start="25149" end="25155" title="135th meridian east" label="135° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q590232" start="25161" end="25180" title="geographical center" label="geographical center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="25427" end="25442" title="alluvium" label="alluvial plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="25514" end="25523" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="25633" end="25639" title="river delta" label="deltas"/>
<link wikidata="Q216941" start="25745" end="25747" title="Xi River" label="Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="25749" end="25755" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="25757" end="25768" title="Brahmaputra River" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="25773" end="25777" title="Amur River" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="25851" end="25858" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="25989" end="26002" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q792880" start="26141" end="26152" title="Ayding Lake" label="Ayding Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q284780" start="26169" end="26186" title="Turpan Depression" label="Turpan Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="26251" end="26261" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="26271" end="26279" title="monsoons" label="monsoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="26576" end="26600" title="desertification" label="expansion of its deserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="26714" end="26724" title="sandstorms" label="sandstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q727414" start="26793" end="26804" title="Asian dust" label="dust storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="26931" end="26938" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755206" start="26944" end="26961" title="Pollution in China" label="pollution control"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="27047" end="27055" title="glaciers" label="glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376358" start="27099" end="27113" title="water shortage" label="water shortage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133474" start="27193" end="27216" title="climate change in China" label="climate change in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150588" start="27248" end="27261" title="coal in China" label="coal in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="27270" end="27284" title="Carbon capture and storage" label="carbon capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="28030" end="28051" title="megadiverse countries" label="megadiverse countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q944816" start="28092" end="28111" title="biogeographic realm" label="biogeographic realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="28118" end="28128" title="Palearctic realm" label="Palearctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q757081" start="28137" end="28148" title="Indomalayan realm" label="Indomalayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="28292" end="28298" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="28303" end="28311" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="28343" end="28377" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914772" start="28383" end="28429" title="Biodiversity action plan" label="National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251384" start="28512" end="28519" title="List of mammals of China" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926077" start="28799" end="28873" title="List of endangered and protected species of China" label="animal species are threatened, vulnerable or in danger of local extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="28974" end="29002" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534321" start="29078" end="29093" title="Protected areas of China" label="nature reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q188130" start="29356" end="29361" title="Baiji" label="Baiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="29503" end="29513" title="coniferous" label="coniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="29597" end="29602" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q124410" start="29607" end="29623" title="Asian black bear" label="Asian black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q422666" start="29663" end="29673" title="understory" label="understory"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="29683" end="29690" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="29723" end="29729" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="29741" end="29748" title="Montane ecosystems" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="29759" end="29766" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q27355" start="29771" end="29774" title="taxus" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="29802" end="29814" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="29817" end="29828" title="Subtropical" label="Subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="29987" end="29997" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="30019" end="30025" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="30030" end="30036" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="30150" end="30155" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381277" start="30224" end="30265" title="environmental issues in China" label="environmental deterioration and pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381288" start="30558" end="30563" title="Environmental issues in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419355" start="30638" end="30649" title="List of countries by carbon dioxide emissions" label="CO emitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q167631" start="30683" end="30696" title="List of countries by carbon dioxide emissions per capita" label="CO per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q85764549" start="30818" end="30851" title="Greenhouse gas emissions by China" label="Greenhouse gas emissions by China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435740" start="30860" end="30880" title="List of countries by greenhouse gas emissions" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="30910" end="30925" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q50484273" start="31035" end="31070" title="Ministry of Ecology and Environment" label="Ministry of Ecology and Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="31364" end="31379" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101409" start="31401" end="31423" title="Climate Action Tracker" label="Climate Action Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="31632" end="31648" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945833" start="31653" end="31674" title="Renewable energy commercialization" label="its commercialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="31681" end="31682" title="US$" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175566" start="31928" end="31944" title="Renewable energy in China" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150588" start="32122" end="32126" title="Coal in China" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954822" start="32171" end="32190" title="Hydroelectric power in Himachal Pradesh" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q842250" start="32212" end="32216" title="Wind power in China" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="32238" end="32250" title="Solar power" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q782552" start="32272" end="32286" title="Nuclear power in China" label="nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980689" start="32315" end="32326" title="Natural gas in China" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18556" start="32358" end="32367" title="bioenergy" label="bioenergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="32601" end="32610" title="Petroleum" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="32799" end="32812" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="third-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="32853" end="32859" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="33055" end="33078" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050943" start="33112" end="33135" title="Yearbook of the United Nations" label="UN Demographic Yearbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="33153" end="33171" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061982" start="33192" end="33233" title="List of countries and territories by number of land borders" label="longest combined land border in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100037" start="33253" end="33262" title="Coastline of China" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="33306" end="33316" title="Yalu River" label="Yalu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q212428" start="33338" end="33352" title="Gulf of Tonkin" label="Gulf of Tonkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944710" start="33360" end="33378" title="Borders of China" label="borders 14 nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="33423" end="33430" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="33432" end="33436" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="33442" end="33449" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="33469" end="33474" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="33476" end="33482" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="33484" end="33489" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="33491" end="33499" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="33504" end="33515" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="33531" end="33541" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="33543" end="33553" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="33558" end="33568" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="33590" end="33596" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="33598" end="33606" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="33612" end="33623" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11212956" start="33627" end="33637" title="Inner Asia" label="Inner Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27243" start="33642" end="33656" title="Northeast Asia" label="Northeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="33688" end="33698" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="33703" end="33711" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="33783" end="33788" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="33790" end="33801" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="33803" end="33811" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="33817" end="33826" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308408" start="34010" end="34015" title="Sino-Indian border dispute" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089001" start="34020" end="34026" title="Bhutan–China border" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112504" start="34126" end="34130" title="East China Sea EEZ disputes" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405450" start="34135" end="34151" title="Territorial disputes in the South China Sea" label="South China Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192526" start="34165" end="34180" title="Senkaku Islands dispute" label="Senkaku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141500" start="34201" end="34224" title="South China Sea Islands" label="South China Sea Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="34300" end="34315" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924561" start="34385" end="34391" title="ideology of the Chinese Communist Party" label="guided"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301091" start="34395" end="34433" title="socialism with Chinese characteristics" label="socialism with Chinese characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160095" start="34444" end="34484" title="Chinese Marxist philosophy" label="Marxism adapted to Chinese circumstances"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357792" start="34572" end="34609" title="people&amp;#x27;s democratic dictatorship" label="people&amp;#x27;s democratic dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q193852" start="34765" end="34786" title="democratic centralism" label="democratic centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255519" start="34937" end="34975" title="Democracy in China" label="officially terms itself as a democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113644077" start="35053" end="35090" title="whole-process people&amp;#x27;s democracy" label="whole-process people&amp;#x27;s democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="35183" end="35195" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876038" start="35280" end="35300" title="Freedom of the press in China" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="35302" end="35321" title="freedom of assembly" label="freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="35323" end="35361" title="Non-governmental organization" label="free formation of social organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395087" start="35363" end="35382" title="Freedom of religion in China" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q836854" start="35387" end="35414" title="Internet censorship in China" label="free access to the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="35516" end="35543" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="35551" end="35566" title="The Economist Democracy Index" label="Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q44544" start="35841" end="35857" title="Constitution of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183482" start="35883" end="35900" title="National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q50963" start="35957" end="35974" title="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076970" start="36009" end="36018" title="Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="36020" end="36048" title="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="36057" end="36074" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q556184" start="36076" end="36088" title="Leader of the Chinese Communist Party" label="party leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="36231" end="36247" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="36282" end="36292" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q988456" start="36355" end="36385" title="Chinese Communist Party Committee Secretary" label="secretary of the CCP committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="36772" end="36803" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518467" start="36868" end="36896" title="highest organ of state power" label="highest organ of state power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811251" start="36949" end="36961" title="rubber stamp (politics)" label="rubber stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q19214" start="37008" end="37030" title="Standing Committee of the National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="NPC Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q574619" start="37259" end="37278" title="List of political parties in China" label="eight minor parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="37363" end="37372" title="President of China" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="37585" end="37628" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="chairman of the Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="37654" end="37670" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047378" start="37675" end="37692" title="Supreme Military Command of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="supreme commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="37718" end="37725" title="Premier of China" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="37733" end="37751" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414390" start="37758" end="37766" title="Li Qiang" label="Li Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="38009" end="38022" title="State Council of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q835630" start="38078" end="38094" title="State councillor" label="state councilors"/>
<link wikidata="Q19215" start="38145" end="38200" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q835396" start="38277" end="38289" title="United Front (China)" label="united front"/>
<link wikidata="Q64543" start="38499" end="38510" title="Wang Huning" label="Wang Huning"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="39286" end="39299" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615742" start="39316" end="39325" title="Provinces of China" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q57362" start="39332" end="39350" title="Autonomous regions of China" label="autonomous regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208802" start="39401" end="39435" title="Direct-administered municipality" label="direct-administered municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="39506" end="39536" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="special administrative regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22528" start="39588" end="39604" title="Geography of Taiwan" label="island of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57251" start="39612" end="39627" title="Taiwan Province, People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Taiwan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q249870" start="39629" end="39635" title="Kinmen" label="Kinmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q609255" start="39640" end="39645" title="Matsu Islands" label="Matsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="39659" end="39674" title="Fujian" label="Fujian Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="39740" end="39755" title="Hainan" label="Hainan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="39760" end="39778" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="39831" end="39848" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046848" start="39951" end="39962" title="North China" label="North China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062525" start="39964" end="39974" title="East China" label="East China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190484" start="39976" end="39994" title="Southwestern China" label="Southwestern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153001" start="39996" end="40014" title="Northwestern China" label="Northwestern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q197877" start="40016" end="40035" title="South Central China" label="South Central China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="40041" end="40056" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633240" start="40172" end="40188" title="List of diplomatic missions of China" label="embassies in 174"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="40430" end="40461" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="40527" end="40530" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="40536" end="40539" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="SCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q243630" start="40545" end="40550" title="BRICS" label="BRICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="40556" end="40572" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="40582" end="40586" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="APEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="40637" end="40657" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="40702" end="40722" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="40758" end="40777" title="One China" label="one-China principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28698515" start="41526" end="41548" title="Foreign policy of China" label="Chinese foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="41580" end="41590" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255047" start="41598" end="41637" title="Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence" label="Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q828218" start="41888" end="41909" title="rogue state" label="regarded as dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117266" start="41953" end="41958" title="China–Sudan relations" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q705574" start="41960" end="41971" title="China–North Korea relations" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095" start="41976" end="41980" title="China–Iran relations" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999374" start="42019" end="42026" title="China–Myanmar relations" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783799" start="42129" end="42140" title="Arakan Army" label="Arakan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q130570" start="42154" end="42205" title="China–Russia relations" label="close political, economic and military relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280045" start="42287" end="42335" title="China–United States relations" label="China&amp;#x27;s relationship with the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963738" start="42471" end="42500" title="Sino-African relations" label="engaging with African nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="42709" end="42721" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="42780" end="42785" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="42961" end="42985" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q28186924" start="43418" end="43436" title="21st Century Maritime Silk Road" label="maritime Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q651936" start="43587" end="43598" title="debt relief" label="debt relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="43643" end="43672" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187401" start="43902" end="43914" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="43928" end="43932" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="43945" end="43954" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364097" start="43971" end="43983" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Rocket Force" label="Rocket Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q28416251" start="44032" end="44047" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Aerospace Force" label="Aerospace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537209" start="44053" end="44069" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Cyberspace Force" label="Cyberspace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q125524285" start="44075" end="44100" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Information Support Force" label="Information Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q28412977" start="44110" end="44139" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Joint Logistics Support Force" label="Joint Logistics Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075693" start="44196" end="44219" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Strategic Support Force" label="Strategic Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="44282" end="44302" title="List of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel" label="largest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196651" start="44335" end="44377" title="China and weapons of mass destruction" label="third-largest stockpile of nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="44529" end="44556" title="List of countries with highest military expenditures" label="second-largest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140407" start="44565" end="44570" title="SIPRI" label="SIPRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="44956" end="44983" title="Central Military Commission (China)" label="Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="45197" end="45216" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="chairman of the CMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047378" start="45224" end="45242" title="Supreme Military Command of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072770" start="45321" end="45342" title="human rights in China" label="human rights in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532447" start="45611" end="45645" title="Capital punishment in China" label="excessive use of the death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="45668" end="45681" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417780" start="45736" end="45756" title="Freedom in the World" label="Freedom in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="45777" end="45798" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="45939" end="45956" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="45958" end="45978" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757432" start="45984" end="46005" title="right to a fair trial" label="right to a fair trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="46007" end="46026" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="46028" end="46046" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="46052" end="46067" title="property" label="property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q19514494" start="46228" end="46239" title="LGBT rights in China" label="LGBT rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850158" start="47010" end="47015" title="Human rights in Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q301585" start="47125" end="47146" title="religious suppression" label="religious suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="47258" end="47265" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506436" start="47325" end="47341" title="Xinjiang internment camps" label="internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827132" start="47509" end="47517" title="Physical abuse" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339137" start="47522" end="47535" title="Psychological abuse" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="47543" end="47563" title="Compulsory sterilization" label="forced sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="47565" end="47577" title="sexual abuse" label="sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="47583" end="47595" title="Forced labour" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="47648" end="47662" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113681179" start="47759" end="47788" title="UN Human Rights Office report on Xinjiang" label="UN Human Rights Office report"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="47842" end="47865" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="47928" end="47937" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q95976070" start="47973" end="47994" title="2020 Hong Kong national security law" label="national security law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="48026" end="48045" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16639280" start="48240" end="48260" title="Global Slavery Index" label="Global Slavery Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057923" start="48381" end="48388" title="Slavery in China" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271479" start="48530" end="48556" title="re-education through labor" label="re-education through labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280973" start="48697" end="48717" title="Laogai" label="reform through labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420986" start="48826" end="48852" title="Laogai Research Foundation" label="Laogai Research Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316242" start="49460" end="49479" title="World Values Survey" label="World Values Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="49842" end="49864" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="second-largest economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="49877" end="49888" title="nominal GDP" label="nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="49911" end="49918" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="49931" end="49954" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q473750" start="50001" end="50015" title="World economy" label="global economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764970" start="50065" end="50080" title="List of countries by real GDP growth rate" label="fastest-growing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="50197" end="50221" title="Chinese economic reform" label="economic reforms in 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="50337" end="50367" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="64th by nominal GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q621102" start="50431" end="50452" title="Fortune Global 500" label="500 largest companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002417" start="50634" end="50686" title="Economic history of China before 1912" label="was one of the world&amp;#x27;s foremost economic powers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50709" end="50719" title="Economy of East Asia#China" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002417" start="50724" end="50738" title="Economic history of China before 1912" label="global history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416081" start="50752" end="50784" title="List of regions by past GDP (PPP)" label="had one of the largest economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315969" start="50814" end="50832" title="Pax Sinica" label="past two millennia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130301678" start="51120" end="51126" title="Mining industry of China" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006573" start="51128" end="51133" title="Steel industry in China" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q75024" start="51302" end="51325" title="List of major stock exchanges" label="largest stock exchanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q739514" start="51339" end="51347" title="Shanghai Stock Exchange" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q496672" start="51349" end="51358" title="Hong Kong Stock Exchange" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q517750" start="51363" end="51371" title="Shenzhen Stock Exchange" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772346" start="51542" end="51572" title="Global Financial Centres Index" label="Global Financial Centres Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="51573" end="51581" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="51583" end="51592" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="51598" end="51606" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q548235" start="51662" end="51678" title="state capitalism" label="state capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140877" start="51682" end="51704" title="party-state capitalism" label="party-state capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="51796" end="51812" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52061" end="52089" title="Manufacturing#List of countries by manufacturing output" label="largest manufacturing nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="52230" end="52239" title="high-tech" label="high-tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="52290" end="52317" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976242" start="52876" end="52903" title="World Tourism rankings" label="fourth-most-visited country"/>
<link wikidata="Q12089958" start="52960" end="52976" title="domestic tourism" label="domestic tourism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53088" end="53109" title="World Heritage Sites by country#Countries with major concentrations of World Heritage Sites" label="second-largest number"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="53113" end="53132" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149287" start="53135" end="53137" title="List of World Heritage Sites in China" label="56"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976242" start="53170" end="53203" title="World Tourism rankings" label="most popular tourist destinations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53205" end="53230" title="World Tourism rankings#Asia-Pacific" label="first in the Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186690" start="53256" end="53275" title="List of countries by total wealth" label="accounted for 18.6%"/>
<link wikidata="Q689548" start="53402" end="53409" title="Poverty in China" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="53628" end="53631" title="Purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="54495" end="54512" title="Income inequality" label="Income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="54554" end="54570" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858279" start="54659" end="54687" title="List of countries by number of billionaires" label="total number of billionaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q58830388" start="54692" end="54720" title="List of countries by number of millionaires" label="total number of millionaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q372657" start="54953" end="54966" title="Credit Suisse" label="Credit Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="55225" end="55228" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="55264" end="55285" title="List of largest trading countries" label="largest trading power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498085" start="55550" end="55565" title="Shipping markets" label="dry-bulk market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468395" start="55568" end="55606" title="Foreign-exchange reserves of China" label="China&amp;#x27;s foreign exchange reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="55760" end="55785" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="56198" end="56206" title="renminbi" label="renminbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983653" start="56230" end="56251" title="currency intervention" label="currency intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="56397" end="56408" title="counterfeit" label="counterfeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121120" start="56481" end="56502" title="Intellectual property in China" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q112300473" start="56519" end="56557" title="Allegations of intellectual property theft by China" label="steals IP through espionage operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="56568" end="56586" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333445" start="56594" end="56619" title="Economic Complexity Index" label="Economic Complexity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253606" start="56744" end="56780" title="internationalization of the renminbi" label="internationalization of the renminbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q363958" start="56963" end="56985" title="special drawing rights" label="special drawing rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="57365" end="57377" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243670" start="57400" end="57419" title="List of Chinese discoveries" label="Chinese discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434077" start="57424" end="57434" title="List of Chinese inventions" label="inventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q335415" start="57444" end="57455" title="papermaking" label="papermaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255779" start="57457" end="57465" title="History of typography in East Asia" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="57471" end="57478" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="57484" end="57493" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349214" start="57499" end="57520" title="Four Great Inventions" label="Four Great Inventions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57638" end="57654" title="negative numbers#History" label="negative numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238584" start="57788" end="57804" title="Great Divergence" label="Great Divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909446" start="57848" end="57873" title="Century of humiliation" label="repeated military defeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q320404" start="57881" end="57905" title="Eight-Nation Alliance" label="European colonial powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="57910" end="57924" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q498117" start="58025" end="58052" title="Self-Strengthening Movement" label="Self-Strengthening Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="58177" end="58189" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q636187" start="58333" end="58352" title="Four Modernizations" label="Four Modernizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="58461" end="58480" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q82370" start="58585" end="58604" title="List of sovereign states by research and development spending" label="in R&amp;amp;D spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601059" start="58722" end="58760" title="World Intellectual Property Indicators" label="World Intellectual Property Indicators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="58978" end="59001" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874121" start="59069" end="59091" title="Supercomputing in China" label="Chinese supercomputers"/>
<link wikidata="Q633765" start="59109" end="59129" title="TOP500" label="fastest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q757827" start="59255" end="59275" title="Education in China" label="its education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881523" start="59296" end="59345" title="science, technology, engineering, and mathematics" label="science, technology, engineering, and mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671292" start="59354" end="59388" title="Academic publishing in China" label="Its academic publication apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518735" start="59413" end="59451" title="List of countries by number of scientific and technical journal articles" label="largest publisher of scientific papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51431089" start="59499" end="59511" title="Nature Index" label="Nature Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q49678" start="59796" end="59812" title="Dong Fang Hong I" label="Dong Fang Hong I"/>
<link wikidata="Q147581" start="59972" end="59982" title="Yang Liwei" label="Yang Liwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q378417" start="60009" end="60019" title="Shenzhou 5" label="Shenzhou 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567052" start="60033" end="60059" title="List of Chinese astronauts" label="eighteen Chinese nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q131500" start="60165" end="60175" title="Tiangong-1" label="Tiangong-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273284" start="60216" end="60220" title="Yutu (rover)" label="Yutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061879" start="60289" end="60303" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 3" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q723045" start="60370" end="60384" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 4" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="60392" end="60412" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944018" start="60423" end="60437" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q106614244" start="60642" end="60669" title="Zhurong (rover)" label="rover (&amp;quot;Zhurong&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="60711" end="60724" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100935" start="60730" end="60738" title="Tiangong space station" label="Tiangong"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="60743" end="60758" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="60922" end="60945" title="Moon landing" label="land humans on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105834902" start="61036" end="61049" title="Long March 10" label="Long March 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q86661840" start="61057" end="61074" title="next-generation crewed spacecraft" label="crewed spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q121037382" start="61082" end="61101" title="Chinese crewed lunar lander" label="crewed lunar lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346001" start="61115" end="61129" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q618975" start="61196" end="61208" title="Apollo (crater)" label="Apollo Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="61216" end="61236" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944018" start="61321" end="61335" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="61444" end="61465" title="Absorption spectroscopy" label="infrared spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="61988" end="62002" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27225800" start="62234" end="62265" title="List of high-speed railway lines in China" label="largest high-speed rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718149" start="62271" end="62297" title="List of supertall skyscrapers" label="most supertall skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12514" start="62328" end="62344" title="Three Gorges Dam" label="Three Gorges Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880332" start="62366" end="62405" title="Ultra-high-voltage electricity transmission in China" label="ultra-high-voltage transmission network"/>
<link wikidata="Q857141" start="62441" end="62477" title="BeiDou" label="a global satellite navigation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587916" start="62616" end="62666" title="List of countries by number of mobile numbers in use" label="largest number of active cellphones of any country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="62734" end="62742" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="62747" end="62762" title="List of sovereign states by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="broadband users"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="62973" end="62975" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="63075" end="63077" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q741618" start="63127" end="63139" title="China Mobile" label="China Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068485" start="63141" end="63153" title="China Unicom" label="China Unicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24834296" start="63158" end="63171" title="China Telecom" label="China Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="63590" end="63596" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q136484" start="63601" end="63604" title="ZTE" label="ZTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="63689" end="63709" title="satellite navigation" label="satellite navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q857141" start="63725" end="63731" title="BeiDou" label="BeiDou"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="63868" end="63871" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q486250" start="63876" end="63883" title="GLONASS" label="GLONASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847533" start="64083" end="64100" title="China National Highways" label="national highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q986648" start="64105" end="64116" title="Expressways of China" label="expressways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427950" start="64195" end="64217" title="List of countries by road network size" label="longest highway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483418" start="64349" end="64359" title="List of countries by motor vehicle production" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q588723" start="64722" end="64743" title="Rail transport in China" label="China&amp;#x27;s railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073489" start="64783" end="64816" title="China Railway" label="China State Railway Group Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q387170" start="64828" end="64839" title="List of countries by rail usage" label="the busiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q592945" start="65002" end="65024" title="List of countries by rail transport network size" label="second-longest network"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="65107" end="65123" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275022" start="65142" end="65185" title="Chunyun" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest annual human migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059836" start="65212" end="65240" title="High-speed rail in China" label="high-speed rail (HSR) system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534266" start="65379" end="65398" title="List of high-speed railway lines" label="longest HSR network"/>
<link wikidata="Q913275" start="65429" end="65445" title="Beijing–Shanghai high-speed railway" label="Beijing–Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q931127" start="65447" end="65462" title="Beijing–Tianjin intercity railway" label="Beijing–Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q871642" start="65468" end="65485" title="Chengdu–Chongqing intercity railway" label="Chengdu–Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712677" start="65707" end="65743" title="Beijing–Guangzhou high-speed railway" label="Beijing–Guangzhou high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q913275" start="65795" end="65830" title="Beijing–Shanghai high-speed railway" label="Beijing–Shanghai high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250794" start="65842" end="65888" title="List of longest bridges" label="three of longest railroad bridges in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q769591" start="65894" end="65915" title="Shanghai maglev train" label="Shanghai maglev train"/>
<link wikidata="Q248613" start="66095" end="66121" title="Urban rail transit in China" label="urban mass transit systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q206974" start="66168" end="66181" title="List of metro systems" label="metro systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q462201" start="66216" end="66224" title="Shanghai Metro" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q235319" start="66226" end="66233" title="Beijing Subway" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q660751" start="66235" end="66244" title="Guangzhou Metro" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660063" start="66246" end="66253" title="Chengdu Metro" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q867680" start="66258" end="66266" title="Shenzhen Metro" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150586" start="66291" end="66323" title="Civil aviation in China" label="civil aviation industry in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q51747" start="66479" end="66488" title="Air China" label="Air China"/>
<link wikidata="Q291090" start="66490" end="66513" title="China Southern Airlines" label="China Southern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="66519" end="66541" title="China Eastern Airlines" label="China Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331352" start="66774" end="66808" title="List of airports in China" label="approximately 259 airports in 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624552" start="66821" end="66850" title="List of ports in China" label="over 2,000 river and seaports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663449" start="66908" end="66937" title="List of busiest container ports" label="fifty busiest container ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186077" start="66992" end="67008" title="Port of Shanghai" label="Port of Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055230" start="67103" end="67116" title="List of countries by waterways length" label="sixth-longest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130624" start="67279" end="67323" title="Water resources of China" label="water scarcity, contamination, and pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269285" start="67342" end="67398" title="Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation" label="Joint Monitoring Program for Water Supply and Sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007834" start="67472" end="67491" title="improved sanitation" label="improved sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036542" start="67513" end="67547" title="South–North Water Transfer Project" label="South–North Water Transfer Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059106" start="67619" end="67638" title="2020 Chinese census" label="2020 Chinese census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858691" start="68561" end="68577" title="two-child policy" label="two-child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107041500" start="68581" end="68599" title="three-child policy" label="three-child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042385" start="68637" end="68653" title="Aging of China" label="population aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="68763" end="68783" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075150" start="68817" end="68846" title="List of countries by total fertility rate" label="among the lowest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509446" start="68857" end="68886" title="National Bureau of Statistics of China" label="National Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861780" start="69244" end="69253" title="human sex ratio" label="sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900233" start="69888" end="69901" title="Urbanization in China" label="has urbanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q174844" start="70132" end="70142" title="Megacity" label="megacities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="70192" end="70201" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="70203" end="70211" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="70213" end="70220" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="70222" end="70229" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="70231" end="70240" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="70242" end="70250" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="70252" end="70259" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="70261" end="70271" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="70273" end="70279" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q30340" start="70281" end="70290" title="Zhengzhou" label="Zhengzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="70292" end="70297" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="70299" end="70307" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q373346" start="70309" end="70314" title="Linyi" label="Linyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58401" start="70316" end="70328" title="Shijiazhuang" label="Shijiazhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q59218" start="70330" end="70338" title="Dongguan" label="Dongguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="70340" end="70347" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q174091" start="70352" end="70360" title="Changsha" label="Changsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735963" start="70483" end="70507" title="List of cities in China by population" label="most populous urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496553" start="70531" end="70550" title="List of largest cities" label="largest city proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459926" start="70839" end="70858" title="floating population" label="floating population"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780812" start="71087" end="71101" title="Zhonghua minzu" label="Zhonghua minzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="71152" end="71163" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="71339" end="71344" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="71346" end="71354" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q653608" start="71356" end="71362" title="Linxia City" label="Linxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q788104" start="71368" end="71389" title="autonomous prefecture" label="autonomous prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q868046" start="71396" end="71409" title="Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture" label="Xishuangbanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288568" start="71854" end="71869" title="living language" label="living language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="71930" end="71944" title="Sinitic languages" label="Sinitic branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="71952" end="71980" title="Sino-Tibetan language family" label="Sino-Tibetan language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="71997" end="72005" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="72045" end="72060" title="Varieties of Chinese" label="other varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="72064" end="72080" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56479" start="72082" end="72085" title="Jin Chinese" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34290" start="72087" end="72089" title="Wu Chinese" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q56504" start="72091" end="72094" title="Min Chinese" label="Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="72096" end="72101" title="Hakka Chinese" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033959" start="72103" end="72106" title="Yue Chinese" label="Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220" start="72108" end="72113" title="Xiang Chinese" label="Xiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q33475" start="72115" end="72118" title="Gan Chinese" label="Gan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56546" start="72120" end="72123" title="Huizhou Chinese" label="Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735715" start="72125" end="72129" title="Pinghua" label="Ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920769" start="72154" end="72168" title="Shaozhou Tuhua" label="Shaozhou Tuhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031342" start="72173" end="72187" title="Xiangnan Tuhua" label="Xiangnan Tuhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="72207" end="72227" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34271" start="72239" end="72246" title="Lhasa Tibetan" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710697" start="72248" end="72253" title="Qiang language" label="Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478711" start="72255" end="72259" title="Naxi language" label="Naxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34235" start="72264" end="72266" title="Nuosu language" label="Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="72290" end="72297" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q604329" start="72302" end="72324" title="Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau" label="Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190484" start="72361" end="72379" title="southwestern China" label="southwestern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q13216" start="72388" end="72394" title="Zhuang languages" label="Zhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="72396" end="72400" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q35379" start="72402" end="72406" title="Kam language" label="Dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112388" start="72411" end="72414" title="Sui language" label="Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="72422" end="72438" title="Kra–Dai languages" label="Tai-Kadai family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9040772" start="72440" end="72444" title="Hmongic language" label="Miao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992695" start="72449" end="72452" title="Mienic languages" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q33322" start="72460" end="72477" title="Hmong–Mien languages" label="Hmong–Mien family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923414" start="72483" end="72485" title="Wa language" label="Wa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="72493" end="72513" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="72522" end="72534" title="Northeast China" label="northeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153001" start="72539" end="72557" title="northwestern China" label="northwestern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="72585" end="72601" title="Altaic languages" label="Altaic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="72612" end="72618" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="72620" end="72629" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="72642" end="72658" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13263" start="72660" end="72666" title="Uyghur language" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="72668" end="72674" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255" start="72676" end="72682" title="Kyrgyz language" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q33963" start="72684" end="72689" title="Salar language" label="Salar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34224" start="72694" end="72707" title="Western Yugur language" label="Western Yugur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="72709" end="72715" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="72757" end="72768" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33873" start="72770" end="72778" title="Sarikoli language" label="Sarikoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131429628" start="72796" end="72822" title="Chinese Tajiks" label="Tajiks in western Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="72830" end="72852" title="Indo-European language" label="Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="72854" end="72882" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="Taiwanese indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="72936" end="72958" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="72961" end="72977" title="Standard Chinese" label="Standard Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147606" start="73002" end="73017" title="Beijing dialect" label="Beijing dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="73115" end="73128" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q57362" start="73188" end="73215" title="autonomous regions of China" label="autonomous regions of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="73383" end="73402" title="Freedom of religion" label="Freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="73589" end="73596" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274087" start="73715" end="73743" title="United Front Work Department" label="United Front Work Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q712192" start="73853" end="73868" title="three teachings" label="three doctrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="73878" end="73890" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="73892" end="73898" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="73904" end="73912" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928436" start="73967" end="74002" title="Chinese theology" label="theological and spiritual framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="74057" end="74062" title="Shang" label="Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="74067" end="74079" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="74081" end="74102" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959372" start="74204" end="74208" title="shen (Chinese religion)" label="shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="74227" end="74234" title="deities" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329919" start="74264" end="74284" title="progenitor" label="ancestral principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q977690" start="74324" end="74336" title="culture hero" label="culture hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="74364" end="74381" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="74420" end="74425" title="cult (religious practice)" label="cults"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="74460" end="74474" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209741" start="74527" end="74544" title="Yan Huang Zisun" label="divine patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q418226" start="74571" end="74575" title="Mazu" label="Mazu"/>
<link wikidata="Q222797" start="74599" end="74605" title="Guandi" label="Guandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322674" start="74633" end="74640" title="Caishen" label="Caishen"/>
<link wikidata="Q245395" start="74675" end="74680" title="Pangu" label="Pangu"/>
<link wikidata="Q206935" start="74982" end="74996" title="civil religion" label="civil religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q668728" start="75092" end="75130" title="list of statues by height" label="world&amp;#x27;s tallest religious statues"/>
<link wikidata="Q924174" start="75246" end="75266" title="Spring Temple Buddha" label="Spring Temple Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="75270" end="75275" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q871396" start="75640" end="75652" title="non-theistic" label="non-theistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="75657" end="75667" title="humanistic" label="humanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="76273" end="76285" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="76313" end="76318" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874708" start="76370" end="76412" title="Chinese salvationist religions" label="salvationist doctrinal organized movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="76437" end="76449" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76516" end="76536" title="religion in China#Ethnic minorities&amp;#x27; indigenous religions" label="indigenous religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="76609" end="76625" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="76632" end="76640" title="Tibetans" label="Tibetans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187403" start="76642" end="76649" title="Mongols in China" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q34283" start="76654" end="76660" title="Yugurs" label="Yugurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="76682" end="76685" title="Hui" label="Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="76687" end="76693" title="Uyghur people" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4208066" start="76695" end="76701" title="Kazakhs in China" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4221193" start="76707" end="76713" title="Kyrgyz in China" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="76861" end="76868" title="primary school" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="76873" end="76896" title="middle school" label="junior secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q670287" start="76963" end="76969" title="Gaokao" label="Gaokao"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="77158" end="77166" title="tertiary education" label="tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="77882" end="77889" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567033" start="77902" end="77919" title="List of Chinese administrative divisions by GDP per capita" label="poorest provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q60765139" start="78282" end="78308" title="Rankings of universities in China" label="number of top universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="78594" end="78598" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="ARWU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="78599" end="78601" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="78602" end="78605" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="THE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="78666" end="78685" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="78690" end="78707" title="Peking University" label="Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="78712" end="78716" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="78721" end="78739" title="Emerging market" label="emerging economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="78758" end="78806" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="Times Higher Education World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="78815" end="78853" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634906" start="78893" end="78902" title="C9 League" label="C9 League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476448" start="78925" end="78945" title="List of universities in China" label="Chinese universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q50839200" start="79013" end="79039" title="National Health Commission" label="National Health Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148047" start="79291" end="79316" title="Patriotic Health Campaign" label="Patriotic Health Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="79441" end="79448" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="79450" end="79457" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q180266" start="79462" end="79475" title="scarlet fever" label="scarlet fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="79561" end="79574" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807865" start="79788" end="79807" title="Healthcare in China" label="Healthcare in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="80167" end="80182" title="Medication" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q912807" start="80215" end="80248" title="Active ingredient" label="active pharmaceutical ingredients"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="80314" end="80330" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628806" start="80414" end="80422" title="Stunted growth" label="stunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="80446" end="80458" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755206" start="80697" end="80721" title="Air pollution in China" label="widespread air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546114" start="80723" end="80764" title="Smoking in China" label="hundreds of millions of cigarette smokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="80785" end="80792" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817468" start="80882" end="80903" title="Mental health in China" label="Chinese mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="81035" end="81039" title="Severe acute respiratory syndrome" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="81101" end="81118" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="81143" end="81148" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110392239" start="81206" end="81235" title="zero-COVID" label="strict public health measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q115468992" start="81340" end="81367" title="2022 COVID-19 protests in China" label="protests against the policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="81403" end="81416" title="Ancient China" label="ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="81528" end="81537" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="81542" end="81556" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="81697" end="81717" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q456012" start="81769" end="81786" title="Chinese literature" label="literary emphasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498317" start="81889" end="81900" title="Chinese calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19855762" start="81902" end="81908" title="Classical Chinese poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q919348" start="81913" end="81921" title="Chinese painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q178079" start="82100" end="82116" title="meritocracy" label="culture of merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="82303" end="82322" title="Chinese nationalism" label="Chinese nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q957904" start="82651" end="82671" title="Chinese architecture" label="Chinese architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422874" start="82829" end="82834" title="Japanese architecture" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860300" start="82836" end="82841" title="Korean architecture" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621583" start="82847" end="82855" title="Architecture of Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="82953" end="82961" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="82963" end="82972" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="82974" end="82983" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="82985" end="82994" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="83012" end="83020" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24958744" start="83022" end="83029" title="Vietnamese architecture" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q170537" start="83142" end="83151" title="feng shui" label="feng shui"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="83170" end="83181" title="Hierarchy" label="hierarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="83248" end="83252" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="83389" end="83396" title="pagodas" label="pagodas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100577" start="83406" end="83413" title="Chinese palace" label="palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="83681" end="83691" title="Geography" label="geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33565" start="83744" end="83755" title="stilt house" label="stilt house"/>
<link wikidata="Q859039" start="83775" end="83792" title="Yaodong" label="Yaodong buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="83815" end="83829" title="Yurt" label="yurt buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195718" start="83857" end="83875" title="Siheyuan" label="Siheyuan buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="83995" end="84019" title="Chinese classics" label="classical texts of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q134032" start="84081" end="84089" title="Chinese calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q753275" start="84091" end="84099" title="List of Chinese military texts" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q724950" start="84101" end="84110" title="Chinese astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q261503" start="84112" end="84121" title="Chinese herbology" label="herbology"/>
<link wikidata="Q839778" start="84127" end="84136" title="Chinese geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="84215" end="84222" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q875313" start="84243" end="84250" title="Classic of History" label="Shujing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377760" start="84280" end="84308" title="Four Books and Five Classics" label="Four Books and Five Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q465108" start="84452" end="84469" title="Classic of Poetry" label="Classic of Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19855762" start="84477" end="84501" title="classical Chinese poetry" label="classical Chinese poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="84519" end="84526" title="floruit" label="floruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071" start="84552" end="84558" title="Li Bai" label="Li Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33772" start="84563" end="84568" title="Du Fu" label="Du Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q133908" start="84662" end="84684" title="Chinese historiography" label="Chinese historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="84706" end="84711" title="Shiji" label="Shiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q175077" start="84795" end="84816" title="Twenty-Four Histories" label="Twenty-Four Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="84873" end="84890" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q837463" start="84895" end="84903" title="Chinese folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976178" start="85032" end="85055" title="gods and demons fiction" label="gods and demons fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q753883" start="85079" end="85106" title="Four Great Classical Novels" label="Four Great Classical Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q70827" start="85127" end="85139" title="Water Margin" label="Water Margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q70806" start="85153" end="85182" title="Romance of the Three Kingdoms" label="Romance of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q70784" start="85196" end="85215" title="Journey to the West" label="Journey to the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q8265" start="85232" end="85256" title="Dream of the Red Chamber" label="Dream of the Red Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q754803" start="85279" end="85284" title="wuxia" label="wuxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180626" start="85297" end="85305" title="Jin Yong" label="Jin Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q587083" start="85310" end="85323" title="Liang Yusheng" label="Liang Yusheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="85381" end="85408" title="Sinosphere" label="Chinese sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q852377" start="85430" end="85450" title="New Culture Movement" label="New Culture Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q783605" start="85532" end="85558" title="written vernacular Chinese" label="written vernacular Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q47667" start="85582" end="85589" title="Hu Shih" label="Hu Shih"/>
<link wikidata="Q23114" start="85594" end="85600" title="Lu Xun" label="Lu Xun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973282" start="85670" end="85682" title="misty poetry" label="misty poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423453" start="85684" end="85699" title="scar literature" label="scar literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233720" start="85701" end="85720" title="young adult fiction" label="young adult fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q430833" start="85729" end="85746" title="xungen movement" label="xungen literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q147516" start="85771" end="85784" title="magic realism" label="magic realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8998" start="85829" end="85835" title="Mo Yan" label="Mo Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q262093" start="86080" end="86119" title="Traditional Chinese musical instruments" label="Traditional Chinese musical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708318" start="86346" end="86361" title="Cantonese opera" label="Cantonese opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q973150" start="86392" end="86400" title="mandopop" label="mandopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q853873" start="86405" end="86413" title="cantopop" label="cantopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100799" start="86415" end="86430" title="Chinese hip hop" label="Chinese hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="86435" end="86452" title="Hong Kong hip hop" label="Hong Kong hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327357" start="86491" end="86496" title="Hanfu" label="Hanfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q836934" start="86556" end="86561" title="Cheongsam" label="qipao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647802" start="86614" end="86628" title="hanfu movement" label="hanfu movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099677" start="86708" end="86726" title="China Fashion Week" label="China Fashion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q601760" start="86882" end="86898" title="Dingjun Mountain (film)" label="Dingjun Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622414" start="87061" end="87092" title="List of highest-grossing films in China" label="highest-grossing films in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q107273994" start="87104" end="87131" title="The Battle at Lake Changjin" label="The Battle at Lake Changjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964540" start="87152" end="87166" title="Wolf Warrior 2" label="Wolf Warrior 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q105221616" start="87191" end="87198" title="Hi, Mom (2021 film)" label="Hi, Mom"/>
<link wikidata="Q691365" start="87431" end="87438" title="Sichuan cuisine" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="87440" end="87449" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045166" start="87451" end="87458" title="Jiangsu cuisine" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038209" start="87460" end="87468" title="Shandong cuisine" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156995" start="87470" end="87476" title="Fujian cuisine" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156889" start="87478" end="87483" title="Hunan cuisine" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133178" start="87485" end="87490" title="Anhui cuisine" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156999" start="87496" end="87504" title="Zhejiang cuisine" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100736" start="87559" end="87574" title="Chinese cooking techniques" label="cooking methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q177378" start="87724" end="87728" title="tofu" label="tofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192199" start="87733" end="87741" title="soy milk" label="soy milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326339" start="87932" end="87948" title="Buddhist cuisine" label="Buddhist cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046779" start="87967" end="87990" title="Chinese Islamic cuisine" label="Chinese Islamic cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036629" start="88156" end="88173" title="Hong Kong cuisine" label="Hong Kong cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743373" start="88178" end="88202" title="American Chinese cuisine" label="American Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="88224" end="88240" title="Chinese diaspora" label="Chinese diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493914" start="88280" end="88304" title="Sport in China" label="oldest sporting cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="88329" end="88336" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069609" start="88384" end="88404" title="Western Zhou dynasty" label="Western Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q138208" start="88448" end="88452" title="cuju" label="cuju"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="88487" end="88507" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q309252" start="88560" end="88576" title="Physical fitness" label="Physical fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q204368" start="88655" end="88661" title="qigong" label="qigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q167987" start="88672" end="88679" title="tai chi" label="tai chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14092" start="88713" end="88716" title="gym" label="gym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073722" start="88829" end="88859" title="Chinese Basketball Association" label="Chinese Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="88877" end="88908" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q58590" start="89070" end="89078" title="Yao Ming" label="Yao Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q352064" start="89083" end="89094" title="Yi Jianlian" label="Yi Jianlian"/>
<link wikidata="Q209318" start="89174" end="89194" title="Chinese Super League" label="Chinese Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="89270" end="89282" title="Chinese martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="89284" end="89296" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="89298" end="89307" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="89309" end="89317" title="swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015" start="89322" end="89329" title="snooker" label="snooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="89365" end="89373" title="cycling" label="cyclists"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="89451" end="89458" title="esports" label="esports"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804535" start="89477" end="89495" title="Traditional games of China" label="traditional sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q57589" start="89505" end="89516" title="dragon boat" label="dragon boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207182" start="89525" end="89550" title="Mongolian wrestling" label="Mongolian-style wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="89555" end="89567" title="horse racing" label="horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q844734" start="89597" end="89630" title="China at the Olympics" label="participated in the Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q589922" start="89688" end="89698" title="China at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="since 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="89717" end="89737" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182067" start="89799" end="89851" title="2008 Summer Olympics medal table" label="highest number of any participating nation that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q182798" start="89891" end="89914" title="2012 Summer Paralympics" label="2012 Summer Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q734989" start="89982" end="90005" title="2011 Summer Universiade" label="2011 Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047774" start="90024" end="90045" title="2013 East Asian Games" label="2013 East Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q244809" start="90065" end="90091" title="2014 Summer Youth Olympics" label="2014 Summer Youth Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58650" start="90191" end="90202" title="Zhangjiakou" label="Zhangjiakou"/>
<link wikidata="Q193074" start="90230" end="90250" title="2022 Winter Olympics" label="2022 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q483463" start="90373" end="90384" title="Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q729561" start="90388" end="90392" title="1990 Asian Games" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q244322" start="90404" end="90408" title="2010 Asian Games" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269643" start="90426" end="90430" title="2022 Asian Games" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112227" start="90462" end="90478" title="Outline of China" label="Outline of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q54340" start="90722" end="90741" title="People&amp;#x27;s Daily" label="People&amp;#x27;s Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="90777" end="90785" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="90801" end="90819" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="90827" end="90854" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5407" wikidata="Q99" url="?curid=5407" title="California">
<text>California () is a state in the Western region of the United States that lies on the Pacific Coast. It borders Oregon to the north, Nevada and Arizona to the east, and shares an international border with the Mexican state of Baja California to the south. With over 39million residents across an area of , it is the most populous U.S. state, the third-largest by area, and the most populated subnational entity in North America.

Prior to European colonization, California was one of the most culturally and linguistically diverse areas in pre-Columbian North America. European exploration in the 16th and 17th centuries led to the colonization by the Spanish Empire. The area became a part of Mexico in 1821, following its successful war for independence, but was ceded to the United States in 1848 after the Mexican–American War. The California gold rush started in 1848 and led to social and demographic changes, including depopulation of Indigenous tribes.
The western portion of Alta California was then organized and admitted as the 31st state in 1850, as a free state, following the Compromise of 1850.

The Greater Los Angeles and San Francisco Bay areas are the nation&#x27;s second- and fifth-most populous urban regions, with 19 million and 10 million residents respectively. Los Angeles is the state&#x27;s most populous city and the nation&#x27;s second-most; California&#x27;s capital is Sacramento. Part of the Californias region of North America, the state&#x27;s diverse geography ranges from the Pacific Coast and metropolitan areas in the west to the Sierra Nevada mountains in the east, and from the redwood and Douglas fir forests in the northwest to the Mojave Desert in the southeast. Two-thirds of the nation&#x27;s earthquake risk lies in California. The Central Valley, a fertile agricultural area, dominates the state&#x27;s center. The large size of the state results in climates that vary from moist temperate rainforest in the north to arid desert in the interior, as well as snowy alpine in the mountains. Droughts and wildfires are an ongoing issue, while simultaneously, atmospheric rivers are turning increasingly prevalent and leading to intense flooding events—especially in the winter.

The economy of California is the largest of any U.S. state, with an estimated 2024 gross state product of $4.132 trillion as of Q3 2024. It is the world&#x27;s largest sub-national economy, and would by most estimations rank 5th globally by nominal GDP. The state&#x27;s agricultural industry also leads the nation in agricultural output, led by its production of dairy, almonds, and grapes. With the busiest port in the country (Los Angeles), California plays a pivotal role in the global supply chain, hauling in about 40% of goods imported to the US. Notable contributions to popular culture, ranging from entertainment, sports, music, and fashion, have their origins in California. California is the home of Hollywood, the oldest and one of the largest film industries in the world, profoundly influencing global entertainment. The San Francisco Bay and the Greater Los Angeles areas are seen as the centers of the global technology and U.S. film industries, respectively.

==Etymology==

The Spaniards gave the name to the peninsula of Baja California (in modern-day Mexico). As Spanish explorers and settlers moved north and inland, the region known as &quot;California&quot;, or &quot;Las Californias&quot;, grew. Eventually it included lands north of the peninsula, Alta California, part of which became the present-day U.S. state of California.

A 2017 state legislative document states, &quot;Numerous theories exist as to the origin and meaning of the word &#x27;California, and that all anyone knows is the name was added to a map by 1541 &quot;presumably by a Spanish navigator.&quot;

The name most likely derived from the mythical island of California in the fictional story of Queen Calafia, as recorded in a 1510 work &quot;The Adventures of Esplandián&quot; by Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo. Queen Calafia&#x27;s kingdom was said to be a remote land rich in gold and pearls, inhabited by beautiful Black women who wore gold armor and lived like Amazons, as well as griffins and other strange beasts.

Abbreviations of the state&#x27;s name include CA, Cal., Calif., Califas, and US-CA.

==History==


===Indigenous tribes===

California was one of the most culturally and linguistically diverse areas in pre-Columbian North America. Historians generally agree that there were at least 300,000 people living in California prior to European colonization. The Indigenous peoples of California included more than 70 distinct ethnic groups, inhabiting environments ranging from mountains and deserts to islands and redwood forests.

Living in these diverse geographic areas, the indigenous peoples developed complex forms of ecosystem management, including forest gardening to ensure the regular availability of food and medicinal plants. This was a form of sustainable agriculture. To mitigate destructive large wildfires from ravaging the natural environment, indigenous peoples developed a practice of controlled burning. This practice was recognized for its benefits by the California government in 2022.

These groups were also diverse in their political organization, with bands, tribes, villages, and, on the resource-rich coasts, large chiefdoms, such as the Chumash, Pomo and Salinan. Trade, intermarriage, craft specialists, and military alliances fostered social and economic relationships between many groups. Although nations would sometimes war, most armed conflicts were between groups of men for vengeance. Acquiring territory was not usually the purpose of these small-scale battles.

Men and women generally had different roles in society. Women were often responsible for weaving, harvesting, processing, and preparing food, while men for hunting and other forms of physical labor. Most societies also had roles for people whom the Spanish referred to as &quot;joyas&quot;, who they saw as &quot;men who dressed as women&quot;. &quot;Joyas&quot; were responsible for death, burial, and mourning rituals, and they performed women&#x27;s social roles. Indigenous societies had terms such as two-spirit to refer to them. The Chumash referred to them as &quot;&#x27;aqi.&quot; The early Spanish settlers detested and sought to eliminate them.

===Spanish period===

The first Europeans to explore the coast of California were the members of a Spanish maritime expedition led by Portuguese captain Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo in 1542. Cabrillo was commissioned by Antonio de Mendoza, the Viceroy of New Spain, to lead an expedition up the Pacific coast in search of trade opportunities; they entered San Diego Bay on September 28, 1542, and reached at least as far north as San Miguel Island. Privateer and explorer Francis Drake explored and claimed an undefined portion of the California coast in 1579, landing north of the future city of San Francisco. The first Asians to set foot on what would be the United States occurred in 1587, when Filipino sailors arrived in Spanish ships at Morro Bay. Coincidentally the descendants of the Muslim Caliph Hasan ibn Ali in formerly Islamic Manila and had converted, then mixed Christianity with Islam, upon Spanish conquest, transited through California (Named after a Caliph) on their way to Guerrero, Mexico where they played a future role in the wars of independence. Sebastián Vizcaíno explored and mapped the coast of California in 1602 for New Spain, putting ashore in Monterey. Despite the on-the-ground explorations of California in the 16th century, Rodríguez&#x27;s idea of California as an island persisted. Such depictions appeared on many European maps well into the 18th century.

The Portolá expedition of 1769–70 was a pivotal event in the Spanish colonization of California, resulting in the establishment of numerous missions, presidios, and pueblos. The military and civil contingent of the expedition was led by Gaspar de Portolá, who traveled over land from Sonora into California, while the religious component was headed by Junípero Serra, who came by sea from Baja California. In 1769, Portolá and Serra established Mission San Diego de Alcalá and the Presidio of San Diego, the first religious and military settlements founded by the Spanish in California. By the end of the expedition in 1770, they would establish the Presidio of Monterey and Mission San Carlos Borromeo de Carmelo on Monterey Bay.

After the Portolà expedition, Spanish missionaries led by Father-President Serra set out to establish 21 Spanish missions of California along El Camino Real (&quot;The Royal Road&quot;) and along the California coast, 16 sites of which having been chosen during the Portolá expedition. Numerous major cities in California grew out of missions, including San Francisco (Mission San Francisco de Asís), San Diego (Mission San Diego de Alcalá), Ventura (Mission San Buenaventura), and Santa Barbara (Mission Santa Barbara), among others.

Juan Bautista de Anza led a similarly important expedition throughout California in 1775–76, which would extend deeper into the interior and north of California. The Anza expedition selected numerous sites for missions, presidios, and pueblos, which subsequently would be established by settlers. Gabriel Moraga, a member of the expedition, would also christen many of California&#x27;s prominent rivers with their names in 1775–1776, such as the Sacramento River and the San Joaquin River. After the expedition, Gabriel&#x27;s son, José Joaquín Moraga, would found the pueblo of San Jose in 1777, making it the first civilian-established city in California.

During this same period, sailors from the Russian Empire explored along the northern coast of California. In 1812, the Russian-American Company established a trading post and small fortification at Fort Ross on the North Coast. Fort Ross was primarily used to supply Russia&#x27;s Alaskan colonies with food supplies. The settlement did not meet much success, failing to attract settlers or establish long term trade viability, and was abandoned by 1841.

During the War of Mexican Independence, Alta California was largely unaffected and uninvolved in the revolution, though many Californios supported independence from Spain, which many believed had neglected California and limited its development. Spain&#x27;s trade monopoly on California had limited local trade prospects. Following Mexican independence, California ports were freely able to trade with foreign merchants. Governor Pablo Vicente de Solá presided over the transition from Spanish colonial rule to independent Mexican rule.

===Mexican period===

In 1821, the Mexican War of Independence gave the Mexican Empire (which included California) independence from Spain. For the next 25 years, Alta California remained a remote, sparsely populated, northwestern administrative district of the newly independent country of Mexico, which shortly after independence became a republic. The missions, which controlled most of the best land in the state, were secularized by 1834 and became the property of the Mexican government. The governor granted many square leagues of land to others with political influence. These huge &quot;ranchos&quot; or cattle ranches emerged as the dominant institutions of Mexican California. The ranchos developed under ownership by Californios (Hispanics native of California) who traded cowhides and tallow with Boston merchants. Beef did not become a commodity until the 1849 California Gold Rush.

From the 1820s, trappers and settlers from the United States and Canada began to arrive in Northern California. These new arrivals used the Siskiyou Trail, California Trail, Oregon Trail and Old Spanish Trail to cross the rugged mountains and harsh deserts in and surrounding California. The early government of the newly independent Mexico was highly unstable, and in a reflection of this, from 1831 onwards, California also experienced a series of armed disputes, both internal and with the central Mexican government. During this tumultuous political period Juan Bautista Alvarado was able to secure the governorship during 1836–1842. The military action which first brought Alvarado to power had momentarily declared California to be an independent state, and had been aided by Anglo-American residents of California, including Isaac Graham. In 1840, one hundred of those residents who did not have passports were arrested, leading to the Graham Affair, which was resolved in part with the intercession of Royal Navy officials.


One of the largest ranchers in California was John Marsh. After failing to obtain justice against squatters on his land from the Mexican courts, he determined that California should become part of the United States. Marsh conducted a letter-writing campaign espousing the California climate, the soil, and other reasons to settle there, as well as the best route to follow, which became known as &quot;Marsh&#x27;s route&quot;. His letters were read, reread, passed around, and printed in newspapers throughout the country, and started the first wagon trains rolling to California. After ushering in the period of organized emigration to California, Marsh became involved in a military battle between the much-hated Mexican general, Manuel Micheltorena and the California governor he had replaced, Juan Bautista Alvarado. At the Battle of Providencia near Los Angeles, he convinced each side that they had no reason to be fighting each other. As a result of Marsh&#x27;s actions, they abandoned the fight, Micheltorena was defeated, and California-born Pio Pico was returned to the governorship. This paved the way to California&#x27;s ultimate acquisition by the United States.

===U.S. conquest and the California Republic===

In 1846, a group of American settlers in and around Sonoma rebelled against Mexican rule during the Bear Flag Revolt. Afterward, rebels raised the Bear Flag (featuring a bear, a star, a red stripe and the words &quot;California Republic&quot;) at Sonoma. The Republic&#x27;s only president was William B. Ide, who played a pivotal role during the Bear Flag Revolt. This revolt by American settlers served as a prelude to the later American military invasion of California and was closely coordinated with nearby American military commanders.

The California Republic was short-lived; the same year marked the outbreak of the Mexican–American War (1846–1848).

Commodore John D. Sloat of the United States Navy sailed into Monterey Bay in 1846 and began the U.S. military invasion of California, with Northern California capitulating in less than a month to the United States forces. In Southern California, Californios continued to resist American forces. Notable military engagements of the conquest include the Battle of San Pasqual and the Battle of Dominguez Rancho in Southern California, as well as the Battle of Olómpali and the Battle of Santa Clara in Northern California. After a series of defensive battles in the south, the Treaty of Cahuenga was signed by the Californios on January 13, 1847, securing a censure and establishing de facto American control in California.

===Early American period===
Following the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (February 2, 1848) that ended the war, the westernmost portion of the annexed Mexican territory of Alta California soon became the American state of California, and the remainder of the old territory was then subdivided into the new American Territories of Arizona, Nevada, Colorado and Utah. The even more lightly populated and arid lower region of old Baja California remained as a part of Mexico. In 1846, the total settler population of the western part of the old Alta California had been estimated to be no more than 8,000, plus about 100,000 Native Americans, down from about 300,000 before Hispanic settlement in 1769.

In 1848, only one week before the official American annexation of the area, gold was discovered in California, this being an event which was to forever alter both the state&#x27;s demographics and its finances. Soon afterward, a massive influx of immigration into the area resulted, as prospectors and miners arrived by the thousands. The population burgeoned with United States citizens, Europeans, Middle Easterns, Chinese and other immigrants during the great California gold rush. By the time of California&#x27;s application for statehood in 1850, the settler population of California had multiplied to 100,000. By 1854, more than 300,000 settlers had come. Between 1847 and 1870, the population of San Francisco increased from 500 to 150,000. 

The seat of government for California under Spanish and later Mexican rule had been located in Monterey from 1777 until 1845. Pio Pico, the last Mexican governor of Alta California, had briefly moved the capital to Los Angeles in 1845. The United States consulate had also been located in Monterey, under consul Thomas O. Larkin.

In 1849, a state Constitutional Convention was first held in Monterey. Among the first tasks of the convention was a decision on a location for the new state capital. The first full legislative sessions were held in San Jose (1850–1851). Subsequent locations included Vallejo (1852–1853), and nearby Benicia (1853–1854); these locations eventually proved to be inadequate as well. The capital has been located in Sacramento since 1854 with only a short break in 1862 when legislative sessions were held in San Francisco due to flooding in Sacramento.
Once the state&#x27;s Constitutional Convention had finalized its state constitution, it applied to the U.S. Congress for admission to statehood. On September 9, 1850, as part of the Compromise of 1850, California became a free state and September9 a state holiday.

During the American Civil War (1861–1865), California sent gold shipments eastward to Washington in support of the Union. However, due to the existence of a large contingent of pro-South sympathizers within the state, the state was not able to muster any full military regiments to send eastwards to officially serve in the Union war effort. Still, several smaller military units within the Union army, such as the &quot;California 100 Company&quot;, were unofficially associated with the state of California due to a majority of their members being from California.

At the time of California&#x27;s admission into the Union, travel between California and the rest of the continental United States had been a time-consuming and dangerous feat. Nineteen years later, and seven years after it was greenlighted by President Lincoln, the first transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869. California was then reachable from the eastern States in a week&#x27;s time.

Much of the state was extremely well suited to fruit cultivation and agriculture in general. Vast expanses of wheat, other cereal crops, vegetable crops, cotton, and nut and fruit trees were grown (including oranges in Southern California), and the foundation was laid for the state&#x27;s prodigious agricultural production in the Central Valley and elsewhere.

In the nineteenth century, a large number of migrants from China traveled to the state as part of the Gold Rush or to seek work. Even though the Chinese proved indispensable in building the transcontinental railroad from California to Utah, perceived job competition with the Chinese led to anti-Chinese riots in the state, and eventually the US ended migration from China partially as a response to pressure from California with the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act.

====California genocide====
Under earlier Spanish and Mexican rule, California&#x27;s original native population had precipitously declined, above all, from Eurasian diseases to which the Indigenous people of California had not yet developed a natural immunity. Under its new American administration, California&#x27;s first governor Peter Hardeman Burnett instituted policies that have been described as a state-sanctioned policy of elimination of California&#x27;s indigenous people. Burnett announced in 1851 in his Second Annual Message to the Legislature: &quot;That a war of extermination will continue to be waged between the races until the Indian race becomes extinct must be expected. While we cannot anticipate the result with but painful regret, the inevitable destiny of the race is beyond the power and wisdom of man to avert.&quot;

As in other American states, indigenous peoples were forcibly removed from their lands by American settlers, like miners, ranchers, and farmers. Although California had entered the American union as a free state, the &quot;loitering or orphaned Indians&quot;, were &quot;de facto&quot; enslaved by their new Anglo-American masters under the 1850 &quot;Act for the Government and Protection of Indians&quot;. One of these &quot;de facto&quot; slave auctions was approved by the Los Angeles City Council and occurred for nearly twenty years. There were many massacres in which hundreds of indigenous people were killed by settlers for their land.

Between 1850 and 1860, the California state government paid around 1.5million dollars (some 250,000 of which was reimbursed by the federal government) to hire militias with the stated purpose of protecting settlers, however these militias perpetrated numerous massacres of indigenous people. Indigenous people were also forcibly moved to reservations and rancherias, which were often small and isolated and without enough natural resources or funding from the government to adequately sustain the populations living on them. As a result, settler colonialism was a calamity for indigenous people. Several scholars and Native American activists, including Benjamin Madley and Ed Castillo, have described the actions of the California government as a genocide, as well as the 40th governor of California Gavin Newsom. Benjamin Madley estimates that from 1846 to 1873, between 9,492 and 16,092 indigenous people were killed, including between 1,680 and 3,741 killed by the U.S. Army.

===1900–present===

In the 20th century, thousands of Japanese people migrated to California. The state in 1913 passed the Alien Land Act, excluding Asian immigrants from owning land. During World War II, Japanese Americans in California were interned in concentration camps; in 2020, California apologized.

Migration to California accelerated during the early 20th century with the completion of transcontinental highways like the Route 66. From 1900 to 1965, the population grew from fewer than one million to the greatest in the Union. In 1940, the Census Bureau reported California&#x27;s population as 6% Hispanic, 2.4% Asian, and 90% non-Hispanic white.

To meet the population&#x27;s needs, engineering feats like the California and Los Angeles Aqueducts; the Oroville and Shasta Dams; and the Bay and Golden Gate Bridges were built. The state government adopted the California Master Plan for Higher Education in 1960 to develop an efficient system of public education.

Meanwhile, attracted to the mild Mediterranean climate, cheap land, and the state&#x27;s variety of geography, filmmakers established the studio system in Hollywood in the 1920s. California manufactured 9% of US armaments produced during World War II, ranking third behind New York and Michigan. California easily ranked first in production of military ships at drydock facilities in San Diego, Los Angeles, and the San Francisco Bay Area. Due to the hiring opportunities California offered during the conflict, the population multiplied from the immigration it received due to the work in its war factories, military bases, and training facilities. After World War II, California&#x27;s economy expanded due to strong aerospace and defense industries, whose size decreased following the end of the Cold War. Stanford University began encouraging faculty and graduates to stay instead of leaving the state, and develop a high-tech region, now known as Silicon Valley. As a result of this, California is a world center of the entertainment and music industries, of technology, engineering, and the aerospace industry, and as the US center of agricultural production. Just before the Dot Com Bust, California had the fifth-largest economy in the world.

In the mid and late twentieth century, race-related incidents occurred. Tensions between police and African Americans, combined with unemployment and poverty in inner cities, led to riots, such as the 1992 Rodney King riots. California was the hub of the Black Panther Party, known for arming African Americans to defend against racial injustice. Mexican, Filipino, and other migrant farm workers rallied in the state around Cesar Chavez for better pay in the 1960s and 70s.

During the 20th century, two great disasters happened: the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and 1928 St. Francis Dam flood remain the deadliest in U.S. history.

Although air pollution has been reduced, health problems associated with pollution continue. Brown haze known as &quot;smog&quot; has been substantially abated after federal and state restrictions on automobile exhaust. An energy crisis in 2001 led to rolling blackouts, soaring power rates, and the importation of electricity from neighboring states. Southern California Edison and Pacific Gas and Electric Company came under heavy criticism.

Housing prices in urban areas continued to increase; a modest home which in the 1960s cost $25,000 would cost half a million dollars or more in urban areas by 2005. More people commuted longer hours to afford a home in more rural areas while earning larger salaries in the urban areas. Speculators bought houses, expecting to make a huge profit in months, then rolling it over by buying more properties. Mortgage companies were compliant, as people assumed prices would keep rising. The bubble burst in 2007–8 as prices began to crash. Hundreds of billions in property values vanished and foreclosures soared, as financial institutions and investors were badly hurt.

In the 21st century, droughts and frequent wildfires attributed to climate change have occurred. From 2011 to 2017, a persistent drought was the worst in its recorded history. The 2018 wildfire season was the state&#x27;s deadliest and most destructive.

One of the first confirmed COVID-19 cases in the United States occurred in California on January 26, 2020. A state of emergency was declared in the state on March 4, 2020, and remained in effect until Governor Gavin Newsom ended it in February 2023. A mandatory statewide stay-at-home order was issued on March 19, 2020, which was ended in January 2021.

Cultural and language revitalization efforts among indigenous Californians have progressed among tribes as of 2022. Some land returns to indigenous stewardship have occurred. In 2022, the largest dam removal and river restoration project in US history was announced for the Klamath River, as a win for California tribes.

In February 2025, a satirical petition of Denmark wanting to buy California and renaming it &#x27;New Denmark&#x27;, was published, with the goal of reaching 1 million votes. This comes after president Donald Trump unveiled a bill at the start of the month to rename Greenland &quot;Red, White, and Blueland&quot;.

==Geography==


Covering an area of , California is the third-largest state in the United States in area, after Alaska and Texas. California is one of the most geographically diverse states in the union and is often geographically bisected into two regions, Southern California, comprising the ten southernmost counties, and Northern California, comprising the 48 northernmost counties. It is bordered by Oregon to the north, Nevada to the east and northeast, Arizona to the southeast, the Pacific Ocean to the west and shares an international border with the Mexican state of Baja California to the south (with which it makes up part of The Californias region of North America, alongside Baja California Sur).

In the middle of the state lies the California Central Valley, bounded by the Sierra Nevada in the east, the coastal mountain ranges in the west, the Cascade Range to the north and by the Tehachapi Mountains in the south. The Central Valley is California&#x27;s productive agricultural heartland.

Divided in two by the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta, the northern portion, the Sacramento Valley serves as the watershed of the Sacramento River, while the southern portion, the San Joaquin Valley is the watershed for the San Joaquin River. Both valleys derive their names from the rivers that flow through them. With dredging, the Sacramento and the San Joaquin Rivers have remained deep enough for several inland cities to be seaports.
The Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta is a critical water supply hub for the state. Water is diverted from the delta and through an extensive network of pumps and canals that traverse nearly the length of the state, to the Central Valley and the State Water Projects and other needs. Water from the Delta provides drinking water for nearly 23million people, almost two-thirds of the state&#x27;s population as well as water for farmers on the west side of the San Joaquin Valley.

Suisun Bay lies at the confluence of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers. The water is drained by the Carquinez Strait, which flows into San Pablo Bay, a northern extension of San Francisco Bay, which then connects to the Pacific Ocean via the Golden Gate strait.

The Channel Islands are located off the Southern coast, while the Farallon Islands lie west of San Francisco.

The Sierra Nevada (Spanish for &quot;snowy range&quot;) includes the highest peak in the contiguous 48 states, Mount Whitney, at . The range embraces Yosemite Valley, famous for its glacially carved domes, and Sequoia National Park, home to the giant sequoia trees, the largest living organisms on Earth, and the deep freshwater lake, Lake Tahoe, the largest lake in the state by volume.

To the east of the Sierra Nevada are Owens Valley and Mono Lake, an essential migratory bird habitat. In the western part of the state is Clear Lake, the largest freshwater lake by area entirely in California. Although Lake Tahoe is larger, it is divided by the California/Nevada border. The Sierra Nevada falls to Arctic temperatures in winter and has several dozen small glaciers, including Palisade Glacier, the southernmost glacier in the United States.
The Tulare Lake was the largest freshwater lake west of the Mississippi River. A remnant of Pleistocene-era Lake Corcoran, Tulare Lake dried up by the early 20th century after its tributary rivers were diverted for agricultural irrigation and municipal water uses.

About 45 percent of the state&#x27;s total surface area is covered by forests, and California&#x27;s diversity of pine species is unmatched by any other state. California contains more forestland than any other state except Alaska. Many of the trees in the California White Mountains are the oldest in the world; an individual bristlecone pine is over 5,000 years old.

In the south is a large inland salt lake, the Salton Sea. The south-central desert is called the Mojave; to the northeast of the Mojave lies Death Valley, which contains the lowest and hottest place in North America, the Badwater Basin at . The horizontal distance from the bottom of Death Valley to the top of Mount Whitney is less than . Indeed, almost all of southeastern California is arid, hot desert, with routine extreme high temperatures during the summer. The southeastern border of California with Arizona is entirely formed by the Colorado River, from which the southern part of the state gets about half of its water.

A majority of California&#x27;s cities are located in either the San Francisco Bay Area or the Sacramento metropolitan area in Northern California; or the Los Angeles area, the Inland Empire, or the San Diego metropolitan area in Southern California. The Los Angeles Area, the Bay Area, and the San Diego metropolitan area are among several major metropolitan areas along the California coast.

As part of the Ring of Fire, California is subject to tsunamis, floods, droughts, Santa Ana winds, wildfires, and landslides on steep terrain; California also has several volcanoes. It has many earthquakes due to several faults running through the state, the largest being the San Andreas Fault. About 37,000 earthquakes are recorded each year; most are too small to be felt. Among Americans at risk of serious harm from a major earthquake, two-thirds of that population are residents of California.

===Climate===


Most of the state has a Mediterranean climate. The cool California Current offshore often creates summer fog near the coast. Farther inland, there are colder winters and hotter summers. The maritime moderation results in the shoreline summertime temperatures of Los Angeles and San Francisco being the coolest of all major metropolitan areas of the United States and uniquely cool compared to areas on the same latitude in the interior and on the east coast of the North American continent. Even the San Diego shoreline bordering Mexico is cooler in summer than most areas in the contiguous United States. Just a few miles inland, summer temperature extremes are significantly higher, with downtown Los Angeles being several degrees warmer than at the coast. The same microclimate phenomenon is seen in the climate of the Bay Area, where areas sheltered from the ocean experience significantly hotter summers and colder winters in contrast with nearby areas closer to the ocean.

Northern parts of the state have more rain than the south. California&#x27;s mountain ranges also influence the climate: some of the rainiest parts of the state are west-facing mountain slopes. Coastal northwestern California has a temperate climate, and the Central Valley has a Mediterranean climate but with greater temperature extremes than the coast. The high mountains, including the Sierra Nevada, have an alpine climate with snow in winter and mild to moderate heat in summer.

California&#x27;s mountains produce rain shadows on the eastern side, creating extensive deserts. The higher elevation deserts of eastern California have hot summers and cold winters, while the low deserts east of the Southern California mountains have hot summers and nearly frostless mild winters. Death Valley, a desert with large expanses below sea level, is considered the hottest location in the world; the highest temperature in the world, , was recorded there on July 10, 1913. The lowest temperature in California was on January 20, 1937, in Boca.

The table below lists average temperatures for January and August in a selection of places throughout the state; some highly populated and some not. This includes the relatively cool summers of the Humboldt Bay region around Eureka, the extreme heat of Death Valley, and the mountain climate of Mammoth in the Sierra Nevada.
The wide range of climates leads to a high demand for water. Over time, droughts have been increasing due to climate change and overextraction, becoming less seasonal and more year-round, further straining California&#x27;s electricity supply and water security and having an impact on California business, industry, and agriculture.

In 2022, a new state program was created in collaboration with indigenous peoples of California to revive the practice of controlled burns as a way of clearing excessive forest debris and making landscapes more resilient to wildfires. Native American use of fire in ecosystem management was outlawed in 1911, yet has now been recognized.

===Ecology===

California is one of the ecologically richest and most diverse parts of the world, and includes some of the most endangered ecological communities. California is part of the Nearctic realm and spans a number of terrestrial ecoregions.

California&#x27;s large number of endemic species includes relict species, which have died out elsewhere, such as the Catalina ironwood (&quot;Lyonothamnus floribundus&quot;). Many other endemics originated through differentiation or adaptive radiation, whereby multiple species develop from a common ancestor to take advantage of diverse ecological conditions such as the California lilac (&quot;Ceanothus&quot;). Many California endemics have become endangered, as urbanization, logging, overgrazing, and the introduction of exotic species have encroached on their habitat.

===Flora and fauna===


California boasts several superlatives in its collection of flora: the largest trees, the tallest trees, and the oldest trees. California&#x27;s native grasses are perennial plants, and there are close to hundred succulent species native to the state. After European contact, these were generally replaced by invasive species of European annual grasses; and, in modern times, California&#x27;s hills turn a characteristic golden-brown in summer.

Because California has the greatest diversity of climate and terrain, the state has six life zones which are the lower Sonoran Desert; upper Sonoran (foothill regions and some coastal lands), transition (coastal areas and moist northeastern counties); and the Canadian, Hudsonian, and Arctic Zones, comprising the state&#x27;s highest elevations.

Plant life in the dry climate of the lower Sonoran zone contains a diversity of native cactus, mesquite, and paloverde. The Joshua tree is found in the Mojave Desert. Flowering plants include the dwarf desert poppy and a variety of asters. Fremont cottonwood and valley oak thrive in the Central Valley. The upper Sonoran zone includes the chaparral belt, characterized by forests of small shrubs, stunted trees, and herbaceous plants. &quot;Nemophila&quot;, mint, &quot;Phacelia&quot;, &quot;Viola&quot;, and the California poppy (&quot;Eschscholzia californica&quot;, the state flower) also flourish in this zone, along with the lupine, more species of which occur here than anywhere else in the world.

The transition zone includes most of California&#x27;s forests with the redwood (&quot;Sequoia sempervirens&quot;) and the &quot;big tree&quot; or giant sequoia (&quot;Sequoiadendron giganteum&quot;), among the oldest living things on earth (some are said to have lived at least 4,000 years). Tanbark oak, California laurel, sugar pine, madrona, broad-leaved maple, and Douglas-fir also grow here. Forest floors are covered with swordfern, alumnroot, barrenwort, and trillium, and there are thickets of huckleberry, azalea, elder, and wild currant. Characteristic wild flowers include varieties of mariposa, tulip, and tiger and leopard lilies.

The high elevations of the Canadian zone allow the Jeffrey pine, red fir, and lodgepole pine to thrive. Brushy areas are abundant with dwarf manzanita and ceanothus; the unique Sierra puffball is also found here. Right below the timberline, in the Hudsonian zone, the whitebark, foxtail, and silver pines grow. At about , begins the Arctic zone, a treeless region whose flora include a number of wildflowers, including Sierra primrose, yellow columbine, alpine buttercup, and alpine shooting star.

Palm trees are a well-known feature of California, particularly in Southern California and Los Angeles; many species have been imported, though the &quot;Washington filifera&quot; (commonly known as the &quot;California fan palm&quot;) is native to the state, mainly growing in the Colorado Desert oases. Other common plants that have been introduced to the state include the eucalyptus, acacia, pepper tree, geranium, and Scotch broom. The species that are federally classified as endangered are the Contra Costa wallflower, Antioch Dunes evening primrose, Solano grass, San Clemente Island larkspur, salt marsh bird&#x27;s beak, McDonald&#x27;s rock-cress, and Santa Barbara Island liveforever. , 85 plant species were listed as threatened or endangered.

In the deserts of the lower Sonoran zone, the mammals include the jackrabbit, kangaroo rat, squirrel, and opossum. Common birds include the owl, roadrunner, cactus wren, and various species of hawk. The area&#x27;s reptilian life include the sidewinder viper, desert tortoise, and horned toad. The upper Sonoran zone boasts mammals such as the antelope, brown-footed woodrat, and ring-tailed cat. Birds unique to this zone are the California thrasher, bushtit, and California condor.

In the transition zone, there are Colombian black-tailed deer, black bears, gray foxes, cougars, bobcats, and Roosevelt elk. Reptiles such as the garter snakes and rattlesnakes inhabit the zone. In addition, amphibians such as the water puppy and redwood salamander are common too. Birds such as the kingfisher, chickadee, towhee, and hummingbird thrive here as well.

The Canadian zone mammals include the mountain weasel, snowshoe hare, and several species of chipmunks. Conspicuous birds include the blue-fronted jay, mountain chickadee, hermit thrush, American dipper, and Townsend&#x27;s solitaire. As one ascends into the Hudsonian zone, birds become scarcer. While the gray-crowned rosy finch is the only bird native to the high Arctic region, other bird species such as Anna&#x27;s hummingbird and Clark&#x27;s nutcracker. Principal mammals found in this region include the Sierra coney, white-tailed jackrabbit, and the bighorn sheep. , the bighorn sheep was listed as endangered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The fauna found throughout several zones are the mule deer, coyote, mountain lion, northern flicker, and several species of hawk and sparrow.

Aquatic life in California thrives, from the state&#x27;s mountain lakes and streams to the rocky Pacific coastline. Numerous trout species are found, among them rainbow, golden, and cutthroat. Migratory species of salmon are common as well. Deep-sea life forms include sea bass, yellowfin tuna, barracuda, and several types of whale. Native to the cliffs of northern California are seals, sea lions, and many types of shorebirds, including migratory species.

, 118 California animals were on the federal endangered list; 181 plants were listed as endangered or threatened. Endangered animals include the San Joaquin kitfox, Point Arena mountain beaver, Pacific pocket mouse, salt marsh harvest mouse, Morro Bay kangaroo rat (and five other species of kangaroo rat), Amargosa vole, California least tern, California condor, loggerhead shrike, San Clemente sage sparrow, San Francisco garter snake, five species of salamander, three species of chub, and two species of pupfish. Eleven butterflies are also endangered and two that are threatened are on the federal list. Among threatened animals are the coastal California gnatcatcher, Paiute cutthroat trout, southern sea otter, and northern spotted owl. California has a total of of National Wildlife Refuges. , 123 California animals were listed as either endangered or threatened on the federal list. Also, , 178 species of California plants were listed either as endangered or threatened on this federal list.

===Rivers===
The most prominent river system within California is formed by the Sacramento River and San Joaquin River, which are fed mostly by snowmelt from the west slope of the Sierra Nevada, and respectively drain the north and south halves of the Central Valley. The two rivers join in the Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta, flowing into the Pacific Ocean through San Francisco Bay. Many major tributaries feed into the Sacramento–San Joaquin system, including the Pit River, Feather River and Tuolumne River.

The Klamath and Trinity Rivers drain a large area in far northwestern California. The Eel River and Salinas River each drain portions of the California coast, north and south of San Francisco Bay, respectively. The Mojave River is the primary watercourse in the Mojave Desert, and the Santa Ana River drains much of the Transverse Ranges as it bisects Southern California. The Colorado River forms the state&#x27;s southeast border with Arizona.

Most of California&#x27;s major rivers are dammed as part of two massive water projects: the Central Valley Project, providing water for agriculture in the Central Valley, and the California State Water Project diverting water from Northern to Southern California. The state&#x27;s coasts, rivers, and other bodies of water are regulated by the California Coastal Commission.

===Regions===


California is traditionally separated into Northern California and Southern California, divided by a straight border which runs across the state, separating the northern 48 counties from the southern 10 counties. Despite the persistence of the northern-southern divide, California is more precisely divided into many regions, multiple of which stretch across the northern-southern divide.

; Major divisions
* Northern California
* Southern California

; Regions
=== Cities and towns ===
The state has 483 incorporated cities and towns, of which 461 are cities and 22 are towns. Under California law, the terms &quot;city&quot; and &quot;town&quot; are explicitly interchangeable; the name of an incorporated municipality in the state can either be &quot;City of (Name)&quot; or &quot;Town of (Name)&quot;.

Sacramento became California&#x27;s first incorporated city on February 27, 1850. San Jose, San Diego, and Benicia tied for California&#x27;s second incorporated city, each receiving incorporation on March 27, 1850. Mountain House became the state&#x27;s most recent and 483rd incorporated municipality on July 1, 2024.
The majority of these cities and towns are within one of five metropolitan areas: the Los Angeles Metropolitan Area, the San Francisco Bay Area, the Riverside-San Bernardino Area, the San Diego metropolitan area, or the Sacramento metropolitan area.

== Demographics ==
===Population===
Presently, close to one out of every nine United States residents live in California. The United States Census Bureau reported that the population of California was 39.54 million on April 1, 2020, a 6.13% increase since the 2010 census. During that decade, the state&#x27;s population grew more slowly than the rest of the nation, resulting in the loss of one seat on the US House of Representatives, the first loss in its entire history. The estimated state population in 2023 was 38.94 million. For well over a century (1900–2020), California experienced steady population growth. Even while the rate of growth began to slow by the 1990s, some growth continued into the first two decades of the 21st century; California added an average of around 400,000 people per year to its population during the period 1940–2020. Then in 2020, the state began to experience population declines continuing every year, attributable mostly to moves out of state but also due to declining birth rates, COVID-19 pandemic deaths, and less internal migration from other states to California. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, between 2021 and 2022, 818,000 California residents moved out of state with emigrants listing high cost of living, high taxes, and a difficult business environment as the motivation. The net loss of population in California between July 2020 and July 2023 was 433,000.

The Greater Los Angeles Area is the second-largest metropolitan area in the United States (U.S.), while Los Angeles is the second-largest city in the U.S. Los Angeles County has held the title of most populous U.S. county for decades, and it alone is more populous than 42 U.S. states. San Francisco is the most densely-populated city in California and one of the most densely populated cities in the U.S.. Four of the top 20 most populous cities in the U.S. are in California: Los Angeles (2nd), San Diego (8th), San Jose (13th), and San Francisco (17th). The center of population of California is located four miles west-southwest of the city of Shafter, Kern County.

As of 2020, California ranked fourth among states by life expectancy, with a life expectancy of 79.0 years.

Starting in the year 2010, for the first time since the California Gold Rush, California-born residents made up the majority of the state&#x27;s population. Along with the rest of the United States, California&#x27;s immigration pattern has also shifted over the course of the late 2000s to early 2010s. Immigration from Latin American countries has dropped significantly with most immigrants now coming from Asia. In total for 2011, there were 277,304 immigrants. Fifty-seven percent came from Asian countries versus 22% from Latin American countries. Net immigration from Mexico, previously the most common country of origin for new immigrants, has dropped to zero / less than zero since more Mexican nationals are departing for their home country than immigrating.

The state&#x27;s population of undocumented immigrants has been shrinking in recent years, due to increased enforcement and decreased job opportunities for lower-skilled workers. The number of migrants arrested attempting to cross the Mexican border in the Southwest decreased from a high of 1.1million in 2005 to 367,000 in 2011. Despite these recent trends, illegal aliens constituted an estimated 7.3 percent of the state&#x27;s population, the third highest percentage of any state in the country, totaling nearly 2.6million. In particular, illegal immigrants tended to be concentrated in Los Angeles, Monterey, San Benito, Imperial, and Napa Counties—the latter four of which have significant agricultural industries that depend on manual labor. More than half of illegal immigrants originate from Mexico. The state of California and some California cities, including Los Angeles, Oakland, and San Francisco, have adopted sanctuary policies.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 171,521 homeless people in California.

===Race and ethnicity===

According to the United States Census Bureau in 2022 the population self-identified as (alone or in combination): 56.5% White (including Hispanic Whites), 33.7% non-Hispanic white, 18.1% Asian, 7.3% Black or African American, 3.2% Native American and Alaska Native, 0.9% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, and 34.3% some other race. These numbers add up to more than 100% because respondents can select multiple racial identities. 19% of Californians identified as two or more races in 2022, although excluding respondents who selected &quot;some other race&quot;, only 5% identified as two or more races.

By ethnicity, in 2018 the population was 60.7% non-Hispanic (of any race) and 39.3% Hispanic or Latino (of any race). Hispanics are the largest single ethnic group in California. Non-Hispanic whites constituted 36.8% of the state&#x27;s population. &quot;Californios&quot; are the Hispanic residents native to California, who make up the Spanish-speaking community that has existed in California since 1542, of varying Mexican American/Chicano, Criollo Spaniard, and Mestizo origin. However, they make up only a small part of California&#x27;s Hispanic population today, estimated at 500,000. California has the largest Mexican, Salvadoran, and Guatemalan population, together making up over 90% of the state&#x27;s Latino population.

According to 2022 estimates from the American Community Survey, 32.4% of the population had Mexican ancestry, 6.6% had German ancestry, 6.1% had English ancestry, 5.6% had Irish ancestry, 4.9% had Chinese ancestry, 4.3% had Filipino ancestry, 4% had Central American ancestry (Mostly Salvadoran and Guatemalan), 3.4% had Italian ancestry, 2.8% listed themselves as American, and 2.5% had Indian ancestry.

, 75.1% of California&#x27;s population younger than age 1 were minorities, meaning they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white (white Hispanics are counted as minorities).

In terms of total numbers, California has the largest population of White Americans in the United States, an estimated 22,200,000 residents including people identifying as white in combination with any other race. The state has the 5th largest population of African Americans in the United States, an estimated 2,250,000 residents. California&#x27;s Asian American population is estimated at 7.1million, constituting a third of the nation&#x27;s total. California&#x27;s Native American population of 504,000 is the most of any state, with 103,030 identifying as Non-Hispanic and belonging mostly to the Indigenous peoples of California. Most of the state&#x27;s Native American population identifies as Hispanic and belongs to Indigenous Mexican or Central American ethnic groups, including 185,200 identifying as Mexican American Indian and 67,904 identifying as Central American Indian.

According to estimates from 2011, California has the largest minority population in the United States by numbers, making up 60% of the state population. Over the past 25 years, the population of non-Hispanic whites has declined, while Hispanic and Asian populations have grown. Between 1970 and 2011, non-Hispanic whites declined from 80% of the state&#x27;s population to 40%, while Hispanics grew from 32% in 2000 to 38% in 2011. It is currently projected that Hispanics will rise to 49% of the population by 2060, primarily due to domestic births rather than immigration. With the decline of immigration from Latin America, Asian Americans now constitute the fastest growing racial/ethnic group in California; this growth is primarily driven by immigration from China, India, and the Philippines, respectively.

Most of California&#x27;s immigrant population are born in Mexico (3.9 million), the Philippines (825,200), China (768,400), India (556,500), and Vietnam (502,600).

California has the largest multiracial population in the United States. Mexican is the most common ancestry in California, followed by English, German, and Irish.

===Languages===


English serves as California&#x27;s de jure and de facto official language. According to the 2021 American Community Survey conducted by the United States Census Bureau, 56.08% (20,763,638) of California residents age5 and older spoke only English at home, while 43.92% spoke another language at home. 60.35% of people who speak a language other than English at home are able to speak English &quot;well&quot; or &quot;very well&quot;, with this figure varying significantly across the different linguistic groups. Like most U.S. states (32 out of 50), California law enshrines English as its official language, and has done so since the passage of Proposition 63 by California voters in 1986. Various government agencies do, and are often required to, furnish documents in the various languages needed to reach their intended audiences.

Spanish is the most commonly spoken language in California, behind English, spoken by 28.18% (10,434,308) of the population (in 2021). The Spanish language has been spoken in California since 1542 and is deeply intertwined with California&#x27;s cultural landscape and history. Spanish was the official administrative language of California through the Spanish and Mexican eras, until 1848. Following the U.S. Conquest of California and the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, the U.S. Government guaranteed the rights of Spanish-speaking Californians. The first Constitution of California was written in both languages at the Monterey Constitutional Convention of 1849 and protected the rights of Spanish speakers to use their language in government proceedings and mandating that all government documents be published in both English and Spanish.

Despite the initial recognition of Spanish by early American governments in California, the revised 1879 constitution stripped the rights of Spanish speakers and the official status of Spanish. The growth of the English-only movement by the mid-20th century led to the passage of 1986 California Proposition 63, which enshrined English as the only official language in California and ended Spanish language instruction in schools. 2016 California Proposition 58 reversed the prohibition on bilingual education, though there are still many barriers to the proliferation of Spanish bilingual education, including a shortage of teachers and lack of funding. The government of California has since made efforts to promote Spanish language access and bilingual education, as have private educational institutions in California. Many businesses in California promote the usage of Spanish by their employees, to better serve both California&#x27;s Hispanic population and the larger Spanish-speaking world.

California has historically been one of the most linguistically diverse areas in the world, with more than 70 indigenous languages derived from 64 root languages in six language families. A survey conducted between 2007 and 2009 identified 23 different indigenous languages among California farmworkers. All of California&#x27;s indigenous languages are endangered, although there are now efforts toward language revitalization. California has the highest concentration nationwide of Chinese, Vietnamese and Punjabi speakers.

As a result of the state&#x27;s increasing diversity and migration from other areas across the country and around the globe, linguists began noticing a noteworthy set of emerging characteristics of spoken American English in California since the late 20th century. This variety, known as California English, has a vowel shift and several other phonological processes that are different from varieties of American English used in other regions of the United States.

=== Religion ===

The largest religious denominations by number of adherents as a percentage of California&#x27;s population in 2014 were the Catholic Church with 28 percent, Evangelical Protestants with 20 percent, and Mainline Protestants with 10 percent. Together, all kinds of Protestants accounted for 32 percent. Those unaffiliated with any religion represented 27 percent of the population. The breakdown of other religions is 1% Muslim, 2% Hindu and 2% Buddhist. This is a change from 2008, when the population identified their religion with the Catholic Church with 31 percent; Evangelical Protestants with 18 percent; and Mainline Protestants with 14 percent. In 2008, those unaffiliated with any religion represented 21 percent of the population. The breakdown of other religions in 2008 was 0.5% Muslim, 1% Hindu and 2% Buddhist. The &quot;American Jewish Year Book&quot; placed the total Jewish population of California at about 1,194,190 in 2006. According to the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) the largest denominations by adherents in 2010 were the Catholic Church with 10,233,334; The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 763,818; and the Southern Baptist Convention with 489,953.

California has a large Catholic population due to the large numbers of Mexicans and Central Americans living within its borders. California has twelve dioceses and two archdioceses, the Archdiocese of Los Angeles and the Archdiocese of San Francisco, the former being the largest archdiocese in the United States.

A Pew Research Center survey revealed that California is somewhat less religious than the rest of the states: 62 percent of Californians say they are &quot;absolutely certain&quot; of their belief in God, while in the nation 71 percent say so. The survey also revealed 48 percent of Californians say religion is &quot;very important&quot;, compared to 56 percent nationally.

==Culture==

The culture of California is a Western culture and has its modern roots in the culture of the United States, but also, historically, many Hispanic Californio and Mexican influences. As a border and coastal state, California culture has been greatly influenced by several large immigrant populations, especially those from Latin America and Asia.

California has long been a subject of interest in the public mind and has often been promoted by its boosters as a kind of paradise. In the early 20th century, fueled by the efforts of state, the building projects during the Great Depression and local boosters, many Americans saw the Golden State as an ideal resort destination, sunny and dry all year round with easy access to the ocean and mountains. In the 1960s, popular music groups such as the Beach Boys promoted the image of Californians as laid-back, tanned beach-goers.

===Media and entertainment===

Hollywood and the rest of the Los Angeles area is a major global center for entertainment, with the U.S. film industry&#x27;s &quot;Big Five&quot; major film studios (Columbia, Disney, Paramount, Universal, and Warner Bros.) as well as many minor film studios being based in or around the area. Many animation studios are also headquartered in the state.
The four major American television commercial broadcast networks (ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox) as well as other networks all have production facilities and offices in the state. All the four major commercial broadcast networks, plus the two major Spanish-language networks (Telemundo and Univision) each have at least three owned-and-operated TV stations in California, including at least one in Los Angeles and at least one in San Francisco.
One of the oldest radio stations in the United States still in existence, KCBS (AM) in the San Francisco Bay Area, was founded in 1909. Universal Music Group, one of the &quot;Big Four&quot; record labels, is based in Santa Monica, while Warner Records is based in Los Angeles. Many independent record labels, such as Mind of a Genius Records, are also headquartered in the state. California is also the birthplace of several international music genres, including the Bakersfield sound, Bay Area thrash metal, alternative rock, g-funk, nu metal, glam metal, thrash metal, psychedelic rock, stoner rock, punk rock, hardcore punk, metalcore, pop punk, surf music, third wave ska, west coast hip hop, west coast jazz, jazz rap, and many other genres. Other genres such as pop rock, indie rock, hard rock, hip hop, pop, rock, rockabilly, country, heavy metal, grunge, new wave and disco were popularized in the state. In addition, many British bands, such as Led Zeppelin, Deep Purple, Black Sabbath, and the Rolling Stones settled in the state after becoming internationally famous.

As the home of Silicon Valley, the Bay Area is the headquarters of several prominent internet media, social media, and other technology companies. Three of the &quot;Big Five&quot; technology companies (Apple, Meta, and Google) are based in the area as well as other services such as Netflix, Pandora Radio, Twitter, Yahoo!, and YouTube. Other prominent companies that are headquartered here include HP inc. and Intel. Microsoft and Amazon also have offices in the area.

California, particularly Southern California, is considered the birthplace of modern car culture.

Several fast food, fast casual, and casual dining chains were also founded California, including some that have since expanded internationally like California Pizza Kitchen, Denny&#x27;s, IHOP, McDonald&#x27;s, Panda Express, and Taco Bell.

===Sports===


California has 18 major professional sports league franchises, far more than any other state. The San Francisco Bay Area has five major league teams, while the Greater Los Angeles Area is home to ten. San Diego has two major league teams and Sacramento has one. The NFL Super Bowl has been hosted in California 12 times at five different stadiums: Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, the Rose Bowl, Stanford Stadium, Levi&#x27;s Stadium, and San Diego Stadium. A thirteenth, Super Bowl LVI, was held at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood on February 13, 2022.

California has long had many respected collegiate sports programs. California is home to the oldest college bowl game, the annual Rose Bowl, among others.

The NFL has three teams in the state: the Los Angeles Rams, Los Angeles Chargers, and San Francisco 49ers.

MLB has four teams in the state: the San Francisco Giants, Los Angeles Dodgers, Los Angeles Angels, and San Diego Padres.

The NBA has four teams in the state: the Golden State Warriors, Los Angeles Clippers, Los Angeles Lakers, and Sacramento Kings. Additionally, the WNBA also has one team in the state: the Los Angeles Sparks.

The NHL has three teams in the state: the Anaheim Ducks, Los Angeles Kings, and San Jose Sharks.

MLS has four teams in the state: the Los Angeles Galaxy, San Jose Earthquakes, Los Angeles FC, and San Diego FC.

MLR has one team in the state: the San Diego Legion.

California is the only U.S. state to have hosted both the Summer and Winter Olympics. The 1932 and 1984 summer games were held in Los Angeles. Squaw Valley Ski Resort (now Palisades Tahoe) in the Lake Tahoe region hosted the 1960 Winter Olympics. Los Angeles will host the 2028 Summer Olympics, marking the fourth time that California will have hosted the Olympic Games. Multiple games during the 1994 FIFA World Cup took place in California, with the Rose Bowl hosting eight matches (including the final), while Stanford Stadium hosted six matches.

In addition to the Olympic games, California also hosts the California State Games.

Many sports, such as surfing, snowboarding, and skateboarding, were invented in California, while others like volleyball, beach soccer, and skiing were popularized in the state.

Other sports that are big in the state include golf, rodeo, tennis, mountain climbing, marathon running, horse racing, bowling, mixed martial arts, boxing, and motorsports, especially NASCAR and Formula One.

==Education==

California has the most school students in the country, with over 6.2 million in the 2005–06 school year, giving California more students in school than 36 states have in total population and one of the highest projected enrollments in the country.
Public secondary education consists of high schools that teach elective courses in trades, languages, and liberal arts with tracks for gifted, college-bound and industrial arts students. California&#x27;s public educational system is supported by a unique constitutional amendment that requires a minimum annual funding level for grades K–12 and community colleges that grows with the economy and student enrollment figures.

In 2016, California&#x27;s K–12 public school per-pupil spending was ranked 22nd in the nation ($11,500 per student vs. $11,800 for the U.S. average).

For 2012, California&#x27;s K–12 public schools ranked 48th in the number of employees per student, at 0.102 (the U.S. average was 0.137), while paying the 7th most per employee, $49,000 (the U.S. average was $39,000).

===Higher education===

California public postsecondary education is organized into three separate systems:
* The state&#x27;s public research university system is the University of California (UC). As of fall 2011, the University of California had a combined student body of 234,464 students. There are ten UC campuses; nine are general campuses offering both undergraduate and graduate programs which culminate in the award of bachelor&#x27;s degrees, master&#x27;s degrees, and doctorates; there is one specialized campus, UC San Francisco, which is entirely dedicated to graduate education in health care, and is home to the UCSF Medical Center, the highest-ranked hospital in California. The system was originally intended to accept the top one-eighth of California high school students, but several of the campuses have become even more selective. The UC system historically held exclusive authority to award the doctorate, but this has since changed and CSU now has limited statutory authorization to award a handful of types of doctoral degrees independently of UC.
* The California State University (CSU) system has almost 430,000 students. The CSU (which takes the definite article in its abbreviated form, while UC does not) was originally intended to accept the top one-third of California high school students, but several of the campuses have become much more selective. The CSU was originally authorized to award only bachelor&#x27;s and master&#x27;s degrees, and could award the doctorate only as part of joint programs with UC or private universities. Since then, CSU has been granted the authority to independently award several doctoral degrees (in specific academic fields that do not intrude upon UC&#x27;s traditional jurisdiction).
* The California Community Colleges system provides lower-division coursework culminating in the associate degree, as well as basic skills and workforce training culminating in various kinds of certificates. (Fifteen California community colleges now award four-year bachelor&#x27;s degrees in disciplines which are in high demand in their geographical area.) It is the largest network of higher education in the U.S., composed of 112 colleges serving a student population of over 2.6million.

California is also home to notable private universities such as Stanford University, the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), the University of Southern California, the Claremont Colleges, Santa Clara University, Loyola Marymount University, the University of San Diego, the University of San Francisco, Chapman University, Pepperdine University, Occidental College, and University of the Pacific, among numerous other private colleges and universities, including many religious and special-purpose institutions. California has a particularly high density of arts colleges, including the California College of the Arts, California Institute of the Arts, San Francisco Art Institute, Art Center College of Design, and Academy of Art University, among others.

==Economy==
California&#x27;s economy ranks among the largest in the world. , the gross state product (GSP) is $4.0trillion ($102,500 per capita), the largest of any U.S. state. California is responsible for one seventh of the nation&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP). , California&#x27;s nominal GDP is larger than all but four countries. In terms of purchasing power parity (PPP), it is larger than all but eight countries. California&#x27;s economy is larger than Africa and Australia and is almost as large as South America. The state recorded total, non-farm employment of 16,677,800 among 966,224 employer establishments. As of 2024, California is home to 57 of the &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 companies, the highest number of any U.S. state.

As the largest and second-largest U.S. ports respectively, the Port of Los Angeles and the Port of Long Beach in Southern California collectively play a pivotal role in the global supply chain, together hauling in about 40% of all imports to the United States by TEU volume. The Port of Oakland and Port of Hueneme are the 10th and 26th largest seaports in the U.S., respectively, by number of TEUs handled.

The five largest sectors of employment in California are trade, transportation, and utilities; government; professional and business services; education and health services; and leisure and hospitality. In output, the five largest sectors are financial services, followed by trade, transportation, and utilities; education and health services; government; and manufacturing. California has an unemployment rate of 3.9% .

California&#x27;s economy is dependent on trade and international related commerce accounts for about one-quarter of the state&#x27;s economy, and representing 7% of their GDP; California&#x27;s biggest trade partner is Mexico. In 2008, California exported $144billion worth of goods, up from $134billion in 2007 and $127billion in 2006. Vehicles, computers and electronic products are California&#x27;s top exports, accounting for 42 percent of all the state&#x27;s exports in 2008; over 50 car companies operate in California, such as Tesla and Mazda.

=== Agriculture ===

Agriculture is an important sector in California&#x27;s economy. According to the USDA in 2011, the three largest California agricultural products by value were milk and cream, shelled almonds, and grapes. Farming-related sales more than quadrupled over the past three decades, from $7.3billion in 1974 to nearly $31billion in 2004. This increase has occurred despite a 15 percent decline in acreage devoted to farming during the period, and water supply suffering from chronic instability. Factors contributing to the growth in sales-per-acre include more intensive use of active farmlands and technological improvements in crop production. In 2008, California&#x27;s 81,500 farms and ranches generated $36.2billion products revenue. In 2011, that number grew to $43.5billion products revenue. The agriculture sector accounts for two percent of the state&#x27;s GDP and employs around three percent of its total workforce.

=== Income ===
Per capita GDP in 2021 was $85,546, ranking fourth in the nation. Per capita income varies widely by geographic region and profession. The Central Valley is the most impoverished, with migrant farm workers making less than minimum wage. According to a 2005 report by the Congressional Research Service, the San Joaquin Valley was characterized as one of the most economically depressed regions in the United States, on par with the region of Appalachia.

Using the supplemental poverty measure, California has a poverty rate of 23.5%, the highest of any state in the country. However, using the official measure the poverty rate was only 13.3% as of 2017. Many coastal cities include some of the wealthiest per-capita areas in the United States. The high-technology sectors in Northern California, specifically Silicon Valley, in Santa Clara and San Mateo counties, have emerged from the economic downturn caused by the dot-com bust.

In 2019, there were 1,042,027 millionaire households in the state, more than any other state in the nation. In 2010, California residents were ranked first among the states with the best average credit score of 754.

===State finances===
State spending increased from $56billion in 1998 to $127billion in 2011. California has the third highest per capita spending on welfare among the states, as well as the highest spending on welfare at $6.67billion. In January 2011, California&#x27;s total debt was at least $265billion. On June 27, 2013, Governor Jerry Brown signed a balanced budget (no deficit) for the state, its first in decades; however, the state&#x27;s debt remains at $132billion.

With the passage of Proposition 30 in 2012 and Proposition 55 in 2016, California now levies a 13.3% maximum marginal income tax rate with ten tax brackets, ranging from 1% at the bottom tax bracket of $0 annual individual income to 13.3% for annual individual income over $1,000,000 (though the top brackets are only temporary until Proposition 55 expires at the end of 2030). While Proposition 30 also enacted a minimum state sales tax of 7.5%, this sales tax increase was not extended by Proposition 55 and reverted to a previous minimum state sales tax rate of 7.25% in 2017. Local governments can and do levy additional sales taxes in addition to this minimum rate.

All real property is taxable annually. Property tax increases are capped at 2% annually or the rate of inflation (whichever is lower), per Proposition 13.

===Energy===


Because it is the most populous state in the United States, California is one of the country&#x27;s largest users of energy. The state has extensive hydro-electric energy generation facilities, however, moving water is the single largest energy use in the state. Also, due to high energy rates, conservation mandates, mild weather in the largest population centers and strong environmental movement, its &quot;per capita&quot; energy use is one of the smallest of any state in the United States. Due to the high electricity demand, California imports more electricity than any other state, primarily hydroelectric power from states in the Pacific Northwest (via Path 15 and Path 66) and coal- and natural gas-fired production from the desert Southwest via Path 46.

The state&#x27;s crude oil and natural gas deposits are located in the Central Valley and along the coast, including the large Midway-Sunset Oil Field. Natural gas-fired power plants typically account for more than one-half of state electricity generation.

As a result of the state&#x27;s strong environmental movement, California has some of the most aggressive renewable energy goals in the United States. The Clean Energy, Jobs and Affordability Act of 2022 commits the state to running its operations on clean, renewable energy resources by 2035, and SB 1203 also requires the state to achieve net-zero operations for all agencies. Currently, several solar power plants such as the Solar Energy Generating Systems facility are located in the Mojave Desert. California&#x27;s wind farms include Altamont Pass, San Gorgonio Pass, and Tehachapi Pass. The Tehachapi area is also where the Tehachapi Energy Storage Project is located. Several dams across the state provide hydro-electric power. It would be possible to convert the total supply to 100% renewable energy, including heating, cooling and mobility, by 2050.

California has one major nuclear power plant (Diablo Canyon) in operation. The San Onofre nuclear plant was shut down in 2013. More than 1,700tons of radioactive waste are stored at San Onofre, and sit on the coast where there is a record of past tsunamis. Voters banned the approval of new nuclear power plants since the late 1970s because of concerns over radioactive waste disposal. Several cities such as Oakland, Berkeley and Davis have declared themselves as nuclear-free zones.

===Transportation===


====Highways====
California&#x27;s vast terrain is connected by an extensive system of controlled-access highways (&#x27;freeways&#x27;), limited-access roads (&#x27;expressways&#x27;), and highways. California is known for its car culture, giving California&#x27;s cities a reputation for severe traffic congestion. Construction and maintenance of state roads and statewide transportation planning are primarily the responsibility of the California Department of Transportation, nicknamed &quot;Caltrans&quot;. The rapidly growing population of the state is straining all of its transportation networks, and California has some of the worst roads in the United States. The Reason Foundation&#x27;s 19th Annual Report on the Performance of State Highway Systems ranked California&#x27;s highways the third-worst of any state, with Alaska second, and Rhode Island first.

The state has been a pioneer in road construction. One of the state&#x27;s more visible landmarks, the Golden Gate Bridge, was the longest suspension bridge main span in the world at between 1937 (when it opened) and 1964. With its orange paint and panoramic views of the bay, this highway bridge is a popular tourist attraction and also accommodates pedestrians and bicyclists. The San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge (often abbreviated the &quot;Bay Bridge&quot;), completed in 1936, transports about 280,000 vehicles per day on two-decks. Its two sections meet at Yerba Buena Island through the world&#x27;s largest diameter transportation bore tunnel, at wide by high. The Arroyo Seco Parkway, connecting Los Angeles and Pasadena, opened in 1940 as the first freeway in the Western United States. It was later extended south to the Four Level Interchange in downtown Los Angeles, regarded as the first stack interchange ever built.

The California Highway Patrol is the largest statewide police agency in the United States in employment with more than 10,000 employees. They are responsible for providing any police-sanctioned service to anyone on California&#x27;s state-maintained highways and on state property.

By the end of 2021, 30,610,058 people in California held a California Department of Motor Vehicles-issued driver&#x27;s licenses or state identification card, and there were 36,229,205 registered vehicles, including 25,643,076 automobiles, 853,368 motorcycles, 8,981,787 trucks and trailers, and 121,716 miscellaneous vehicles (including historical vehicles and farm equipment).

====Air travel====

Los Angeles International Airport (LAX), the 4th busiest airport in the world in 2018, and San Francisco International Airport (SFO), the 25th busiest airport in the world in 2018, are major hubs for trans-Pacific and transcontinental traffic. There are about a dozen important commercial airports and many more general aviation airports throughout the state.

====Railroads====

Inter-city rail travel is provided by Amtrak California; the three routes, the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot;, &quot;Pacific Surfliner&quot;, and &quot;San Joaquin&quot;, are funded by Caltrans. These services are the busiest intercity rail lines in the United States outside the Northeast Corridor and ridership is continuing to set records. The routes are becoming increasingly popular over flying, especially on the LAX-SFO route. Integrated subway and light rail networks are found in Los Angeles (Los Angeles Metro Rail) and San Francisco (Muni Metro). Light rail systems are also found in San Jose (VTA light rail), San Diego (San Diego Trolley), Sacramento (SacRT light rail), and Northern San Diego County (Sprinter). Furthermore, commuter rail networks serve the San Francisco Bay Area (Altamont Corridor Express, Bay Area Rapid Transit, Caltrain, Sonoma–Marin Area Rail Transit), Greater Los Angeles (Metrolink), and San Diego County (Coaster).

The California High-Speed Rail Authority was authorized in 1996 by the state legislature to plan a California High-Speed Rail system to put before the voters. The plan they devised, 2008 California Proposition 1A, connecting all the major population centers in the state, was approved by the voters at the November 2008 general election. The first phase of construction was begun in 2015, and the first segment long, is planned to be put into operation by the end of 2030. Planning and work on the rest of the system is continuing, with funding for completing it is an ongoing issue. California&#x27;s 2023 integrated passenger rail master plan includes a high speed rail system.

====Busses====
Nearly all counties operate bus lines, and many cities operate their own city bus lines as well. Intercity bus travel is provided by Greyhound, Megabus, and Amtrak Thruway.

===Water===
California&#x27;s interconnected water system is the world&#x27;s largest, managing over of water per year, centered on six main systems of aqueducts and infrastructure projects. Water use and conservation in California is a politically divisive issue, as the state experiences periodic droughts and has to balance the demands of its large agricultural and urban sectors, especially in the arid southern portion of the state. The state&#x27;s widespread redistribution of water also invites the frequent scorn of environmentalists.

The California Water Wars, a conflict between Los Angeles and the Owens Valley over water rights, is one of the most well-known examples of the struggle to secure adequate water supplies. Former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger said: We&#x27;ve been in crisis for quite some time because we&#x27;re now 38million people and not anymore 18million people like we were in the late 60s. So it developed into a battle between environmentalists and farmers and between the south and the north and between rural and urban. And everyone has been fighting for the last four decades about water.

==Government and politics==
===State government===

The capital city of California is Sacramento.
The state is organized into three branches of government—the executive branch consisting of the governor and the other independently elected constitutional officers; the legislative branch consisting of the Assembly and Senate; and the judicial branch consisting of the Supreme Court of California and lower courts. The state also allows ballot propositions: direct participation of the electorate by initiative, referendum, recall, and ratification. Before the passage of Proposition 14 in 2010, California allowed each political party to choose whether to have a closed primary or a primary where only party members and independents vote. After June 8, 2010, when Proposition 14 was approved, excepting only the United States president and county central committee offices, all candidates in the primary elections are listed on the ballot with their preferred party affiliation, but they are not the official nominee of that party. At the primary election, the two candidates with the top votes will advance to the general election regardless of party affiliation. This is known as a nonpartisan blanket primary. If at a special primary election, one candidate receives more than 50% of all the votes cast, they are elected to fill the vacancy and no special general election will be held.

====Executive branch====
The California executive branch consists of the governor and seven other elected constitutional officers: lieutenant governor, attorney general, secretary of state, state controller, state treasurer, insurance commissioner, and state superintendent of public instruction. They serve four-year terms and may be re-elected only once.

The many California state agencies that are under the governor&#x27;s cabinet are grouped together to form cabinet-level entities that are referred to by government officials as &quot;superagencies&quot;. Those departments that are directly under the other independently elected officers work separately from these superagencies.

====Legislative branch====

The California State Legislature consists of a 40-member Senate and 80-member Assembly. Senators serve four-year terms and Assembly members two. Members of the Assembly are subject to term limits of six terms, and members of the Senate are subject to term limits of three terms.

====Judicial branch====
California&#x27;s legal system is explicitly based upon English common law but carries many features from Spanish civil law, such as community property. California&#x27;s prison population grew from 25,000 in 1980 to over 170,000 in 2007. Capital punishment is a legal form of punishment and the state has the largest &quot;Death Row&quot; population in the country (though Oklahoma and Texas are far more active in carrying out executions). California has performed 13 executions since 1976, with the last being in 2006.

California&#x27;s judiciary system is the largest in the United States with a total of 1,600 judges (the federal system has only about 840). At the apex is the seven-member Supreme Court of California, while the California Courts of Appeal serve as the primary appellate courts and the California Superior Courts serve as the primary trial courts. Justices of the Supreme Court and Courts of Appeal are appointed by the governor, but are subject to retention by the electorate every 12 years.

The administration of the state&#x27;s court system is controlled by the Judicial Council, composed of the chief justice of the California Supreme Court, 14 judicial officers, four representatives from the State Bar of California, and one member from each house of the state legislature.

In fiscal year 2020–2021, the state judiciary&#x27;s 2,000 judicial officers and 18,000 judicial branch employees processed approximately 4.4 million cases.

===Local government===
California has an extensive system of local government that manages public functions throughout the state. Like most states, California is divided into counties, of which there are 58 (including San Francisco) covering the entire state. Most urbanized areas are incorporated as cities. School districts, which are independent of cities and counties, handle public education. Many other functions, such as fire protection and water supply, especially in unincorporated areas, are handled by special districts.

====Counties====
California is divided into 58 counties. Per Article 11, Section 1, of the Constitution of California, they are the legal subdivisions of the state. The county government provides countywide services such as law enforcement, jails, elections and voter registration, vital records, property assessment and records, tax collection, public health, health care, social services, libraries, flood control, fire protection, animal control, agricultural regulations, building inspections, ambulance services, and education departments in charge of maintaining statewide standards. In addition, the county serves as the local government for all unincorporated areas. Each county is governed by an elected board of supervisors.

====City and town governments====
Incorporated cities and towns in California are either charter or general-law municipalities. General-law municipalities owe their existence to state law and are consequently governed by it; charter municipalities are governed by their own city or town charters. Municipalities incorporated in the 19th century tend to be charter municipalities. All ten of the state&#x27;s most populous cities are charter cities. Most small cities have a council–manager form of government, where the elected city council appoints a city manager to supervise the operations of the city. Some larger cities have a directly elected mayor who oversees the city government. In many council-manager cities, the city council selects one of its members as a mayor, sometimes rotating through the council membership—but this type of mayoral position is primarily ceremonial. The Government of San Francisco is the only consolidated city-county in California, where both the city and county governments have been merged into one unified jurisdiction.

====School districts and special districts====
About 1,102 school districts, independent of cities and counties, handle California&#x27;s public education. California school districts may be organized as elementary districts, high school districts, unified school districts combining elementary and high school grades, or community college districts.

There are about 3,400 special districts in California. A special district, defined by California Government Code § 16271(d) as &quot;any agency of the state for the local performance of governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries&quot;, provides a limited range of services within a defined geographic area. The geographic area of a special district can spread across multiple cities or counties, or could consist of only a portion of one. Most of California&#x27;s special districts are &quot;single-purpose districts&quot;, and provide one service.

===Federal representation===

The state of California sends 52 members to the House of Representatives, the nation&#x27;s largest congressional state delegation. Consequently, California also has the largest number of electoral votes in national presidential elections, with 54. The former speaker of the House of Representatives is the representative of California&#x27;s 20th district, Kevin McCarthy.

California is represented in the United States Senate by Alex Padilla and Adam Schiff.

===Armed forces===
In California, , the U.S. Department of Defense had a total of 117,806 active duty servicemembers of which 88,370 were Sailors or Marines, 18,339 were Airmen, and 11,097 were Soldiers, with 61,365 Department of Defense civilian employees. Additionally, there were a total of 57,792 Reservists and Guardsman in California.

In 2010, Los Angeles County was the largest origin of military recruits in the United States by county, with 1,437 individuals enlisting in the military. However, , Californians were relatively under-represented in the military as a proportion to its population.

In 2000, California, had 2,569,340 veterans of United States military service. , there were 1,942,775 veterans living in California, of which 1,457,875 served during a period of armed conflict, and just over four thousand served before World WarII (the largest population of this group of any state).

California&#x27;s military forces consist of the Army and Air National Guard, the naval and state military reserve (militia), and the California Cadet Corps.

===Politics===


California has an idiosyncratic political culture compared to the rest of the country, and is sometimes regarded as a trendsetter. In socio-cultural mores and national politics, Californians are perceived as more liberal than other Americans, especially those who live in the inland states. In the 2016 United States presidential election, California had the third highest percentage of Democratic votes behind the District of Columbia and Hawaii. In the 2020 United States presidential election, it had the 6th highest behind the District of Columbia, Vermont, Massachusetts, Maryland, and Hawaii. According to the Cook Political Report, California contains five of the 15 most Democratic congressional districts in the United States.

California was the second state to recall their state governor, the second state to legalize abortion, and the only state to ban marriage for gay couples twice by vote (including Proposition8 in 2008). Voters also passed Proposition 71 in 2004 to fund stem cell research, making California the second state to legalize stem cell research, and Proposition 14 in 2010 to completely change the state&#x27;s primary election process. California has also experienced disputes over water rights; and a tax revolt, culminating with the passage of Proposition 13 in 1978, limiting state property taxes. California voters have rejected affirmative action on multiple occasions, most recently in November 2020.

The state&#x27;s trend towards the Democratic Party and away from the Republican Party can be seen in state elections. From 1899 to 1939, California had exclusively Republican governors. Since 1990, California has generally elected Democratic candidates to federal, state and local offices, including current Governor Gavin Newsom; however, the state has elected Republican Governors, though many of its Republican Governors, such as Arnold Schwarzenegger, tend to be considered moderate Republicans and more centrist than the national party.
Several political movements have advocated for California independence. The California National Party and the California Freedom Coalition both advocate for California independence along the lines of progressivism and civic nationalism. The Yes California movement attempted to organize an independence referendum via ballot initiative for 2019, which was then postponed.

The Democrats also hold a supermajority in both houses of the state legislature. There are 62 Democrats and 18 Republicans in the Assembly; and 32 Democrats and eight Republicans in the Senate.

From 1952 through 1988, California was a Republican-leaning state, as the party carried the state&#x27;s electoral votes in nine of ten elections, with 1964 as the sole exception. Southern California Republicans Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan were both elected twice as the 37th and 40th U.S. Presidents, respectively. However, Democrats have won all of California&#x27;s electoral votes for the last eight elections, starting in 1992.

In the United States House, the Democrats held a 34–19 edge in the California delegation of the 110th United States Congress in 2007. As the result of gerrymandering, the districts in California were usually dominated by one or the other party, and few districts were considered competitive. In 2008, Californians passed Proposition 20 to empower a 14-member independent citizen commission to redraw districts for both local politicians and Congress. After the 2012 elections, when the new system took effect, Democrats gained four seats and held a 38–15 majority in the delegation. Following the 2018 midterm House elections, Democrats won 46 out of 53 congressional house seats in California, leaving Republicans with seven.

In general, Democratic strength is centered in the populous coastal regions of the Los Angeles metropolitan area and the San Francisco Bay Area. Republican strength is still greatest in eastern parts of the state. Orange County had remained largely Republican until the 2016 and 2018 elections, in which a majority of the county&#x27;s votes were cast for Democratic candidates. One study ranked Berkeley, Oakland, Inglewood and San Francisco in the top 20 most liberal American cities; and Bakersfield, Orange, Escondido, Garden Grove, and Simi Valley in the top 20 most conservative cities.

In October 2022, out of the 26,876,800 people eligible to vote, 21,940,274 people were registered to vote. Of the people registered, the three largest registered groups were Democrats (10,283,258), Republicans (5,232,094), and No Party Preference (4,943,696).

California retains the death penalty, though it has not been used since 2006.

=== Twinned regions ===
California has region twinning arrangements with:
* Catalonia, autonomous community of Spain
* Alberta, province of Canada
* Jeju Province of South Korea
* Guangdong, province of China

==See also==
* Index of California-related articles
* Outline of California
* List of people from California
* Proposed Danish acquisition of California
==Notes==

==References==
===Citations===

===Works cited===
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* Matthews, Glenna. &quot;The Golden State in the Civil War: Thomas Starr King, the Republican Party, and the Birth of Modern California&quot;. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
* 

==External links==

* State of California
* California State Guide, from the Library of Congress
* data.ca.gov: open data portal from California state agencies
* California State Facts from USDA
* California Drought: Farm and Food Impacts from USDA, Economic Research Service
* 1973 documentary featuring aerial views of the California coastline from Mt. Shasta to Los Angeles
* Early City Views (Los Angeles) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="0" end="10" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="19" end="24" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="32" end="67" title="Western United States" label="Western region of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="85" end="98" title="West Coast of the United States" label="Pacific Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="111" end="117" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="132" end="138" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="143" end="150" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="175" end="198" title="Mexico–United States border" label="an international border"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="208" end="215" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="225" end="240" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="315" end="339" title="List of states and territories of the United States by population" label="most populous U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="345" end="366" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="third-largest by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="391" end="409" title="Administrative division" label="subnational entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="413" end="426" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="438" end="459" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="539" end="566" title="pre-Columbian North America" label="pre-Columbian North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="651" end="665" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="734" end="754" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="war for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="760" end="790" title="Mexican Cession" label="was ceded to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="809" end="829" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="835" end="855" title="California gold rush" label="California gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22090310" start="925" end="958" title="California genocide" label="depopulation of Indigenous tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849306" start="1022" end="1056" title="California Statehood Act" label="admitted as the 31st state in 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="1063" end="1073" title="Slave states and free states" label="free state"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="1089" end="1107" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="1114" end="1133" title="Greater Los Angeles" label="Greater Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="1138" end="1155" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604380" start="1216" end="1229" title="Statistical area (United States)" label="urban regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1286" end="1297" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852707" start="1301" end="1336" title="List of largest California cities by population" label="the state&amp;#x27;s most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="1341" end="1370" title="List of United States cities by population" label="the nation&amp;#x27;s second-most"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="1390" end="1397" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="1401" end="1411" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q301467" start="1421" end="1436" title="the Californias" label="the Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661460" start="1462" end="1496" title="Geography of California" label="the state&amp;#x27;s diverse geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138257" start="1513" end="1526" title="Coastal California" label="Pacific Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="1569" end="1582" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="1619" end="1626" title="Sequoia sempervirens" label="redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="1631" end="1642" title="Douglas fir" label="Douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="1675" end="1688" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617630" start="1739" end="1749" title="List of earthquakes in California" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="1779" end="1793" title="Central Valley (California)" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="1797" end="1804" title="fertilizer" label="fertile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271386" start="1898" end="1906" title="Climate of California" label="climates"/>
<link wikidata="Q845725" start="1928" end="1948" title="temperate rainforest" label="temperate rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="1970" end="1976" title="Desert climate" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="2011" end="2017" title="alpine climate" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123824" start="2025" end="2034" title="List of mountain ranges of California" label="mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058413" start="2036" end="2044" title="Droughts in California" label="Droughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565566" start="2049" end="2058" title="List of California wildfires" label="wildfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817119" start="2103" end="2121" title="atmospheric river" label="atmospheric rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746454" start="2227" end="2248" title="economy of California" label="economy of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="2256" end="2281" title="List of U.S. states and territories by GDP" label="largest of any U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="2306" end="2325" title="gross state product" label="gross state product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254793" start="2383" end="2411" title="List of country subdivisions by GDP over 200 billion US dollars" label="largest sub-national economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="2464" end="2475" title="nominal GDP" label="nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090775" start="2477" end="2515" title="Agriculture in California" label="The state&amp;#x27;s agricultural industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878212" start="2587" end="2592" title="California dairy industry" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752895" start="2594" end="2601" title="Almond cultivation in California" label="almonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q120468674" start="2607" end="2613" title="Grape cultivation in California" label="grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308991" start="2653" end="2664" title="Port of Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193541" start="2802" end="2817" title="Culture of California" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665099" start="2832" end="2845" title="Media in Los Angeles" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557822" start="2847" end="2853" title="Sports in California" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942029" start="2855" end="2860" title="Music of California" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="2866" end="2873" title="fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="2935" end="2944" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="3164" end="3173" title="Cinema of the United States" label="U.S. film"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="3251" end="3279" title="Baja California peninsula" label="peninsula of Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="3497" end="3512" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650727" start="3916" end="3929" title="Calafia" label="Queen Calafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909432" start="3964" end="3992" title="Las sergas de Esplandián" label="The Adventures of Esplandián"/>
<link wikidata="Q723468" start="4002" end="4029" title="Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo" label="Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="4184" end="4191" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="4204" end="4211" title="griffin" label="griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240721" start="4287" end="4312" title="List of U.S. state abbreviations" label="CA, Cal., Calif., Califas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106487" start="4318" end="4323" title="ISO 3166" label="US-CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="4443" end="4470" title="pre-Columbian North America" label="pre-Columbian North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="4596" end="4628" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="Indigenous peoples of California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4648" end="4673" title="Classification of indigenous peoples of the Americas#California" label="70 distinct ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q397350" start="4891" end="4907" title="forest gardening" label="forest gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q188840" start="4955" end="4971" title="medicinal plants" label="medicinal plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="4992" end="5015" title="sustainable agriculture" label="sustainable agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589818" start="5139" end="5154" title="controlled burn" label="controlled burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="5378" end="5386" title="chiefdom" label="chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24251468" start="5401" end="5408" title="Chumash people" label="Chumash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929613" start="5410" end="5414" title="Pomo people" label="Pomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404641" start="5419" end="5426" title="Salinan" label="Salinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="5646" end="5655" title="Revenge" label="vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="5774" end="5779" title="Gender role" label="roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="6120" end="6125" title="Death rituals" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="6127" end="6133" title="burial" label="burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q750652" start="6139" end="6155" title="mourning rituals" label="mourning rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q301702" start="6242" end="6252" title="two-spirit" label="two-spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138257" start="6450" end="6469" title="coast of California" label="coast of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="6492" end="6499" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q182491" start="6546" end="6569" title="Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo" label="Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q441300" start="6608" end="6626" title="Antonio de Mendoza" label="Antonio de Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q556876" start="6632" end="6652" title="Viceroy of New Spain" label="Viceroy of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219470" start="6744" end="6757" title="San Diego Bay" label="San Diego Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348353" start="6818" end="6835" title="San Miguel Island" label="San Miguel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="6860" end="6873" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6985" end="6998" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q779126" start="7087" end="7095" title="Overseas Filipino" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q605491" start="7132" end="7141" title="Morro Bay, California" label="Morro Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050497" start="7162" end="7187" title="Agustin de Legaspi" label="descendants of the Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q182914" start="7195" end="7208" title="Hasan ibn Ali" label="Hasan ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7221" end="7235" title="Kingdom of Maynila#Establishment by Sultan Bolkiah and the Sultanate of Brunei (c. 1500)" label="Islamic Manila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7314" end="7365" title="Tondo Conspiracy#Aftermath" label="transited through California (Named after a Caliph)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60158" start="7382" end="7398" title="Guerrero, Mexico" label="Guerrero, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q111574171" start="7438" end="7458" title="Philippine Military Activities in the Americas" label="wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q141710" start="7460" end="7478" title="Sebastián Vizcaíno" label="Sebastián Vizcaíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="7535" end="7544" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="7564" end="7572" title="Monterey, California" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q844977" start="7665" end="7696" title="island of California" label="idea of California as an island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966440" start="7788" end="7806" title="Portolá expedition" label="Portolá expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323096" start="7934" end="7942" title="presidio" label="presidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="7949" end="7956" title="pueblos" label="pueblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q461023" start="8021" end="8038" title="Gaspar de Portolá" label="Gaspar de Portolá"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="8068" end="8074" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="8136" end="8150" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="8173" end="8188" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q617891" start="8229" end="8256" title="Mission San Diego de Alcalá" label="Mission San Diego de Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q605760" start="8265" end="8286" title="Presidio of San Diego" label="Presidio of San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q734577" start="8434" end="8454" title="Presidio of Monterey" label="Presidio of Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689743" start="8459" end="8497" title="Mission San Carlos Borromeo de Carmelo" label="Mission San Carlos Borromeo de Carmelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="8554" end="8566" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="8621" end="8651" title="Spanish missions of California" label="Spanish missions of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q805831" start="8658" end="8672" title="El Camino Real (California)" label="El Camino Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="8870" end="8883" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000321" start="8885" end="8914" title="Mission San Francisco de Asís" label="Mission San Francisco de Asís"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="8917" end="8926" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q617891" start="8928" end="8955" title="Mission San Diego de Alcalá" label="Mission San Diego de Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q490434" start="8958" end="8965" title="Ventura, California" label="Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061890" start="8967" end="8991" title="Mission San Buenaventura" label="Mission San Buenaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="8998" end="9011" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413807" start="9013" end="9034" title="Mission Santa Barbara" label="Mission Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q727612" start="9052" end="9073" title="Juan Bautista de Anza" label="Juan Bautista de Anza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515756" start="9349" end="9363" title="Gabriel Moraga" label="Gabriel Moraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q335575" start="9499" end="9515" title="Sacramento River" label="Sacramento River"/>
<link wikidata="Q751347" start="9524" end="9541" title="San Joaquin River" label="San Joaquin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356932" start="9585" end="9604" title="José Joaquín Moraga" label="José Joaquín Moraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="9632" end="9640" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="9754" end="9768" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q753193" start="9831" end="9855" title="Russian-American Company" label="Russian-American Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278115" start="9910" end="9919" title="Fort Ross" label="Fort Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671326" start="9927" end="9938" title="North Coast (California)" label="North Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="9979" end="10009" title="Russian America" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s Alaskan colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="10179" end="10206" title="War of Mexican Independence" label="War of Mexican Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="10293" end="10303" title="Californio" label="Californio"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="10333" end="10338" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756280" start="10599" end="10620" title="Pablo Vicente de Solá" label="Pablo Vicente de Solá"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="10655" end="10676" title="New Spain" label="Spanish colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="10742" end="10769" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131780" start="10779" end="10793" title="Declaration of Independence of the Mexican Empire" label="Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="11062" end="11070" title="Missions of California" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="11130" end="11141" title="secularized" label="secularized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679045" start="11303" end="11310" title="Ranchos of California" label="ranchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="11436" end="11446" title="Californio" label="Californio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="11582" end="11602" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772442" start="11745" end="11759" title="Siskiyou Trail" label="Siskiyou Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026956" start="11761" end="11777" title="California Trail" label="California Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q862312" start="11779" end="11791" title="Oregon Trail" label="Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467414" start="11796" end="11813" title="Old Spanish Trail (trade route)" label="Old Spanish Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187571" start="12166" end="12188" title="Juan Bautista Alvarado" label="Juan Bautista Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q96036383" start="12387" end="12401" title="Anglo-Americans" label="Anglo-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076393" start="12437" end="12449" title="Isaac Graham" label="Isaac Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076393" start="12548" end="12561" title="Isaac Graham" label="Graham Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12615" end="12625" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246838" start="12685" end="12695" title="John Marsh (pioneer)" label="John Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754878" start="13372" end="13391" title="Manuel Micheltorena" label="Manuel Micheltorena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8244390" start="13468" end="13489" title="Battle of Providencia" label="Battle of Providencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q949282" start="13692" end="13700" title="Pio Pico" label="Pio Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11592" start="13920" end="13926" title="Sonoma, California" label="Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17557" start="13968" end="13984" title="Bear Flag Revolt" label="Bear Flag Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q330517" start="14015" end="14024" title="Bear Flag" label="Bear Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568406" start="14162" end="14176" title="William B. Ide" label="William B. Ide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="14493" end="14513" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q634931" start="14538" end="14551" title="John D. Sloat" label="John D. Sloat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="14559" end="14577" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="14590" end="14602" title="Monterey Bay" label="Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411096" start="14625" end="14661" title="Conquest of California" label="U.S. military invasion of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872288" start="14881" end="14902" title="Battle of San Pasqual" label="Battle of San Pasqual"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870893" start="14911" end="14937" title="Battle of Dominguez Rancho" label="Battle of Dominguez Rancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871942" start="14977" end="14995" title="Battle of Olómpali" label="Battle of Olómpali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872300" start="15004" end="15025" title="Battle of Santa Clara (1847)" label="Battle of Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805651" start="15104" end="15122" title="Treaty of Cahuenga" label="Treaty of Cahuenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="15141" end="15152" title="Californios" label="Californios"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="15210" end="15218" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="15294" end="15321" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="15596" end="15604" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="15609" end="15613" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="16413" end="16433" title="California gold rush" label="California gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="16796" end="16804" title="Monterey, California" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843791" start="16955" end="16964" title="consulate" label="consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061100" start="17013" end="17029" title="Thomas O. Larkin" label="Thomas O. Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208445" start="17300" end="17307" title="Vallejo, California" label="Vallejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q817301" start="17332" end="17339" title="Benicia, California" label="Benicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="17445" end="17455" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274684" start="17559" end="17581" title="Great Flood of 1862" label="flooding in Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="17705" end="17727" title="Admission to the Union" label="admission to statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="17766" end="17784" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="17806" end="17816" title="Slave states and free states" label="free state"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849306" start="17834" end="17847" title="California Admission Day" label="state holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="17861" end="17879" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021269" start="17947" end="17970" title="California in the American Civil War" label="in support of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633893" start="18265" end="18299" title="2nd Regiment of Cavalry, Massachusetts Volunteers" label="&amp;quot;California 100 Company&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753108" start="18685" end="18716" title="first transcontinental railroad" label="first transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="19283" end="19292" title="Gold Rush" label="Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073716" start="19620" end="19641" title="Chinese Exclusion Act" label="Chinese Exclusion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="19832" end="19863" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="Indigenous people of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q280706" start="19978" end="20000" title="Peter Hardeman Burnett" label="Peter Hardeman Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="20591" end="20598" title="settler" label="settler"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="20763" end="20771" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135283" start="20844" end="20892" title="Act for the Government and Protection of Indians" label="Act for the Government and Protection of Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="20934" end="20948" title="Slave-auction" label="slave auctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870447" start="20969" end="20993" title="Los Angeles City Council" label="Los Angeles City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q716815" start="21676" end="21695" title="settler colonialism" label="settler colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334634" start="21812" end="21823" title="Ed Castillo" label="Ed Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22090310" start="21881" end="21894" title="California Genocide" label="as a genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="21939" end="21951" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Gavin Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020225" start="22242" end="22256" title="California Alien Land Law of 1913" label="Alien Land Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="22324" end="22370" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="Japanese Americans in California were interned"/>
<link wikidata="Q624387" start="22552" end="22560" title="U.S. Route 66 (California)" label="Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307376" start="22845" end="22855" title="California Aqueduct" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859225" start="22860" end="22880" title="Los Angeles Aqueduct" label="Los Angeles Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425594" start="22887" end="22895" title="Oroville Dam" label="Oroville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972924" start="22900" end="22910" title="Shasta Dam" label="Shasta Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q771404" start="22921" end="22924" title="San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge" label="Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="22929" end="22940" title="Golden Gate Bridge" label="Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451064" start="22994" end="23037" title="California Master Plan for Higher Education" label="California Master Plan for Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11307668" start="23237" end="23250" title="studio system" label="studio system"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750144" start="23330" end="23349" title="California during World War II" label="during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="23372" end="23380" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="23385" end="23393" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="23818" end="23827" title="Aerospace manufacturer" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="23832" end="23839" title="Defense industry" label="defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="23898" end="23906" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="23908" end="23927" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="24051" end="24065" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="24281" end="24293" title="Dot-com bubble" label="Dot Com Bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q696187" start="24557" end="24575" title="1992 Los Angeles riots" label="Rodney King riots."/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="24606" end="24625" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q355425" start="24776" end="24788" title="Cesar Chavez" label="Cesar Chavez"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="24886" end="24915" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q381648" start="24925" end="24940" title="St. Francis Dam" label="St. Francis Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="25105" end="25109" title="smog" label="smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002742" start="25209" end="25230" title="2000–2001 California electricity crisis" label="energy crisis in 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438438" start="25238" end="25254" title="rolling blackout" label="rolling blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706317" start="25338" end="25364" title="Southern California Edison" label="Southern California Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815011" start="25369" end="25401" title="Pacific Gas and Electric Company" label="Pacific Gas and Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="25835" end="25843" title="Mortgage" label="Mortgage"/>
<link wikidata="Q844541" start="25918" end="25930" title="subprime mortgage crisis" label="bubble burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075430" start="26217" end="26235" title="2011–2017 California drought" label="persistent drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="26381" end="26389" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26463" end="26481" title="State of emergency#United States" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="26564" end="26576" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Gavin Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q88307738" start="26626" end="26644" title="stay-at-home order" label="stay-at-home order"/>
<link wikidata="Q844244" start="26722" end="26745" title="language revitalization" label="language revitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742649" start="26830" end="26842" title="Land Back" label="land returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211855" start="26905" end="26916" title="dam removal" label="dam removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q968640" start="26983" end="26996" title="Klamath River" label="Klamath River"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="27073" end="27080" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="27233" end="27245" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="27298" end="27307" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="27403" end="27443" title="List of U.S. states by area" label="third-largest state in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="27459" end="27465" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="27470" end="27475" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="27605" end="27624" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="27672" end="27691" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="27752" end="27758" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="27773" end="27779" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="27807" end="27814" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="27837" end="27850" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="27907" end="27914" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="27924" end="27939" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q301467" start="27985" end="28000" title="The Californias" label="The Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="28011" end="28024" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46508" start="28036" end="28055" title="Baja California Sur" label="Baja California Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="28095" end="28120" title="California Central Valley" label="California Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q660304" start="28168" end="28191" title="Pacific Coast Ranges" label="coastal mountain ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="28209" end="28222" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559442" start="28247" end="28266" title="Tehachapi Mountains" label="Tehachapi Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536323" start="28379" end="28413" title="Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta" label="Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686914" start="28441" end="28458" title="Sacramento Valley" label="Sacramento Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q335575" start="28490" end="28506" title="Sacramento River" label="Sacramento River"/>
<link wikidata="Q964198" start="28540" end="28558" title="San Joaquin Valley" label="San Joaquin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q751347" start="28584" end="28601" title="San Joaquin River" label="San Joaquin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="28790" end="28797" title="seaport" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q134574" start="28954" end="28959" title="pump (Water)" label="pumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q644154" start="29282" end="29292" title="Suisun Bay" label="Suisun Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044843" start="29386" end="29402" title="Carquinez Strait" label="Carquinez Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q999055" start="29421" end="29434" title="San Pablo Bay" label="San Pablo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="29460" end="29477" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="29506" end="29519" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q220032" start="29528" end="29539" title="Golden Gate" label="Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q306147" start="29553" end="29568" title="Channel Islands of California" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566837" start="29589" end="29603" title="South Coast (California)" label="Southern coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396187" start="29615" end="29631" title="Farallon Islands" label="Farallon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="29749" end="29769" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous 48 states"/>
<link wikidata="Q235539" start="29771" end="29784" title="Mount Whitney" label="Mount Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996389" start="29810" end="29825" title="Yosemite Valley" label="Yosemite Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q152660" start="29870" end="29891" title="Sequoia National Park" label="Sequoia National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="29905" end="29918" title="Sequoiadendron giganteum" label="giant sequoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169962" start="29995" end="30005" title="Lake Tahoe" label="Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042674" start="30086" end="30098" title="Owens Valley" label="Owens Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q335585" start="30103" end="30112" title="Mono Lake" label="Mono Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="30127" end="30141" title="bird migration" label="migratory bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099503" start="30187" end="30197" title="Clear Lake (California)" label="Clear Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127580" start="30442" end="30458" title="Palisade Glacier" label="Palisade Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459429" start="30511" end="30522" title="Tulare Lake" label="Tulare Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="30599" end="30610" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232370" start="30615" end="30628" title="Lake Corcoran" label="Lake Corcoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433957" start="31030" end="31056" title="White Mountains (California)" label="California White Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q515556" start="31100" end="31116" title="bristlecone pine" label="bristlecone pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q503301" start="31189" end="31199" title="Salton Sea" label="Salton Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="31240" end="31246" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="31284" end="31296" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q799720" start="31364" end="31378" title="Badwater Basin" label="Badwater Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="31685" end="31699" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="31839" end="31861" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947646" start="31869" end="31897" title="Sacramento metropolitan area" label="Sacramento metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="31901" end="31920" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="31929" end="31945" title="Los Angeles metropolitan area" label="Los Angeles area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148552" start="31951" end="31964" title="Inland Empire" label="Inland Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q108143" start="31973" end="32000" title="San Diego metropolitan area" label="San Diego metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="32004" end="32023" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783" start="32184" end="32196" title="Pacific Ring of Fire" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="32223" end="32230" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460122" start="32233" end="32239" title="Floods in California" label="floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058413" start="32241" end="32249" title="Droughts in California" label="droughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570423" start="32251" end="32266" title="Santa Ana winds" label="Santa Ana winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565566" start="32268" end="32277" title="List of California wildfires" label="wildfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="32283" end="32292" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="32340" end="32347" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617630" start="32363" end="32374" title="List of earthquakes in California" label="earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="32446" end="32463" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="32478" end="32488" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="32710" end="32731" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q281655" start="32742" end="32760" title="California Current" label="California Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="32791" end="32794" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="32964" end="32977" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="33186" end="33195" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133615" start="33419" end="33425" title="Climate of the Los Angeles Basin" label="warmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="33454" end="33466" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33493" end="33516" title="San Francisco Bay Area#Climate" label="climate of the Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="33898" end="33915" title="temperate climate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="34079" end="34093" title="alpine climate" label="alpine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="34188" end="34199" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="34241" end="34247" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189073" start="34282" end="34300" title="eastern California" label="eastern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="34452" end="34464" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908225" start="34703" end="34707" title="Boca, California" label="Boca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636952" start="34908" end="34920" title="Humboldt Bay" label="Humboldt Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q488702" start="34935" end="34941" title="Eureka, California" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="34963" end="34975" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q983604" start="35005" end="35012" title="Mammoth Lakes, California" label="Mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058413" start="35107" end="35115" title="Droughts in California" label="droughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133471" start="35137" end="35158" title="Climate change in California" label="due to climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160967" start="35163" end="35177" title="Water extraction" label="overextraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q387400" start="35259" end="35277" title="electricity supply" label="electricity supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973735" start="35282" end="35296" title="water security" label="water security"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="35433" end="35465" title="indigenous peoples of California" label="indigenous peoples of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589818" start="35492" end="35507" title="controlled burn" label="controlled burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979974" start="35605" end="35645" title="Native American use of fire in ecosystems" label="Native American use of fire in ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q737742" start="35898" end="35912" title="Nearctic realm" label="Nearctic realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="35947" end="35956" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="35994" end="36001" title="endemic (ecology)" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248233" start="36019" end="36025" title="Relict (biology)" label="relict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262384" start="36103" end="36127" title="Lyonothamnus floribundus" label="Lyonothamnus floribundus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216818" start="36194" end="36212" title="adaptive radiation" label="adaptive radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q311139" start="36357" end="36366" title="Ceanothus" label="Ceanothus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="36450" end="36461" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="36487" end="36501" title="exotic species" label="exotic species"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="36632" end="36645" title="giant sequoia" label="largest trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="36651" end="36664" title="coast redwood" label="tallest trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116374" start="36674" end="36686" title="pinus longaeva" label="oldest trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="36725" end="36740" title="perennial plant" label="perennial plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="36870" end="36886" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="37127" end="37141" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378081" start="37480" end="37491" title="Yucca brevifolia" label="Joshua tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q517130" start="37588" end="37594" title="aster (genus)" label="asters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838136" start="37596" end="37614" title="Fremont cottonwood" label="Fremont cottonwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377986" start="37619" end="37629" title="valley oak" label="valley oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738306" start="37798" end="37807" title="Nemophila" label="Nemophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q53476" start="37815" end="37819" title="Lamiaceae" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q133285" start="37827" end="37835" title="Phacelia" label="Phacelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q146095" start="37849" end="37854" title="viola (plant)" label="Viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q158795" start="37894" end="37918" title="Eschscholzia californica" label="Eschscholzia californica"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="38149" end="38169" title="Sequoia sempervirens" label="Sequoia sempervirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="38230" end="38254" title="Sequoiadendron giganteum" label="Sequoiadendron giganteum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17271024" start="38355" end="38366" title="Tanbark oak" label="Tanbark oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15933047" start="38368" end="38385" title="California laurel" label="California laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q227779" start="38387" end="38397" title="sugar pine" label="sugar pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q430057" start="38399" end="38406" title="Arbutus" label="madrona"/>
<link wikidata="Q599523" start="38408" end="38426" title="Acer macrophyllum" label="broad-leaved maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="38432" end="38443" title="Douglas-fir" label="Douglas-fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q608099" start="38491" end="38500" title="Polystichum" label="swordfern"/>
<link wikidata="Q157746" start="38513" end="38523" title="barrenwort" label="barrenwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q475629" start="38529" end="38537" title="trillium" label="trillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689896" start="38565" end="38576" title="huckleberry" label="huckleberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q118353099" start="38578" end="38584" title="azalea" label="azalea"/>
<link wikidata="Q93201" start="38670" end="38675" title="tulip" label="tulip"/>
<link wikidata="Q141828" start="38681" end="38686" title="Lilium columbianum" label="tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263838" start="38691" end="38698" title="Lilium pardalinum" label="leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q251370" start="38759" end="38771" title="Jeffrey pine" label="Jeffrey pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290204" start="38773" end="38780" title="red fir" label="red fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q165091" start="38786" end="38800" title="lodgepole pine" label="lodgepole pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287159" start="38849" end="38858" title="manzanita" label="manzanita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024216" start="38885" end="38900" title="Calvatia sculpta" label="Sierra puffball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243697" start="39127" end="39142" title="Primula suffrutescens" label="Sierra primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782930" start="39144" end="39160" title="Aquilegia flavescens" label="yellow columbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146130" start="39162" end="39178" title="Ranunculus" label="alpine buttercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287813" start="39184" end="39204" title="Dodecatheon alpinum" label="alpine shooting star"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="39207" end="39217" title="Palm trees" label="Palm trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="39274" end="39293" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="39298" end="39309" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q267267" start="39489" end="39504" title="Colorado Desert" label="Colorado Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="39583" end="39593" title="eucalyptus" label="eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="39595" end="39601" title="acacia" label="acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q786249" start="39603" end="39614" title="Schinus" label="pepper tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q145781" start="39630" end="39642" title="Scotch broom" label="Scotch broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025685" start="39708" end="39731" title="Erysimum capitatum" label="Contra Costa wallflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078659" start="39733" end="39763" title="Oenothera deltoides subsp. howellii" label="Antioch Dunes evening primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851182" start="39765" end="39777" title="Tuctoria mucronata" label="Solano grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117327" start="39779" end="39807" title="Delphinium variegatum" label="San Clemente Island larkspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17715355" start="39809" end="39836" title="Cordylanthus maritimus" label="salt marsh bird&amp;#x27;s beak"/>
<link wikidata="Q159779" start="39838" end="39864" title="Arabis blepharophylla" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s rock-cress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228444" start="39870" end="39902" title="Dudleya traskiae" label="Santa Barbara Island liveforever"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="40031" end="40041" title="jackrabbit" label="jackrabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q120094" start="40043" end="40055" title="kangaroo rat" label="kangaroo rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="40105" end="40108" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452250" start="40110" end="40120" title="roadrunner" label="roadrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q969006" start="40122" end="40133" title="cactus wren" label="cactus wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366532" start="40207" end="40223" title="Crotalus cerastes" label="sidewinder viper"/>
<link wikidata="Q914356" start="40225" end="40240" title="desert tortoise" label="desert tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q288720" start="40246" end="40257" title="horned toad" label="horned toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="40309" end="40317" title="Pronghorn" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763729" start="40319" end="40339" title="Dusky-footed woodrat" label="brown-footed woodrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q632701" start="40345" end="40360" title="ring-tailed cat" label="ring-tailed cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225831" start="40396" end="40415" title="California thrasher" label="California thrasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746307" start="40417" end="40424" title="Psaltriparus minimus" label="bushtit"/>
<link wikidata="Q194314" start="40430" end="40447" title="California condor" label="California condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880944" start="40494" end="40511" title="black-tailed deer" label="black-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="40513" end="40524" title="American black bear" label="black bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q215250" start="40526" end="40534" title="gray fox" label="gray fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="40538" end="40544" title="cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131907" start="40547" end="40553" title="bobcat" label="bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060769" start="40560" end="40573" title="Roosevelt elk" label="Roosevelt elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q743692" start="40681" end="40692" title="Proteidae" label="water puppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698012" start="40697" end="40715" title="Batrachoseps attenuatus" label="redwood salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q8154335" start="40750" end="40760" title="kingfisher" label="kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116033" start="40773" end="40779" title="towhee" label="towhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q434197" start="40857" end="40872" title="mountain weasel" label="mountain weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81063" start="40874" end="40887" title="snowshoe hare" label="snowshoe hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q838749" start="40953" end="40969" title="Steller&amp;#x27;s jay" label="blue-fronted jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q973320" start="40971" end="40989" title="mountain chickadee" label="mountain chickadee"/>
<link wikidata="Q846350" start="40991" end="41004" title="hermit thrush" label="hermit thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q912010" start="41006" end="41021" title="American dipper" label="American dipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668264" start="41027" end="41052" title="Townsend&amp;#x27;s solitaire" label="Townsend&amp;#x27;s solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304007" start="41126" end="41149" title="gray-crowned rosy finch" label="gray-crowned rosy finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q564265" start="41228" end="41251" title="Anna&amp;#x27;s hummingbird" label="Anna&amp;#x27;s hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142785" start="41256" end="41279" title="Clark&amp;#x27;s nutcracker" label="Clark&amp;#x27;s nutcracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q932186" start="41346" end="41369" title="white-tailed jackrabbit" label="white-tailed jackrabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="41379" end="41392" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="41527" end="41536" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="41538" end="41544" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="41546" end="41559" title="mountain lion" label="mountain lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16819" start="41561" end="41577" title="northern flicker" label="northern flicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="41783" end="41790" title="Rainbow trout" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535697" start="41792" end="41798" title="Golden trout" label="golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717060" start="41804" end="41813" title="Cutthroat trout" label="cutthroat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188144" start="41891" end="41899" title="White seabass" label="sea bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q269781" start="41901" end="41915" title="yellowfin tuna" label="yellowfin tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q193921" start="41917" end="41926" title="barracuda" label="barracuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q745751" start="42227" end="42245" title="Vulpes macrotis" label="San Joaquin kitfox"/>
<link wikidata="Q503813" start="42247" end="42274" title="Aplodontia rufa nigra" label="Point Arena mountain beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q35223" start="42276" end="42296" title="Pacific pocket mouse" label="Pacific pocket mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762859" start="42298" end="42322" title="salt marsh harvest mouse" label="salt marsh harvest mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484203" start="42324" end="42346" title="Morro Bay kangaroo rat" label="Morro Bay kangaroo rat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42389" end="42402" title="California vole#Subspecies" label="Amargosa vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q27608918" start="42404" end="42425" title="California least tern" label="California least tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q194314" start="42427" end="42444" title="California condor" label="California condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q430863" start="42446" end="42463" title="loggerhead shrike" label="loggerhead shrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q792447" start="42465" end="42490" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s sparrow" label="San Clemente sage sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219145" start="42492" end="42518" title="San Francisco garter snake" label="San Francisco garter snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q841099" start="42732" end="42754" title="California gnatcatcher" label="California gnatcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q49445687" start="42756" end="42778" title="Paiute cutthroat trout" label="Paiute cutthroat trout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42780" end="42798" title="Sea otter#Subspecies" label="southern sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058979" start="42804" end="42824" title="northern spotted owl" label="northern spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="42961" end="42973" title="US Fish &amp;amp; Wildlife Service" label="federal list"/>
<link wikidata="Q751347" start="43187" end="43204" title="San Joaquin River" label="San Joaquin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536323" start="43381" end="43415" title="Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta" label="Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="43456" end="43473" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760800" start="43557" end="43566" title="Pit River" label="Pit River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399312" start="43568" end="43581" title="Feather River" label="Feather River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807419" start="43586" end="43600" title="Tuolumne River" label="Tuolumne River"/>
<link wikidata="Q968640" start="43607" end="43614" title="Klamath River" label="Klamath"/>
<link wikidata="Q499797" start="43619" end="43633" title="Trinity River (California)" label="Trinity Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048862" start="43689" end="43698" title="Eel River (California)" label="Eel River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161673" start="43703" end="43716" title="Salinas River (California)" label="Salinas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535751" start="43818" end="43830" title="Mojave River" label="Mojave River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761189" start="43888" end="43903" title="Santa Ana River" label="Santa Ana River"/>
<link wikidata="Q942677" start="43923" end="43940" title="Transverse Ranges" label="Transverse Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="43980" end="43994" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944429" start="44143" end="44165" title="Central Valley Project" label="Central Valley Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026947" start="44230" end="44260" title="California State Water Project" label="California State Water Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020331" start="44395" end="44424" title="California Coastal Commission" label="California Coastal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="44486" end="44505" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="44510" end="44529" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="44853" end="44872" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="44875" end="44894" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="44949" end="44961" title="Municipal corporation" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="45251" end="45261" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="45333" end="45341" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="45343" end="45352" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q817301" start="45358" end="45365" title="Benicia, California" label="Benicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473861" start="45467" end="45481" title="Mountain House, California" label="Mountain House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="45633" end="45650" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="45657" end="45686" title="Los Angeles Metropolitan Area" label="Los Angeles Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="45692" end="45714" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148552" start="45720" end="45749" title="Riverside-San Bernardino Area" label="Riverside-San Bernardino Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q108143" start="45755" end="45782" title="San Diego metropolitan area" label="San Diego metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947646" start="45791" end="45819" title="Sacramento metropolitan area" label="Sacramento metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="45948" end="45975" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="46040" end="46053" title="2020 United States census" label="April 1, 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="46082" end="46093" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="46833" end="46843" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q89901480" start="46846" end="46870" title="COVID-19 pandemic deaths" label="COVID-19 pandemic deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="47244" end="47268" title="Greater Los Angeles Area" label="Greater Los Angeles Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="47291" end="47308" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="47363" end="47394" title="List of United States cities by population" label="second-largest city in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="47395" end="47413" title="Los Angeles County" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602744" start="47593" end="47645" title="List of United States cities by population density" label="one of the most densely populated cities in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="47659" end="47698" title="List of United States cities by population" label="top 20 most populous cities in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="47737" end="47746" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="47754" end="47762" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="47801" end="47821" title="center of population" label="center of population"/>
<link wikidata="Q985258" start="47888" end="47895" title="Shafter, California" label="Shafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q108047" start="47897" end="47908" title="Kern County, California" label="Kern County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601005" start="47941" end="47979" title="List of U.S. states and territories by life expectancy" label="fourth among states by life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="48076" end="48096" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="48341" end="48354" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="48429" end="48433" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="48573" end="48588" title="Net immigration" label="Net immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="48820" end="48843" title="undocumented immigrants" label="undocumented immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q185367" start="49149" end="49156" title="Illegal immigration to the United States" label="illegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q473741" start="49157" end="49163" title="Alien (law)" label="aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985639" start="49282" end="49289" title="Illegal immigrant population of the United States" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="49382" end="49393" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q108072" start="49395" end="49403" title="Monterey County, California" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q109656" start="49405" end="49415" title="San Benito County, California" label="San Benito"/>
<link wikidata="Q169952" start="49417" end="49425" title="Imperial County, California" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q108137" start="49431" end="49444" title="Napa County, California" label="Napa Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="49662" end="49673" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="49675" end="49682" title="Oakland" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="49688" end="49701" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559093" start="49716" end="49734" title="Sanctuary city" label="sanctuary policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="49750" end="49753" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="49766" end="49799" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="49833" end="49841" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q106881068" start="49849" end="49862" title="Homelessness in California" label="in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="50011" end="50016" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="50028" end="50043" title="Hispanic White Americans" label="Hispanic Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="50052" end="50070" title="non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic white"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="50078" end="50083" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="50099" end="50115" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="50122" end="50137" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="50142" end="50155" title="Alaska Native" label="Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="50162" end="50177" title="Native Hawaiian" label="Native Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="50181" end="50197" title="Pacific Islander American" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="50209" end="50224" title="Some Other Race" label="some other race"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197368" start="50584" end="50602" title="Hispanics and Latinos in California" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="50679" end="50698" title="Non-Hispanic whites" label="Non-Hispanic whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="50755" end="50765" title="Californio" label="Californio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="50781" end="50789" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122182096" start="50838" end="50854" title="Spanish language in California" label="Spanish-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="50919" end="50935" title="Mexican American" label="Mexican American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307911" start="50936" end="50943" title="Chicano" label="Chicano"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="50945" end="50961" title="Criollo people" label="Criollo Spaniard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406487" start="51129" end="51139" title="Salvadoran Americans" label="Salvadoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614258" start="51145" end="51155" title="Guatemalan Americans" label="Guatemalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="51273" end="51298" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="51328" end="51335" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="51355" end="51361" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="51381" end="51388" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="51408" end="51413" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="51433" end="51440" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="51460" end="51468" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="51486" end="51501" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406487" start="51520" end="51530" title="Salvadoran Americans" label="Salvadoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614258" start="51535" end="51545" title="Guatemalan Americans" label="Guatemalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="51557" end="51564" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745454" start="51601" end="51609" title="American ancestry" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="51624" end="51630" title="Indian Americans" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="52436" end="52468" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="Indigenous peoples of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314452" start="52647" end="52670" title="Indigenous peoples of Mexico" label="Mexican American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="52697" end="52720" title="Central american indians" label="Central American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q105102828" start="52784" end="52803" title="Majority-minority state" label="minority population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="52918" end="52937" title="non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="52958" end="52966" title="Hispanic and Latino American" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="52971" end="52976" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="53107" end="53116" title="Hispanic and Latino American" label="Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="53488" end="53493" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="53495" end="53500" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="53510" end="53521" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026812" start="53886" end="53893" title="California English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="53922" end="53929" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="53934" end="53942" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="53943" end="53960" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="53984" end="54009" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="54027" end="54054" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="54126" end="54133" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="54411" end="54421" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="54479" end="54496" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54535" end="54549" title="List of California ballot propositions 1980–1989#November 4, 1986" label="Proposition 63"/>
<link wikidata="Q122182096" start="54725" end="54732" title="Spanish language in California" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411096" start="55135" end="55157" title="Conquest of California" label="Conquest of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="55166" end="55193" title="Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q196195" start="55281" end="55307" title="Constitution of California" label="Constitution of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164283" start="55345" end="55387" title="California Constitutional Conventions" label="Monterey Constitutional Convention of 1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719842" start="55780" end="55801" title="English-only movement" label="English-only movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600641" start="55848" end="55878" title="1986 California Proposition 63" label="1986 California Proposition 63"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452330" start="55999" end="56029" title="2016 California Proposition 58" label="2016 California Proposition 58"/>
<link wikidata="Q233107" start="56058" end="56077" title="bilingual education" label="bilingual education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589189" start="56227" end="56251" title="government of California" label="government of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="56544" end="56566" title="Hispanophone" label="Spanish-speaking world"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="56923" end="56933" title="endangered language" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q844244" start="56973" end="56996" title="language revitalization" label="language revitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100826" start="57053" end="57060" title="Chinese language in the United States" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q113133266" start="57062" end="57072" title="Vietnamese language in the United States" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260324" start="57077" end="57084" title="Punjabi American" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="57301" end="57317" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026812" start="57384" end="57402" title="California English" label="California English"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126200" start="57410" end="57421" title="vowel shift" label="vowel shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="57592" end="57614" title="religious denomination" label="religious denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744222" start="58414" end="58439" title="American Jewish Year Book" label="American Jewish Year Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="58463" end="58469" title="American Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="58540" end="58577" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="58641" end="58656" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722890" start="58674" end="58721" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in California" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="58744" end="58771" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q965508" start="58973" end="58999" title="Archdiocese of Los Angeles" label="Archdiocese of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q936952" start="59008" end="59036" title="Archdiocese of San Francisco" label="Archdiocese of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="59104" end="59123" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="59522" end="59537" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="59570" end="59598" title="culture of the United States" label="culture of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="59629" end="59637" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="59638" end="59648" title="Californio" label="Californio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317008" start="59653" end="59660" title="Culture of Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="60063" end="60079" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="60285" end="60299" title="the Beach Boys" label="the Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="60401" end="60410" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="60501" end="60519" title="cinema in the United States" label="U.S. film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537117" start="60527" end="60566" title="Major film studio" label="&amp;quot;Big Five&amp;quot; major film studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="60568" end="60576" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="60578" end="60584" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="60586" end="60595" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="60597" end="60606" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="60612" end="60624" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="60701" end="60710" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="60822" end="60825" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="60827" end="60830" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="60832" end="60835" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="60841" end="60844" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="61025" end="61034" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="61039" end="61048" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114923" start="61075" end="61105" title="Owned-and-operated television stations in the United States" label="owned-and-operated TV stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326585" start="61268" end="61277" title="KCBS (AM)" label="KCBS (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253904" start="61285" end="61307" title="Media in the San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="61330" end="61351" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="61370" end="61378" title="Music market" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="61412" end="61424" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="61432" end="61446" title="Warner Records" label="Warner Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="61459" end="61470" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858553" start="61512" end="61536" title="Mind of a Genius Records" label="Mind of a Genius Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q804401" start="61662" end="61679" title="Bakersfield sound" label="Bakersfield sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537356" start="61681" end="61702" title="Bay Area thrash metal" label="Bay Area thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="61704" end="61720" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045541" start="61722" end="61728" title="g-funk" label="g-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="61730" end="61738" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="61740" end="61750" title="glam metal" label="glam metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="61752" end="61764" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="61766" end="61782" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q617240" start="61784" end="61795" title="stoner rock" label="stoner rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="61797" end="61806" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="61808" end="61821" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q183862" start="61823" end="61832" title="metalcore" label="metalcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="61834" end="61842" title="pop punk" label="pop punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q220830" start="61844" end="61854" title="surf music" label="surf music"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="61856" end="61870" title="third wave ska" label="third wave ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q429264" start="61872" end="61890" title="west coast hip hop" label="west coast hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548603" start="61892" end="61907" title="west coast jazz" label="west coast jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q255406" start="61909" end="61917" title="jazz rap" label="jazz rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="61963" end="61971" title="pop rock" label="pop rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="61973" end="61983" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="61985" end="61994" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="61996" end="62003" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="62005" end="62008" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="62010" end="62014" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="62016" end="62026" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="62028" end="62035" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="62037" end="62048" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="62050" end="62056" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="62058" end="62066" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="62071" end="62076" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="62149" end="62161" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="62163" end="62174" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="62176" end="62189" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="62195" end="62213" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="62290" end="62304" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="62360" end="62374" title="internet media" label="internet media"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="62376" end="62388" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122864" start="62435" end="62476" title="Big Tech" label="&amp;quot;Big Five&amp;quot; technology companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="62478" end="62483" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="62485" end="62489" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="62495" end="62501" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="62559" end="62566" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196431" start="62568" end="62581" title="Pandora Radio" label="Pandora Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="62583" end="62590" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="62592" end="62598" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="62604" end="62611" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q21404084" start="62675" end="62682" title="HP inc." label="HP inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="62687" end="62692" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="62694" end="62703" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="62708" end="62714" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="62772" end="62791" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215004" start="62832" end="62843" title="car culture" label="car culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="62854" end="62863" title="fast food" label="fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898326" start="62865" end="62876" title="fast casual restaurant" label="fast casual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608991" start="62882" end="62895" title="List of casual dining restaurant chains" label="casual dining"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109854" start="62994" end="63018" title="California Pizza Kitchen" label="California Pizza Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189695" start="63020" end="63032" title="Denny&amp;#x27;s" label="Denny&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185675" start="63034" end="63038" title="IHOP" label="IHOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="63040" end="63055" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358690" start="63057" end="63070" title="Panda Express" label="Panda Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q752941" start="63076" end="63085" title="Taco Bell" label="Taco Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="63121" end="63153" title="major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="major professional sports league"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="63201" end="63223" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="63263" end="63287" title="Greater Los Angeles Area" label="Greater Los Angeles Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="63373" end="63383" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="63451" end="63480" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419343" start="63515" end="63534" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q956072" start="63540" end="63557" title="San Diego Stadium" label="San Diego Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q30114464" start="63573" end="63587" title="Super Bowl LVI" label="Super Bowl LVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520501" start="63601" end="63613" title="SoFi Stadium" label="SoFi Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="63617" end="63626" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q543429" start="63780" end="63789" title="Rose Bowl Game" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="63810" end="63813" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="63848" end="63864" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q272220" start="63866" end="63886" title="Los Angeles Chargers" label="Los Angeles Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="63892" end="63911" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="63914" end="63917" title="Major League Baseball" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="63951" end="63971" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="63973" end="63992" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="63994" end="64012" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="Los Angeles Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="64018" end="64034" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="64041" end="64044" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="64078" end="64099" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q976396" start="64101" end="64121" title="Los Angeles Clippers" label="Los Angeles Clippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="64123" end="64141" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q166105" start="64147" end="64163" title="Sacramento Kings" label="Sacramento Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="64183" end="64187" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329633" start="64224" end="64242" title="Los Angeles Sparks" label="Los Angeles Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="64249" end="64252" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="64287" end="64300" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="64302" end="64319" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="64325" end="64340" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="64343" end="64346" title="Major League Soccer" label="MLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q204357" start="64380" end="64398" title="Los Angeles Galaxy" label="Los Angeles Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q575370" start="64400" end="64420" title="San Jose Earthquakes" label="San Jose Earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18380286" start="64422" end="64436" title="Los Angeles FC" label="Los Angeles FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945347" start="64442" end="64454" title="San Diego FC" label="San Diego FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592108" start="64457" end="64460" title="Major League Rugby" label="MLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q48861132" start="64492" end="64508" title="San Diego Legion" label="San Diego Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="64569" end="64575" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="64580" end="64586" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8143" start="64601" end="64605" title="1932 Summer Olympics" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="64610" end="64614" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="64641" end="64652" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182804" start="64683" end="64698" title="Palisades Tahoe" label="Palisades Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9634" start="64736" end="64756" title="1960 Winter Olympics" label="1960 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451505" start="64784" end="64804" title="2028 Summer Olympics" label="2028 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="64908" end="64927" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q582280" start="64963" end="64972" title="Rose Bowl Stadium" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q389104" start="65010" end="65015" title="1994 FIFA World Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q692470" start="65024" end="65040" title="Stanford Stadium" label="Stanford Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021026" start="65122" end="65144" title="California State Games" label="California State Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="65168" end="65175" title="surfing" label="surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178131" start="65177" end="65189" title="snowboarding" label="snowboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q842284" start="65195" end="65208" title="skateboarding" label="skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="65257" end="65267" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q210778" start="65269" end="65281" title="beach soccer" label="beach soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="65287" end="65293" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="65373" end="65377" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="65379" end="65384" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="65386" end="65392" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="65394" end="65411" title="mountain climbing" label="mountain climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="65413" end="65429" title="Marathon" label="marathon running"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="65431" end="65443" title="horse racing" label="horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="65445" end="65452" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="65454" end="65472" title="mixed martial arts" label="mixed martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="65474" end="65480" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="65486" end="65497" title="motorsports" label="motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="65510" end="65516" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="65521" end="65532" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054793" start="65806" end="65825" title="Secondary education in the United States" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622305" start="65838" end="65850" title="High schools in California" label="high schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020883" start="66048" end="66079" title="California Proposition 98 (1988)" label="unique constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765345" start="66145" end="66163" title="List of California Community Colleges" label="community colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="66639" end="66662" title="postsecondary education" label="postsecondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="66724" end="66730" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="66731" end="66750" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075106" start="66751" end="66757" title="State university system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="66765" end="66789" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="66857" end="66864" title="student" label="student"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061104" start="67123" end="67139" title="UC San Francisco" label="UC San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507357" start="67194" end="67205" title="Health care in California" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864122" start="67226" end="67245" title="UCSF Medical Center" label="UCSF Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623563" start="67266" end="67288" title="Hospitals in California" label="hospital in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q815352" start="67677" end="67704" title="California State University" label="California State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460112" start="68359" end="68388" title="California Community Colleges" label="California Community Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="68911" end="68930" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="68936" end="68970" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="68986" end="69019" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246557" start="69025" end="69043" title="Claremont Colleges" label="Claremont Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q992830" start="69045" end="69067" title="Santa Clara University" label="Santa Clara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786078" start="69069" end="69096" title="Loyola Marymount University" label="Loyola Marymount University"/>
<link wikidata="Q262663" start="69102" end="69125" title="University of San Diego" label="University of San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887879" start="69131" end="69158" title="University of San Francisco" label="University of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805085" start="69160" end="69178" title="Chapman University" label="Chapman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q117876" start="69180" end="69201" title="Pepperdine University" label="Pepperdine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346110" start="69203" end="69221" title="Occidental College" label="Occidental College"/>
<link wikidata="Q630226" start="69227" end="69252" title="University of the Pacific (United States)" label="University of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026804" start="69444" end="69474" title="California College of the Arts" label="California College of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026827" start="69476" end="69508" title="California Institute of the Arts" label="California Institute of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q586735" start="69510" end="69537" title="San Francisco Art Institute" label="San Francisco Art Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272069" start="69539" end="69567" title="Art Center College of Design" label="Art Center College of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822225" start="69573" end="69598" title="Academy of Art University" label="Academy of Art University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="69697" end="69716" title="gross state product" label="gross state product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191085" start="69730" end="69738" title="1000000000000 (number)" label="trillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="69766" end="69791" title="List of U.S. states and territories by GDP" label="largest of any U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="69969" end="69992" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q580864" start="70084" end="70090" title="Economy of Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154521" start="70095" end="70104" title="Economy of Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072272" start="70131" end="70144" title="Economy of South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="70289" end="70312" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="70328" end="70360" title="List of U.S. states by number of Fortune 500 companies" label="highest number of any U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308991" start="70426" end="70445" title="Port of Los Angeles" label="Port of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244441" start="70454" end="70472" title="Port of Long Beach" label="Port of Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q488021" start="70626" end="70629" title="Twenty-foot equivalent units" label="TEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q125553059" start="70642" end="70657" title="Port of Oakland" label="Port of Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16898749" start="70662" end="70677" title="Port of Hueneme" label="Port of Hueneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021300" start="71165" end="71177" title="California unemployment statistics" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q478214" start="71731" end="71736" title="Tesla, Inc." label="Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="71741" end="71746" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="71852" end="71856" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878212" start="71931" end="71945" title="California dairy industry" label="milk and cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752895" start="71955" end="71962" title="Almond cultivation in California" label="almonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q120468674" start="71968" end="71974" title="Grape cultivation in California" label="grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="72710" end="72724" title="List of U.S. states by GDP per capita" label="Per capita GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021279" start="72776" end="72793" title="California locations by per capita income" label="Per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q15320003" start="72895" end="72915" title="migrant worker" label="migrant farm workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="72933" end="72945" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="72981" end="73011" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q964198" start="73017" end="73035" title="San Joaquin Valley" label="San Joaquin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="73152" end="73162" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372903" start="73222" end="73234" title="Poverty in the United States" label="poverty rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="73521" end="73535" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q110739" start="73540" end="73551" title="Santa Clara County, California" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q108101" start="73556" end="73574" title="San Mateo County, California" label="San Mateo counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="73630" end="73642" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020808" start="74360" end="74382" title="California Proposition 30 (2012)" label="Proposition 30 in 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452324" start="74387" end="74409" title="2016 California Proposition 55" label="Proposition 55 in 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="74458" end="74468" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892673" start="74483" end="74494" title="tax bracket" label="tax bracket"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74762" end="74777" title="sales taxes in the United States#California" label="state sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="75016" end="75029" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041426" start="75151" end="75165" title="California Proposition 13 (1978)" label="Proposition 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="75559" end="75581" title="environmental movement" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144625" start="75845" end="75852" title="Path 15" label="Path 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144632" start="75857" end="75864" title="Path 66" label="Path 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144628" start="75939" end="75946" title="Path 46" label="Path 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972125" start="75953" end="76000" title="California oil and gas industry" label="state&amp;#x27;s crude oil and natural gas deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079700" start="76039" end="76054" title="Offshore oil and gas in California" label="along the coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292860" start="76076" end="76099" title="Midway-Sunset Oil Field" label="Midway-Sunset Oil Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634611" start="76119" end="76131" title="List of power stations in California" label="power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743851" start="76313" end="76329" title="Renewable energy in California" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556751" start="76605" end="76623" title="Solar power in California" label="solar power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078408" start="76636" end="76667" title="Solar Energy Generating Systems" label="Solar Energy Generating Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="76696" end="76709" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023992" start="76711" end="76739" title="Wind power in California" label="California&amp;#x27;s wind farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187140" start="76748" end="76761" title="Altamont Pass Wind Farm" label="Altamont Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068982" start="76763" end="76780" title="San Gorgonio Pass Wind Farm" label="San Gorgonio Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15404076" start="76786" end="76800" title="Tehachapi Pass Wind Farm" label="Tehachapi Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q96419470" start="76839" end="76871" title="Tehachapi Energy Storage Project" label="Tehachapi Energy Storage Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="76922" end="76942" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydro-electric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="77095" end="77108" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516546" start="77116" end="77129" title="Diablo Canyon Power Plant" label="Diablo Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q762368" start="77149" end="77173" title="San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station" label="San Onofre nuclear plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q185252" start="77220" end="77237" title="radioactive waste" label="radioactive waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="77317" end="77324" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774410" start="77334" end="77381" title="Anti-nuclear movement in California" label="banned the approval of new nuclear power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113991" start="77428" end="77454" title="High-level radioactive waste management" label="radioactive waste disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="77488" end="77496" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q668546" start="77501" end="77506" title="Davis, California" label="Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278776" start="77535" end="77552" title="nuclear-free zone" label="nuclear-free zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q806129" start="77643" end="77662" title="California Freeway and Expressway System" label="an extensive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="77666" end="77692" title="controlled-access highways" label="controlled-access highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="77717" end="77736" title="limited-access road" label="limited-access road"/>
<link wikidata="Q400256" start="77769" end="77777" title="State highways in California" label="highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215004" start="77807" end="77818" title="car culture" label="car culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="77876" end="77894" title="traffic congestion" label="traffic congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q127743" start="78018" end="78057" title="California Department of Transportation" label="California Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301484" start="78253" end="78270" title="Reason Foundation" label="Reason Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="78553" end="78571" title="Golden Gate Bridge" label="Golden Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q468464" start="78581" end="78616" title="List of longest suspension bridge spans" label="longest suspension bridge main span"/>
<link wikidata="Q771404" start="78833" end="78865" title="San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge" label="San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q768669" start="79014" end="79032" title="Yerba Buena Island" label="Yerba Buena Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q460788" start="79124" end="79143" title="Arroyo Seco Parkway" label="Arroyo Seco Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="79172" end="79180" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q805998" start="79283" end="79305" title="Four Level Interchange" label="Four Level Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253909" start="79353" end="79370" title="stack interchange" label="stack interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249117" start="79388" end="79413" title="California Highway Patrol" label="California Highway Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020431" start="79726" end="79765" title="California Department of Motor Vehicles" label="California Department of Motor Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="79773" end="79794" title="driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="driver&amp;#x27;s license"/>
<link wikidata="Q784167" start="79799" end="79824" title="Identity documents in the United States" label="state identification card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350212" start="79852" end="79871" title="Vehicle registration" label="registered vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="80067" end="80100" title="Los Angeles International Airport" label="Los Angeles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q935262" start="80108" end="80152" title="World&amp;#x27;s busiest airports by passenger traffic" label="the 4th busiest airport in the world in 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q8688" start="80158" end="80193" title="San Francisco International Airport" label="San Francisco International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q935262" start="80201" end="80246" title="World&amp;#x27;s busiest airports by passenger traffic" label="the 25th busiest airport in the world in 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="80379" end="80395" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432599" start="80396" end="80404" title="List of airports in California" label="airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022147" start="80447" end="80462" title="Inter-city rail" label="Inter-city rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q218438" start="80485" end="80502" title="Amtrak California" label="Amtrak California"/>
<link wikidata="Q510836" start="80532" end="80548" title="Capitol Corridor" label="Capitol Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q847589" start="80562" end="80579" title="Pacific Surfliner" label="Pacific Surfliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q287167" start="80597" end="80608" title="San Joaquin (train)" label="San Joaquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="80725" end="80743" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="80890" end="80896" title="Rapid transit" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="80901" end="80911" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339558" start="80947" end="80969" title="Los Angeles Metro Rail" label="Los Angeles Metro Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q278074" start="80990" end="81000" title="Muni Metro" label="Muni Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337235" start="81050" end="81064" title="VTA light rail" label="VTA light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577187" start="81078" end="81095" title="San Diego Trolley" label="San Diego Trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333826" start="81110" end="81126" title="SacRT light rail" label="SacRT light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959969" start="81160" end="81168" title="Sprinter (rail service)" label="Sprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="81184" end="81197" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q434302" start="81241" end="81266" title="Altamont Corridor Express" label="Altamont Corridor Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q610120" start="81268" end="81290" title="Bay Area Rapid Transit" label="Bay Area Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q166817" start="81292" end="81300" title="Caltrain" label="Caltrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562166" start="81302" end="81332" title="Sonoma–Marin Area Rail Transit" label="Sonoma–Marin Area Rail Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q766647" start="81356" end="81365" title="Metrolink (California)" label="Metrolink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138375" start="81390" end="81397" title="Coaster (rail service)" label="Coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020545" start="81405" end="81441" title="California High-Speed Rail Authority" label="California High-Speed Rail Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q782093" start="81500" end="81526" title="California High-Speed Rail" label="California High-Speed Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020792" start="81583" end="81613" title="2008 California Proposition 1A" label="2008 California Proposition 1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="82125" end="82128" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="82230" end="82239" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808155" start="82241" end="82248" title="Megabus (North America)" label="Megabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748907" start="82254" end="82268" title="Amtrak Thruway" label="Amtrak Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119171" start="82820" end="82841" title="California Water Wars" label="California Water Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="83031" end="83052" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="83498" end="83508" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="83544" end="83566" title="separation of powers" label="branches of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="83571" end="83587" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="83606" end="83614" title="Governor of California" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="83680" end="83698" title="legislative branch" label="legislative branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="83717" end="83725" title="California State Assembly" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526814" start="83730" end="83736" title="California State Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="83746" end="83761" title="judicial branch" label="judicial branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="83780" end="83807" title="Supreme Court of California" label="Supreme Court of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021202" start="83848" end="83867" title="California ballot proposition" label="ballot propositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q660064" start="83911" end="83921" title="Popular initiative" label="initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="83923" end="83933" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196663" start="83935" end="83941" title="recall election" label="recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="83947" end="83959" title="ratification" label="ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020778" start="83983" end="84005" title="California Proposition 14 (2010)" label="Proposition 14 in 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="84075" end="84089" title="closed primary" label="closed primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="84132" end="84144" title="independent (politics)" label="independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049544" start="84596" end="84623" title="nonpartisan blanket primary" label="nonpartisan blanket primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021228" start="84832" end="84859" title="California executive branch" label="California executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238284" start="84934" end="84953" title="Lieutenant Governor of California" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406489" start="84955" end="84971" title="California Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024182" start="84973" end="84991" title="Secretary of State of California" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021015" start="84993" end="85009" title="California State Controller" label="state controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021097" start="85011" end="85026" title="California State Treasurer" label="state treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191175" start="85028" end="85050" title="California Insurance Commissioner" label="insurance commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021095" start="85056" end="85098" title="California State Superintendent of Public Instruction" label="state superintendent of public instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970560" start="85170" end="85195" title="List of California state agencies" label="California state agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="85524" end="85552" title="California State Legislature" label="California State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="85704" end="85714" title="term limit" label="term limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="85888" end="85898" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="85938" end="85947" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q355736" start="85957" end="85975" title="community property" label="community property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858821" start="86063" end="86081" title="Capital punishment in California" label="Capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083686" start="86148" end="86157" title="Death Row" label="Death Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071103" start="86291" end="86304" title="List of people executed in California" label="13 executions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303089" start="86347" end="86381" title="California&amp;#x27;s judiciary system" label="California&amp;#x27;s judiciary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020373" start="86559" end="86586" title="California Courts of Appeal" label="California Courts of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="86608" end="86623" title="appellate court" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643515" start="86633" end="86659" title="California Superior Courts" label="California Superior Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125101" start="86681" end="86692" title="trial court" label="trial court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575526" start="86695" end="86724" title="List of justices of the Supreme Court of California" label="Justices of the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302869" start="86914" end="86930" title="Judicial Council of California" label="Judicial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603078" start="87047" end="87070" title="State Bar of California" label="State Bar of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="87463" end="87471" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="87506" end="87519" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="87589" end="87595" title="city" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637272" start="87597" end="87613" title="List of school districts in California" label="School districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="87764" end="87783" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q610237" start="87801" end="87817" title="Special-purpose district" label="special district"/>
<link wikidata="Q317936" start="87865" end="87876" title="List of counties in California" label="58 counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q196195" start="87912" end="87938" title="Constitution of California" label="Constitution of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625088" start="88045" end="88060" title="Law enforcement in California" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q96387902" start="88062" end="88067" title="List of California county jails" label="jails"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="88474" end="88493" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175507" start="88534" end="88554" title="board of supervisors" label="board of supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888675" start="88646" end="88653" title="Charter city" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="89031" end="89046" title="Council–manager government" label="council–manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413764" start="89447" end="89474" title="Government of San Francisco" label="Government of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="89487" end="89511" title="consolidated city-county" label="consolidated city-county"/>
<link wikidata="Q398141" start="89678" end="89693" title="school district" label="school district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="89757" end="89773" title="public education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q610237" start="89993" end="90010" title="special-purpose district" label="special districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q610237" start="90028" end="90044" title="Special-purpose district" label="special district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020163" start="90603" end="90605" title="California&amp;#x27;s congressional districts" label="52"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="90621" end="90645" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="90761" end="90776" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="90833" end="90872" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="speaker of the House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q766866" start="90931" end="90945" title="Kevin McCarthy" label="Kevin McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="90981" end="91001" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717593" start="91005" end="91017" title="Alex Padilla" label="Alex Padilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q350843" start="91022" end="91033" title="Adam Schiff" label="Adam Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="91076" end="91102" title="U.S. Department of Defense" label="U.S. Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677555" start="91126" end="91137" title="active duty" label="active duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="91174" end="91181" title="United States Navy" label="Sailors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="91185" end="91192" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="91206" end="91212" title="United States Air Force" label="Airmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="91230" end="91238" title="United States Army" label="Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q657908" start="91337" end="91361" title="Reserve components of the United States Armed Forces" label="Reservists and Guardsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="91387" end="91405" title="Los Angeles County" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q209572" start="91703" end="91719" title="military service" label="military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="91871" end="91889" title="Interwar period" label="before World WarII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020707" start="91993" end="92020" title="California National Guard" label="Army and Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021045" start="92026" end="92058" title="California State Military Reserve" label="naval and state military reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020298" start="92078" end="92100" title="California Cadet Corps" label="California Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="92333" end="92340" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="92418" end="92458" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="92531" end="92555" title="Washington, D.C." label="the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="92560" end="92566" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92575" end="92615" title="2020 United States presidential election#Results by state" label="2020 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="92673" end="92680" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="92682" end="92695" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="92697" end="92705" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021265" start="92889" end="92919" title="California gubernatorial recall election, 2003" label="to recall their state governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q589889" start="93036" end="93048" title="California Proposition 8" label="Proposition8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020851" start="93078" end="93100" title="California Proposition 71 (2004)" label="Proposition 71 in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="93109" end="93118" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93151" end="93194" title="Stem cell laws and policy in the United States#Legalization and funding" label="second state to legalize stem cell research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020778" start="93200" end="93222" title="California Proposition 14 (2010)" label="Proposition 14 in 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="93261" end="93277" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119171" start="93319" end="93345" title="California Water Wars" label="disputes over water rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937612" start="93353" end="93363" title="tax revolt" label="tax revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041426" start="93397" end="93419" title="California Proposition 13 (1978)" label="Proposition 13 in 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="93436" end="93448" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="93484" end="93502" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020399" start="93594" end="93610" title="California Democratic Party" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020915" start="93629" end="93645" title="California Republican Party" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="93877" end="93889" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Gavin Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="94068" end="94076" title="Centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140632" start="94149" end="94172" title="Partition and secession in California" label="California independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908120" start="94178" end="94203" title="California National Party" label="California National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958891" start="94212" end="94240" title="California Freedom Coalition" label="California Freedom Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="94302" end="94315" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="progressivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="94320" end="94337" title="civic nationalism" label="civic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27825684" start="94343" end="94357" title="Yes California" label="Yes California"/>
<link wikidata="Q660064" start="94420" end="94437" title="ballot initiative" label="ballot initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="94675" end="94679" title="1952 United States presidential election" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="94688" end="94692" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="94822" end="94826" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="94882" end="94895" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="94900" end="94913" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="95101" end="95105" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q170018" start="95204" end="95232" title="110th United States Congress" label="110th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="95259" end="95273" title="gerrymandering" label="gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404971" start="95705" end="95733" title="2018 United States House of Representatives elections" label="2018 midterm House elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138257" start="95896" end="95911" title="Coastal California" label="coastal regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="95919" end="95948" title="Los Angeles metropolitan area" label="Los Angeles metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="95957" end="95979" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="96050" end="96063" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="96232" end="96240" title="Berkeley California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="96242" end="96249" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="96251" end="96260" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="96265" end="96278" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="96327" end="96338" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q491350" start="96340" end="96346" title="Orange, California" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q372454" start="96348" end="96357" title="Escondido, California" label="Escondido"/>
<link wikidata="Q50054" start="96359" end="96371" title="Garden Grove, California" label="Garden Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q323414" start="96377" end="96388" title="Simi Valley, California" label="Simi Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567308" start="96657" end="96676" title="Independent voter" label="No Party Preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858821" start="96714" end="96727" title="Death penalty in California" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="96809" end="96837" title="City twinning" label="region twinning arrangements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="96846" end="96855" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="96881" end="96886" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="96889" end="96896" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="96910" end="96916" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q41164" start="96919" end="96932" title="Jeju Province" label="Jeju Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="96936" end="96947" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="96950" end="96959" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="96973" end="96978" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017979" start="96995" end="97031" title="Index of California-related articles" label="Index of California-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112217" start="97034" end="97055" title="Outline of California" label="Outline of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386459" start="97058" end="97088" title="List of people from California" label="List of people from California"/>
<link wikidata="Q132798063" start="97091" end="97132" title="Proposed Danish acquisition of California" label="Proposed Danish acquisition of California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5408" wikidata="Q2251" url="?curid=5408" title="Columbia River">
<text>The Columbia River (Upper Chinook: &#x27; or&#x27;; Sahaptin: &quot;Nch’i-Wàna&quot; or &quot;Nchi wana&quot;; Sinixt dialect&quot; &quot;) is the largest river in the Pacific Northwest region of North America. The river forms in the Rocky Mountains of British Columbia, Canada. It flows northwest and then south into the U.S. state of Washington, then turns west to form most of the border between Washington and the state of Oregon before emptying into the Pacific Ocean. The river is long, and its largest tributary is the Snake River. Its drainage basin is roughly the size of France and extends into seven states of the United States and one Canadian province. The fourth-largest river in the United States by flow, the Columbia has the greatest flow of any river into the eastern Pacific.

The Columbia and its tributaries have been central to the region&#x27;s culture and economy for thousands of years. They have been used for transportation since ancient times, linking the region&#x27;s many cultural groups. The river system hosts many species of anadromous fish, which migrate between freshwater habitats and the saline waters of the Pacific Ocean. These fish—especially the salmon species—provided the core subsistence for native peoples.

The first documented European discovery of the Columbia River occurred when Bruno de Heceta sighted the river&#x27;s mouth in 1775. On May 11, 1792, a private American ship, Columbia Rediviva, under Captain Robert Gray from Boston became the first non-indigenous vessel to enter the river. Later in 1792, William Robert Broughton of the British Royal Navy commanding HMS &quot;Chatham&quot; as part of the Vancouver Expedition, navigated past the Oregon Coast Range and upriver to what is now Vancouver, Washington. In the following decades, fur-trading companies used the Columbia as a key transportation route. Overland explorers entered the Willamette Valley through the scenic, but treacherous Columbia River Gorge, and pioneers began to settle the valley in increasing numbers. Steamships along the river linked communities and facilitated trade; the arrival of railroads in the late 19th century, many running along the river, supplemented these links.

Since the late 19th century, public and private sectors have extensively developed the river. To aid ship and barge navigation, locks have been built along the lower Columbia and its tributaries, and dredging has opened, maintained, and enlarged shipping channels. Since the early 20th century, dams have been built across the river for power generation, navigation, irrigation, and flood control. The 14 hydroelectric dams on the Columbia&#x27;s main stem and many more on its tributaries produce more than 44 percent of total U.S. hydroelectric generation. Production of nuclear power has taken place at two sites along the river. Plutonium for nuclear weapons was produced for decades at the Hanford Site, which is now the most contaminated nuclear site in the United States. These developments have greatly altered river environments in the watershed, mainly through industrial pollution and barriers to fish migration.

== Course ==

The Columbia begins its journey in the southern Rocky Mountain Trench in British Columbia (BC). Columbia Lake above sea level and the adjoining Columbia Wetlands form the river&#x27;s headwaters. The trench is a broad, deep, and long glacial valley between the Canadian Rockies and the Columbia Mountains in BC. For its first , the Columbia flows northwest along the trench through Windermere Lake and the town of Invermere, a region known in BC as the Columbia Valley, then northwest to Golden and into Kinbasket Lake. Rounding the northern end of the Selkirk Mountains, the river turns sharply south through a region known as the Big Bend Country, passing through Revelstoke Lake and the Arrow Lakes. Revelstoke, the Big Bend, and the Columbia Valley combined are referred to in BC parlance as the Columbia Country. Below the Arrow Lakes, the Columbia passes the cities of Castlegar, located at the Columbia&#x27;s confluence with the Kootenay River, and Trail, two major population centers of the West Kootenay region. The Pend Oreille River joins the Columbia about north of the United States–Canada border.

The Columbia enters eastern Washington flowing south and turning to the west at the Spokane River confluence. It marks the southern and eastern borders of the Colville Indian Reservation and the western border of the Spokane Indian Reservation. The river turns south after the Okanogan River confluence, then southeasterly near the confluence with the Wenatchee River in central Washington. This C-shaped segment of the river is also known as the &quot;Big Bend&quot;. During the Missoula Floods 1015,000 years ago, much of the floodwater took a more direct route south, forming the ancient river bed known as the Grand Coulee. After the floods, the river found its present course, and the Grand Coulee was left dry. The construction of the Grand Coulee Dam in the mid-20th century impounded the river, forming Lake Roosevelt, from which water was pumped into the dry coulee, forming the reservoir of Banks Lake.

The river flows past The Gorge Amphitheatre, a prominent concert venue in the Northwest, then through Priest Rapids Dam, and then through the Hanford Nuclear Reservation. Entirely within the reservation is Hanford Reach, the only U.S. stretch of the river that is completely free-flowing, unimpeded by dams, and not a tidal estuary. The Snake River and Yakima River join the Columbia in the Tri-Cities population center. The Columbia makes a sharp bend to the west at the Washington–Oregon border. The river defines that border for the final of its journey.

The Deschutes River joins the Columbia near The Dalles. Between The Dalles and Portland, the river cuts through the Cascade Range, forming the dramatic Columbia River Gorge. Via the gorge, the Columbia crosses the Cascades at a lower elevation than any other river. The gorge is known for its strong and steady winds, scenic beauty, and its role as an important transportation link. The river continues west, bending sharply to the north-northwest near Portland and Vancouver, Washington, at the Willamette River confluence. Here the river slows considerably, dropping sediment that might otherwise form a river delta at the Columbia&#x27;s mouth. Near Longview, Washington and the Cowlitz River confluence, the river turns west again. The Columbia empties into the Pacific Ocean just west of Astoria, Oregon, over the Columbia Bar, a shifting sandbar that makes the river&#x27;s mouth one of the most hazardous stretches of water to navigate in the world. Because of the danger and the many shipwrecks near the mouth, it acquired a reputation as the &quot;Graveyard of Ships&quot;.

The Columbia drains an area of about . Its drainage basin covers nearly all of Idaho, large portions of British Columbia, Oregon, and Washington, and ultimately all of Montana west of the Continental Divide, and small portions of Wyoming, Utah, and Nevada; the total area is similar to the size of France. Roughly of the river&#x27;s length and 85 percent of its drainage basin are in the US. The Columbia is the twelfth-longest river and has the sixth-largest drainage basin in the United States. In Canada, where the Columbia flows for and drains , the river ranks 23rd in length, and the Canadian part of its basin ranks 13th in size among Canadian basins. 
The Columbia shares its name with nearby places, such as British Columbia, as well as with landforms and bodies of water.

== Discharge ==
With an average flow at the mouth of about , the Columbia is the largest river by discharge flowing into the Pacific from the Americas and is the fourth-largest by volume in the U.S. The average flow where the river crosses the international border between Canada and the United States is from a drainage basin of . This amounts to about 15 percent of the entire Columbia watershed. The Columbia&#x27;s highest recorded flow, measured at The Dalles, was in June 1894, before the river was dammed. The lowest flow recorded at The Dalles was on April 16, 1968, and was caused by the initial closure of the John Day Dam, upstream. The Dalles is about from the mouth; the river at this point drains about or about 91 percent of the total watershed. Flow rates on the Columbia are affected by many large upstream reservoirs, many diversions for irrigation, and, on the lower stretches, reverse flow from the tides of the Pacific Ocean. The National Ocean Service observes water levels at six tide gauges and issues tide forecasts for twenty-two additional locations along the river between the entrance at the North Jetty and the base of Bonneville Dam, its head of tide.

*1858–1899: 6,280 m3/s

== Geology ==


When the rifting of Pangaea, due to the process of plate tectonics, pushed North America away from Europe and Africa and into the Panthalassic Ocean (ancestor to the modern Pacific Ocean), the Pacific Northwest was not part of the continent. As the North American continent moved westward, the Farallon Plate subducted under its western margin. As the plate subducted, it carried along island arcs which were accreted to the North American continent, resulting in the creation of the Pacific Northwest between 150 and 90 million years ago. The general outline of the Columbia Basin was not complete until between 60 and 40 million years ago, but it lay under a large inland sea later subject to uplift. Between 50 and 20 million years ago, from the Eocene through the Miocene eras, tremendous volcanic eruptions frequently modified much of the landscape traversed by the Columbia. The lower reaches of the ancestral river passed through a valley near where Mount Hood later arose. Carrying sediments from erosion and erupting volcanoes, it built a thick delta that underlies the foothills on the east side of the Coast Range near Vernonia in northwestern Oregon. Between 17 million and 6 million years ago, huge outpourings of flood basalt lava covered the Columbia River Plateau and forced the lower Columbia into its present course. The modern Cascade Range began to uplift 5 to 4 million years ago. Cutting through the uplifting mountains, the Columbia River significantly deepened the Columbia River Gorge.

The river and its drainage basin experienced some of the world&#x27;s greatest known catastrophic floods toward the end of the last ice age. The periodic rupturing of ice dams at Glacial Lake Missoula resulted in the Missoula Floods, with discharges exceeding the combined flow of all the other rivers in the world, dozens of times over thousands of years. The exact number of floods is unknown, but geologists have documented at least 40; evidence suggests that they occurred between about 19,000 and 13,000 years ago.

The floodwaters rushed across eastern Washington, creating the channeled scablands, which are a complex network of dry canyon-like channels, or coulees that are often braided and sharply gouged into the basalt rock underlying the region&#x27;s deep topsoil. Numerous flat-topped buttes with rich soil stand high above the chaotic scablands. Constrictions at several places caused the floodwaters to pool into large temporary lakes, such as Lake Lewis, in which sediments were deposited. Water depths have been estimated at at Wallula Gap and over modern Portland, Oregon. Sediments were also deposited when the floodwaters slowed in the broad flats of the Quincy, Othello, and Pasco Basins. The floods&#x27; periodic inundation of the lower Columbia River Plateau deposited rich sediments; 21st-century farmers in the Willamette Valley &quot;plow fields of fertile Montana soil and clays from Washington&#x27;s Palouse&quot;.

Over the last several thousand years a series of large landslides have occurred on the north side of the Columbia River Gorge, sending massive amounts of debris south from Table Mountain and Greenleaf Peak into the gorge near the present site of Bonneville Dam. The most recent and significant is known as the Bonneville Slide, which formed a massive earthen dam, filling of the river&#x27;s length. Various studies have placed the date of the Bonneville Slide anywhere between 1060 and 1760 AD; the idea that the landslide debris present today was formed by more than one slide is relatively recent and may explain the large range of estimates. It has been suggested that if the later dates are accurate there may be a link with the 1700 Cascadia earthquake. The pile of debris resulting from the Bonneville Slide blocked the river until rising water finally washed away the sediment. It is not known how long it took the river to break through the barrier; estimates range from several months to several years. Much of the landslide&#x27;s debris remained, forcing the river about south of its previous channel and forming the Cascade Rapids. In 1938, the construction of Bonneville Dam inundated the rapids as well as the remaining trees that could be used to refine the estimated date of the landslide.

In 1980, the eruption of Mount St. Helens deposited large amounts of sediment in the lower Columbia, temporarily reducing the depth of the shipping channel by .

== Indigenous peoples ==

Humans have inhabited the Columbia&#x27;s watershed for more than 15,000 years, with a transition to a sedentary lifestyle based mainly on salmon starting about 3,500 years ago. In 1962, archaeologists found evidence of human activity dating back 11,230 years at the Marmes Rockshelter, near the confluence of the Palouse and Snake rivers in eastern Washington. In 1996 the skeletal remains of a 9,000-year-old prehistoric man (dubbed Kennewick Man) were found near Kennewick, Washington. The discovery rekindled debate in the scientific community over the origins of human habitation in North America and sparked a protracted controversy over whether the scientific or Native American community was entitled to possess and/or study the remains.

Many different Native Americans and First Nations peoples have a historical and continuing presence on the Columbia. South of the Canada–US border, the Colville, Spokane, Coeur d&#x27;Alene, Yakama, Wanapum, Nez Perce, Cayuse, Palus, Umatilla, Cowlitz, and the Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs live along the US stretch. Along the upper Snake River and Salmon River, the Shoshone Bannock tribes are present. The Sinixt or Lakes people lived on the lower stretch of the Canadian portion, while above that the Shuswap people (Secwepemc in their own language) reckon the whole of the upper Columbia east to the Rockies as part of their territory. The Canadian portion of the Columbia Basin outlines the traditional homelands of the Canadian Kootenay–Ktunaxa.

The Chinook tribe, which is not federally recognized, who live near the lower Columbia River, call it &#x27; or &#x27; in the Upper Chinook (Kiksht) language, and it is &quot;Nch’i-Wàna&quot; or &quot;Nchi wana&quot; to the Sahaptin (Ichishkíin Sɨ́nwit)-speaking peoples of its middle course in present-day Washington. The river is known as &quot;&quot; by the Sinixt people, who live in the area of the Arrow Lakes in the river&#x27;s upper reaches in Canada. All three terms essentially mean &quot;the big river&quot;.

Oral histories describe the formation and destruction of the Bridge of the Gods, a land bridge that connected the Oregon and Washington sides of the river in the Columbia River Gorge. The bridge, which aligns with geological records of the Bonneville Slide, was described in some stories as the result of a battle between gods, represented by Mount Adams and Mount Hood, in their competition for the affection of a goddess, represented by Mount St. Helens. Native American stories about the bridge differ in their details but agree in general that the bridge permitted increased interaction between tribes on the north and south sides of the river.

Horses, originally acquired from Spanish New Mexico, spread widely via native trade networks, reaching the Shoshone of the Snake River Plain by 1700. The Nez Perce, Cayuse, and Flathead people acquired their first horses around 1730. Along with horses came aspects of the emerging plains culture, such as equestrian and horse training skills, greatly increased mobility, hunting efficiency, trade over long distances, intensified warfare, the linking of wealth and prestige to horses and war, and the rise of large and powerful tribal confederacies. The Nez Perce and Cayuse kept large herds and made annual long-distance trips to the Great Plains for bison hunting, adopted the plains culture to a significant degree, and became the main conduit through which horses and the plains culture diffused into the Columbia River region. Other peoples acquired horses and aspects of the plains culture unevenly. The Yakama, Umatilla, Palus, Spokane, and Coeur d&#x27;Alene maintained sizable herds of horses and adopted some of the plains cultural characteristics, but fishing and fish-related economies remained important. Less affected groups included the Molala, Klickitat, Wenatchi, Okanagan, and Sinkiuse-Columbia peoples, who owned small numbers of horses and adopted few plains culture features. Some groups remained essentially unaffected, such as the Sanpoil and Nespelem people, whose culture remained centered on fishing.

Natives of the region encountered foreigners at several times and places during the 18th and 19th centuries. European and American vessels explored the coastal area around the mouth of the river in the late 18th century, trading with local natives. The contact would prove devastating to the indigenous Chinookan speaking peoples; a large portion of their population was wiped out by a smallpox epidemic. Canadian explorer Alexander Mackenzie crossed what is now interior British Columbia in 1793. From 1805 to 1806, the Lewis and Clark Expedition entered the Oregon Country along the Clearwater and Snake rivers, and encountered numerous small settlements of natives. Their records recount tales of hospitable traders who were not above stealing small items from the visitors. They also noted brass teakettles, a British musket, and other artifacts that had been obtained in trade with coastal tribes. From the earliest contact with westerners, the natives of the mid- and lower Columbia were not tribal, but instead congregated in social units no larger than a village, and more often at a family level; these units would shift with the season as people moved about, following the salmon catch up and down the river&#x27;s tributaries.

Sparked by the 1847 Whitman Massacre, a number of violent battles were fought between American settlers and the region&#x27;s natives. The subsequent wars over Northwest territory, especially the Yakima War, decimated the native population and removed much land from native control. As years progressed, the right of natives to fish along the Columbia became the central issue of contention with the states, commercial fishers, and private property owners. The US Supreme Court upheld fishing rights in landmark cases in 1905 and 1918, as well as the 1974 case &quot;United States v. Washington&quot;, commonly called the Boldt Decision.

Fish were central to the culture of the region&#x27;s natives, both as sustenance and as part of their religious beliefs. Natives drew fish from the Columbia at several major sites, which also served as trading posts. Celilo Falls, located east of the modern city of The Dalles, was a vital hub for trade and the interaction of different cultural groups, being used for fishing and trading for 11,000 years. Prior to contact with westerners, villages along this stretch may have at times had a population as great as 10,000. The site drew traders from as far away as the Great Plains.

The Cascades Rapids of the Columbia River Gorge, and Kettle Falls and Priest Rapids in eastern Washington, were also major fishing and trading sites.

In prehistoric times the Columbia&#x27;s salmon and steelhead runs numbered an estimated annual average of 10 to 16 million fish. In comparison, the largest run since 1938 was in 1986, with 3.2 million fish entering the Columbia. The annual catch by natives has been estimated at . The most important and productive native fishing site was located at Celilo Falls, which was perhaps the most productive inland fishing site in North America. The falls were located at the border between Chinookan- and Sahaptian-speaking peoples and served as the center of an extensive trading network across the Pacific Plateau. Celilo was the oldest continuously inhabited community on the North American continent.

Salmon canneries established by white settlers beginning in 1866 had a strong negative impact on the salmon population, and in 1908 US president Theodore Roosevelt observed that the salmon runs were but a fraction of what they had been 25 years prior.

As river development continued in the 20th century, each of these major fishing sites was flooded by a dam, beginning with Cascades Rapids in 1938. The development was accompanied by extensive negotiations between natives and US government agencies. The Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs, a coalition of various tribes, adopted a constitution and incorporated after the 1938 completion of the Bonneville Dam flooded Cascades Rapids; Still, in the 1930s, there were natives who lived along the river and fished year round, moving along with the fish&#x27;s migration patterns throughout the seasons. The Yakama were slower to do so, organizing a formal government in 1944. In the 21st century, the Yakama, Nez Perce, Umatilla, and Warm Springs tribes all have treaty fishing rights along the Columbia and its tributaries.

In 1957 Celilo Falls was submerged by the construction of The Dalles Dam, and the native fishing community was displaced. The affected tribes received a $26.8 million settlement for the loss of Celilo and other fishing sites submerged by The Dalles Dam. The Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs used part of its $4 million settlement to establish the Kah-Nee-Ta resort south of Mount Hood.

In 1977, 75 indigenous fishermen of the Yakama Tribe were arrested in a federal sting operation which claimed that fishermen were poaching up to 40,000 fish in the Columbia River. Fishermen placed on trial received sentences ranging from six months to five years. The federal government pinned Yakama Tribe member David Sohappy ringleader of the operation. After the trial ended, it was determined that the fish were not poached, but driven away because of harmful chemicals present in the power plant. These harmful chemicals mainly consisted of aluminum. This event is commonly known today as the &quot;Salmon Scam&quot;.

Shortly after the Salmon Scam, many Columbia River-based indigenous tribes received federally recognized status. The Siletz Tribe was the first to restore its federal recognition in 1977, followed by the Cow Creek Band of the Umpqua Tribe in 1982, the Grand Ronde Tribe in 1983, the Lower Umpqua Tribe, Siuslaw Tribe, and Coos Tribe in 1984, the Klamath Tribe in 1986, and the Coquille Tribe in 1989. While all the aforementioned tribes received federally recognized status, the Chinook Indian Nation had their federal recognition revoked in 2002 by the Bush administration, and are fighting to have it restored.

In 2023, members of the Yakama Nation expressed their dismay for the construction of a Goldendale-based pumped hydroelectric energy storage project. Jeremy Takala of the Yakama Nation embodies Yakama belief on the importance of Columbia River crops to food and medicine, stating &quot;the [Goldendale] project being proposed here, it will definitely impact our life&quot;.  The Goldendale-pumped hydro storage unit could allow for reused water use in reservoirs, which would be placed on mountainous terrain overlooking the Columbia River. The mountainous terrain where the unit would be placed in is Juniper Point, referred to by the Yakama as Pushpum. Pushpum has rock formations, as well as food and medicine capabilities that are essential to the Yakama. Members of the Yakama tribe wish for consent on the Goldendale project, as opposed to consultation.

== New waves of explorers ==


Some historians believe that Japanese or Chinese vessels blown off course reached the Northwest Coast long before Europeans—possibly as early as 219 BCE. Historian Derek Hayes claims that &quot;It is a near certainty that Japanese or Chinese people arrived on the northwest coast long before any European.&quot; It is unknown whether they landed near the Columbia. 

The Maris Pacifici map published in 1589 features on the west coast of North-America an intriguing resemblance of two major coastline features: the mouth of the Columbia River identified as &quot;Rio Grande&quot; and the delta of the Fraser River labeled &quot;Baia de las isleas&quot;. These rivers may have been too sighted by European visitors long before official records would confirm nearly 200 years later. In spite of limited evidence of Francis Drake expedition 1579 whereabouts in the Pacific Northwest, Pacific Northwest BC history commentator Sam Bawlf posited that the Ortelius mapped coastal features were a proof that Drake sighted the mouth of the Columbia and the Fraser River delta. Evidence exists that Spanish castaways reached the shore in 1679 and traded with the Clatsop; if these were the first Europeans to see the Columbia, they failed to send word home to Spain.

In the 18th century, there was strong interest in discovering a Northwest Passage that would permit navigation between the Atlantic (or inland North America) and the Pacific Ocean. Many ships in the area, especially those under Spanish and British command, searched the northwest coast for a large river that might connect to Hudson Bay or the Missouri River. The first documented European discovery of the Columbia River was that of Bruno de Heceta, who in 1775 sighted the river&#x27;s mouth. On the advice of his officers, he did not explore it, as he was short-staffed and the current was strong. He considered it a bay, and called it &quot;Ensenada de Asunción&quot; (&quot;Assumption Cove&quot;). Later Spanish maps, based on his sighting, showed a river, labeled &quot;Río de San Roque&quot; (&quot;The Saint Roch River&quot;), or an entrance, called &quot;Entrada de Hezeta&quot;, named for Bruno de Hezeta, who sailed the region. Following Hezeta&#x27;s reports, British maritime fur trader Captain John Meares searched for the river in 1788 but concluded that it did not exist. He named Cape Disappointment for the non-existent river, not realizing the cape marks the northern edge of the river&#x27;s mouth.

What happened next would form the basis for decades of both cooperation and dispute between British and American exploration of, and ownership claim to, the region. Royal Navy commander George Vancouver sailed past the mouth in April 1792 and observed a change in the water&#x27;s color, but he accepted Meares&#x27; report and continued on his journey northward. Later that month, Vancouver encountered the American captain Robert Gray at the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Gray reported that he had seen the entrance to the Columbia and had spent nine days trying but failing to enter.

On May 12, 1792, Gray returned south and crossed the Columbia Bar, becoming the first known explorer of European descent to enter the river. Gray&#x27;s fur trading mission had been financed by Boston merchants, who outfitted him with a private vessel named &quot;Columbia Rediviva&quot;; he named the river after the ship on May 18. Gray spent nine days trading near the mouth of the Columbia, then left without having gone beyond upstream. The farthest point reached was Grays Bay at the mouth of Grays River. Gray&#x27;s discovery of the Columbia River was later used by the United States to support its claim to the Oregon Country, which was also claimed by Russia, Great Britain, Spain and other nations.

In October 1792, Vancouver sent Lieutenant William Robert Broughton, his second-in-command, up the river. Broughton got as far as the Sandy River at the western end of the Columbia River Gorge, about upstream, sighting and naming Mount Hood. Broughton formally claimed the river, its drainage basin, and the nearby coast for Britain. In contrast, Gray had not made any formal claims on behalf of the United States.

Because the Columbia was at the same latitude as the headwaters of the Missouri River, there was some speculation that Gray and Vancouver had discovered the long-sought Northwest Passage. A 1798 British map showed a dotted line connecting the Columbia with the Missouri. When the American explorers Meriwether Lewis and William Clark charted the vast, unmapped lands of the American West in their overland expedition (1803–1805), they found no passage between the rivers. After crossing the Rocky Mountains, Lewis and Clark built dugout canoes and paddled down the Snake River, reaching the Columbia near the present-day Tri-Cities, Washington. They explored a few miles upriver, as far as Bateman Island, before heading down the Columbia, concluding their journey at the river&#x27;s mouth and establishing Fort Clatsop, a short-lived establishment that was occupied for less than three months.

Canadian explorer David Thompson, of the North West Company, spent the winter of 180708 at Kootanae House near the source of the Columbia at present-day Invermere, BC. Over the next few years he explored much of the river and its northern tributaries. In 1811 he traveled down the Columbia to the Pacific Ocean, arriving at the mouth just after John Jacob Astor&#x27;s Pacific Fur Company had founded Astoria. On his return to the north, Thompson explored the one remaining part of the river he had not yet seen, becoming the first Euro-descended person to travel the entire length of the river.

In 1825, the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company (HBC) established Fort Vancouver on the bank of the Columbia, in what is now Vancouver, Washington, as the headquarters of the company&#x27;s Columbia District, which encompassed everything west of the Rocky Mountains, north of California, and south of Russian-claimed Alaska. Chief Factor John McLoughlin, a physician who had been in the fur trade since 1804, was appointed superintendent of the Columbia District. The HBC reoriented its Columbia District operations toward the Pacific Ocean via the Columbia, which became the region&#x27;s main trunk route. In the early 1840s Americans began to colonize the Oregon country in large numbers via the Oregon Trail, despite the HBC&#x27;s efforts to discourage American settlement in the region. For many the final leg of the journey involved travel down the lower Columbia River to Fort Vancouver. This part of the Oregon Trail, the treacherous stretch from The Dalles to below the Cascades, could not be traversed by horses or wagons (only watercraft, at great risk). This prompted the 1846 construction of the Barlow Road.

In the Treaty of 1818 the United States and Britain agreed that both nations were to enjoy equal rights in Oregon Country for 10 years. By 1828, when the so-called &quot;joint occupation&quot; was renewed indefinitely, it seemed probable that the lower Columbia River would in time become the border between the two nations. For years the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company successfully maintained control of the Columbia River and American attempts to gain a foothold were fended off. In the 1830s, American religious missions were established at several locations in the lower Columbia River region. In the 1840s a mass migration of American settlers undermined British control. The Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company tried to maintain dominance by shifting from the fur trade, which was in decline, to exporting other goods such as salmon and lumber. Colonization schemes were attempted, but failed to match the scale of American settlement. Americans generally settled south of the Columbia, mainly in the Willamette Valley. The Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company tried to establish settlements north of the river, but nearly all the British colonists moved south to the Willamette Valley. The hope that the British colonists might dilute the American presence in the valley failed in the face of the overwhelming number of American settlers. These developments rekindled the issue of &quot;joint occupation&quot; and the boundary dispute. While some British interests, especially the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company, fought for a boundary along the Columbia River, the Oregon Treaty of 1846 set the boundary at the 49th parallel. As part of the treaty, the British retained all areas north of the line while the United States acquired the south. The Columbia River became much of the border between the U.S. territories of Oregon and Washington. Oregon became a U.S. state in 1859, while Washington later entered into the Union in 1889.

By the turn of the 20th century, the difficulty of navigating the Columbia was seen as an impediment to the economic development of the Inland Empire region east of the Cascades. The dredging and dam building that followed would permanently alter the river, disrupting its natural flow but also providing electricity, irrigation, navigability and other benefits to the region.

== Navigation ==


American captain Robert Gray and British captain George Vancouver, who explored the river in 1792, proved that it was possible to cross the Columbia Bar. Many of the challenges associated with that feat remain today; even with modern engineering alterations to the mouth of the river, the strong currents and shifting sandbar make it dangerous to pass between the river and the Pacific Ocean.

The use of steamboats along the river, beginning with the British &quot;Beaver&quot; in 1836 and followed by American vessels in 1850, contributed to the rapid settlement and economic development of the region. Steamboats operated in several distinct stretches of the river: on its lower reaches, from the Pacific Ocean to Cascades Rapids; from the Cascades to the Dalles-Celilo Falls; from Celilo to Priests Rapids; on the Wenatchee Reach of eastern Washington; on British Columbia&#x27;s Arrow Lakes; and on tributaries like the Willamette, the Snake and Kootenay Lake. The boats, initially powered by burning wood, carried passengers and freight throughout the region for many years. Early railroads served to connect steamboat lines interrupted by waterfalls on the river&#x27;s lower reaches. In the 1880s, railroads maintained by companies such as the Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company began to supplement steamboat operations as the major transportation links along the river.

=== Opening the passage to Lewiston ===

As early as 1881, industrialists proposed altering the natural channel of the Columbia to improve navigation. Changes to the river over the years have included the construction of jetties at the river&#x27;s mouth, dredging, and the construction of canals and navigation locks. Today, ocean freighters can travel upriver as far as Portland and Vancouver, and barges can reach as far inland as Lewiston, Idaho.

The shifting Columbia Bar makes passage between the river and the Pacific Ocean difficult and dangerous, and numerous rapids along the river hinder navigation. &quot;Pacific Graveyard,&quot; a 1964 book by James A. Gibbs, describes the many shipwrecks near the mouth of the Columbia. Jetties, first constructed in 1886, extend the river&#x27;s channel into the ocean. Strong currents and the shifting sandbar remain a threat to ships entering the river and necessitate continuous maintenance of the jetties.

In 1891, the Columbia was dredged to enhance shipping. The channel between the ocean and Portland and Vancouver was deepened from to . &quot;The Columbian&quot; called for the channel to be deepened to as early as 1905, but that depth was not attained until 1976.

Cascade Locks and Canal were first constructed in 1896 around the Cascades Rapids, enabling boats to travel safely through the Columbia River Gorge. The Celilo Canal, bypassing Celilo Falls, opened to river traffic in 1915. In the mid-20th century, the construction of dams along the length of the river submerged the rapids beneath a series of reservoirs. An extensive system of locks allowed ships and barges to pass easily between reservoirs. A navigation channel reaching Lewiston, Idaho, along the Columbia and Snake rivers, was completed in 1975. Among the main commodities are wheat and other grains, mainly for export. As of 2016, the Columbia ranked third, behind the Mississippi and Paraná rivers, among the world&#x27;s largest export corridors for grain.

The 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens caused mudslides in the area, which reduced the Columbia&#x27;s depth by for a stretch, disrupting Portland&#x27;s economy.

=== Deeper shipping channel ===

Efforts to maintain and improve the navigation channel have continued to the present day. In 1990 a new round of studies examined the possibility of further dredging on the lower Columbia. The plans were controversial from the start because of economic and environmental concerns.

In 1999, Congress authorized deepening the channel between Portland and Astoria from , which will make it possible for large container and grain ships to reach Portland and Vancouver. The project has met opposition because of concerns about stirring up toxic sediment on the riverbed. Portland-based Northwest Environmental Advocates brought a lawsuit against the Army Corps of Engineers, but it was rejected by the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in August 2006. The project includes measures to mitigate environmental damage; for instance, the US Army Corps of Engineers must restore 12 times the area of wetland damaged by the project. In early 2006, the Corps spilled of hydraulic oil into the Columbia, drawing further criticism from environmental organizations.

Work on the project began in 2005 and concluded in 2010. The project&#x27;s cost is estimated at $150 million. The federal government is paying 65 percent, Oregon and Washington are paying $27 million each, and six local ports are also contributing to the cost.

== Dams ==


In 1902, the United States Bureau of Reclamation was established to aid in the economic development of arid western states. One of its major undertakings was building Grand Coulee Dam to provide irrigation for the of the Columbia Basin Project in central Washington. With the onset of World War II, the focus of dam construction shifted to production of hydroelectricity. Irrigation efforts resumed after the war.

River development occurred within the structure of the 1909 International Boundary Waters Treaty between the United States and Canada. The United States Congress passed the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1925, which directed the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Federal Power Commission to explore the development of the nation&#x27;s rivers. This prompted agencies to conduct the first formal financial analysis of hydroelectric development; the reports produced by various agencies were presented in House Document 308. Those reports, and subsequent related reports, are referred to as 308 Reports.

The 308 Reports generated 176 publications across the United States. Of those 176 documents, thirteen of them were generated in the Pacific Northwest. In 1932, one of the thirteen reports was released on the Columbia River, titled &quot;The Columbia River and Minor Tributaries.&quot; The report was backed by many engineers and state politicians who believed that the creation of Dams along the Columbia River would be a strong candidate for generation of hydroelectric power. The report led to congressional action, where dams at Bonneville and Grand Coulee were authorized in 1933.

The report itself emphasized the economic values of dam creation. Additionally, the reports emphasized the importance of dams for river navigation. Furthermore, the reports emphasized the importance of hydropower, storage of water for irrigation techniques, and flood control. To ensure that the dams did not affect biodiversity, many engineers and state politicians regarded the importance of salmon within the region. Thus, dams were to be built at a low height that would permit salmon to pass over.

In the late 1920s, political forces in the Northwestern United States generally favored the private development of hydroelectric dams along the Columbia. But the overwhelming victories of gubernatorial candidate George W. Joseph in the 1930 Republican primary, and later his law partner Julius Meier, were understood to demonstrate strong public support for public ownership of dams. In 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed a bill that enabled the construction of the Bonneville and Grand Coulee dams as public works projects. The legislation was attributed to the efforts of Oregon Senator Charles McNary, Washington Senator Clarence Dill, and Oregon Congressman Charles Martin, among others.

In 1948, floods swept through the Columbia watershed, destroying Vanport, then the second largest city in Oregon, and impacting cities as far north as Trail, BC. The flooding prompted the U.S. Congress to pass the Flood Control Act of 1950, authorizing the federal development of additional dams and other flood control mechanisms. By that time local communities had become wary of federal hydroelectric projects, and sought local control of new developments; a public utility district in Grant County, Washington, ultimately began construction of the dam at Priest Rapids.

In the 1960s, the United States and Canada signed the Columbia River Treaty, which focused on flood control and the maximization of downstream power generation. Canada agreed to build dams and provide reservoir storage, and the United States agreed to deliver to Canada one-half of the increase in United States downstream power benefits as estimated five years in advance. Canada&#x27;s obligation was met by building three dams (two on the Columbia, and one on the Duncan River), the last of which was completed in 1973.

Today the main stem of the Columbia River has fourteen dams, of which three are in Canada and eleven in the United States. Four mainstem dams and four lower Snake River dams contain navigation locks to allow ship and barge passage from the ocean as far as Lewiston, Idaho. The river system as a whole has more than 400 dams for hydroelectricity and irrigation. The dams address a variety of demands, including flood control, navigation, stream flow regulation, storage, and delivery of stored waters, reclamation of public lands and Indian reservations and territories, and the generation of hydroelectric power.

The larger U.S. dams are owned and operated by the federal government (some by the Army Corps of Engineers and some by the Bureau of Reclamation), while the smaller dams are operated by public utility districts and private power companies. The federally operated system is known as the Federal Columbia River Power System, which includes 31 dams on the Columbia and its tributaries. The system has altered the seasonal flow of the river to meet higher electricity demands during the winter. At the beginning of the 20th century, roughly 75 percent of the Columbia&#x27;s flow occurred in the summer, between April and September. By 1980, the summer proportion had been lowered to about 50 percent, essentially eliminating the seasonal pattern.

Upon its creation in 1942, the Grand Coulee Dam required land inundation for construction. This flooding included parts of the Colville Reservation and Spokane Reservation. Reservation flooding has resulted in the displacement of 2,250 indigenous peoples located on said reservations.

The installation of dams dramatically altered the landscape and ecosystem of the river. At one time, the Columbia was one of the top salmon-producing river systems in the world. Previously active fishing sites, such as Celilo Falls in the eastern Columbia River Gorge, have exhibited a sharp decline in fishing along the Columbia in the last century, and salmon populations have been dramatically reduced. Fish ladders have been installed at some dam sites to help the fish journey to spawning waters. Fish ladders have been seen as highly effective when configurations to fishway exits are properly configured, as reconstructing the Bradford Island fish ladder allowed Sockeye salmon to stray away from spillway zones, reducing fallback (the rate at which fish are found moving away from a dam post-migration) and mortality birthrates. However, improper construction of fish ladders can result in salmon populations exerting significantly more energy when breeding, which results in higher levels of fallback. Chief Joseph Dam has no fish ladders and completely blocks fish migration to the upper half of the Columbia River system.

In 2019, both the Yakama and Lummi Northwest Nations proposed to remove the Bonneville, John Day, and The Dalles dams due to their belief removal would strengthen salmon population. The former Chairman of the Lummi Nation, Jay Julius, stated in 2019 that the fate of salmon without dam removal for the Lummi Nation is a &quot;horrifying reality&quot;. JoDe Goudy, a former Chairman of the Yakama Nation, coincides with beliefs of the Lummi Nation, stating &quot;The Columbia River Dams were built on this false legal foundation, and decimated the Yakama Nation’s fisheries, traditional foods, and cultural sites.&quot;. Both Nations have worked with nonprofit advocacy organizations to further removal agendas.

Throughout 2021, the nonprofit organization Earthjustice represented 10 conservation and fishing organizations in negotiations with President Joe Biden over removal of dam operations on the Snake River. These negotiations culminated in a lawsuit, with Earthjustice requesting to completely halt operations due to their belief of Snake River Dam effects on salmon and steelhead fish runs. On December 15, 2021, the two parties agreed to settle the dispute and focus on a plan to mitigate fish extinction.

Proposed in December 2023, President Joe Biden agreed to a $1 billion mandate, which will attempt to reintroduce Columbia River salmon blockaded by dams. The mandate asked for the Bonneville Power Administration to supply US$300 million over a ten-year span starting in 2024, which includes habitat restoration and upgrades in fish hatcheries. Furthermore, the Biden administration has publicly stated it will examine the possibility of doubling fish and wildlife spending to meet tribal needs. As a benchmark for financial utilization, US$1 billion in backlogged projects have been identified in the Columbia River Basin. The mandate did not call for the removal of four dams on the Snake River.

=== Irrigation ===

The Bureau of Reclamation&#x27;s Columbia Basin Project focused on the generally dry region of central Washington known as the Columbia Basin, which features rich loess soil. Several groups developed competing proposals, and in 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt authorized the Columbia Basin Project. The Grand Coulee Dam was the project&#x27;s central component; upon completion, it pumped water up from the Columbia to fill the formerly dry Grand Coulee, forming Banks Lake. By 1935, the intended height of the dam was increased from a range between to , a height that would extend the lake impounded by the dam to the Canada–United States border; the project had grown from a local New Deal relief measure to a major national project.

The project&#x27;s initial purpose was irrigation, but the onset of World War II created a high electricity demand, mainly for aluminum production and for the development of nuclear weapons at the Hanford Site. Irrigation began in 1951. The project provides water to more than of fertile but arid land in central Washington, transforming the region into a major agricultural center. Important crops include orchard fruit, potatoes, alfalfa, mint, beans, beets, and wine grapes.

Since 1750, the Columbia has experienced six multi-year droughts. The longest, lasting 12 years in the mid‑19th century, reduced the river&#x27;s flow to 20 percent below average. Scientists have expressed concern that a similar drought would have grave consequences in a region so dependent on the Columbia. In 1992–1993, a lesser drought affected farmers, hydroelectric power producers, shippers, and wildlife managers.

Many farmers in central Washington build dams on their property for irrigation and to control frost on their crops. The Washington Department of Ecology, using new techniques involving aerial photographs, estimated there may be as many as a hundred such dams in the area, most of which are illegal. Six such dams have failed in recent years, causing hundreds of thousands of dollars of damage to crops and public roads. Fourteen farms in the area have gone through the permitting process to build such dams legally.

=== Hydroelectricity ===

The Columbia&#x27;s heavy flow and large elevation drop over a short distance, , give it tremendous capacity for hydroelectricity generation. In comparison, the Mississippi drops less than . The Columbia alone possesses one-third of the United States&#x27;s hydroelectric potential. In 2012, the river and its tributaries accounted for 29 GW of hydroelectric generating capacity, contributing 44 percent of the total hydroelectric generation in the nation.

The largest of the 150 hydroelectric projects, the Grand Coulee Dam and Chief Joseph Dam are also the largest in the United States. As of 2017, Grand Coulee is the fifth largest hydroelectric plant in the world.

Inexpensive hydropower supported the location of a large aluminum industry in the region because its reduction from bauxite requires large amounts of electricity. Until 2000, the Northwestern United States produced up to 17 percent of the world&#x27;s aluminum and 40 percent of the aluminum produced in the United States. The commoditization of power in the early 21st century, coupled with a drought that reduced the generation capacity of the river, damaged the industry and by 2001, Columbia River aluminum producers had idled 80 percent of its production capacity. By 2003, the entire United States produced only 15 percent of the world&#x27;s aluminum and many smelters along the Columbia had gone dormant or out of business.

Power remains relatively inexpensive along the Columbia, and since the mid-2000 several global enterprises have moved server farm operations into the area to avail themselves of cheap power. Downriver of Grand Coulee, each dam&#x27;s reservoir is closely regulated by the Bonneville Power Administration (BPA), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and various Washington public utility districts to ensure flow, flood control, and power generation objectives are met. Increasingly, hydro-power operations are required to meet standards under the U.S. Endangered Species Act and other agreements to manage operations to minimize impacts on salmon and other fish, and some conservation and fishing groups support removing four dams on the lower Snake River, the largest tributary of the Columbia.

In 1941, the BPA hired Oklahoma folksinger Woody Guthrie to write songs for a documentary film promoting the benefits of hydropower. In the month he spent traveling the region Guthrie wrote 26 songs, which have become an important part of the cultural history of the region.
== Ecology and environment ==

=== Fish migration ===


The Columbia supports several species of anadromous fish that migrate between the Pacific Ocean and freshwater tributaries of the river. Sockeye salmon, Coho and Chinook (&quot;king&quot;) salmon, and steelhead, all of the genus &quot;Oncorhynchus&quot;, are ocean fish that migrate up the rivers at the end of their life cycles to spawn. White sturgeon, which take 15 to 25 years to mature, typically migrate between the ocean and the upstream habitat several times during their lives.

Salmon populations declined dramatically after the establishment of canneries in 1867. In 1879 it was reported that 545,450 salmon, with an average weight of were caught (in a recent season) and mainly canned for export to England. A can weighing could be sold for 8d or 9d. By 1908, there was widespread concern about the decline of salmon and sturgeon. In that year, the people of Oregon passed two laws under their newly instituted program of citizens&#x27; initiatives limiting fishing on the Columbia and other rivers. Then in 1948, another initiative banned the use of seine nets (devices already used by Native Americans, and refined by later settlers) altogether.

Dams interrupt the migration of anadromous fish. Salmon and steelhead return to the streams in which they were born to spawn; where dams prevent their return, entire populations of salmon die. Some of the Columbia and Snake River dams employ fish ladders, which are effective to varying degrees at allowing these fish to travel upstream. Another problem exists for the juvenile salmon headed downstream to the ocean. Previously, this journey would have taken two to three weeks. With river currents slowed by the dams, and the Columbia converted from a wild river to a series of slackwater pools, the journey can take several months, which increases the mortality rate. In some cases, the Army Corps of Engineers transports juvenile fish downstream by truck or river barge. The Chief Joseph Dam and several dams on the Columbia&#x27;s tributaries entirely block migration, and there are no migrating fish on the river above these dams. Sturgeons have different migration habits and can survive without ever visiting the ocean. In many upstream areas cut off from the ocean by dams, sturgeon simply live upstream of the dam.

Not all fish have suffered from the modifications to the river; the northern pikeminnow (formerly known as the &quot;squawfish&quot;) thrives in the warmer, slower water created by the dams. Research in the mid-1980s found that juvenile salmon were suffering substantially from the predatory pikeminnow, and in 1990, in the interest of protecting salmon, a &quot;bounty&quot; program was established to reward anglers for catching pikeminnow.

In 1994, the salmon catch was smaller than usual in the rivers of Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, causing concern among commercial fishermen, government agencies, and tribal leaders. US government intervention, to which the states of Alaska, Idaho, and Oregon objected, included an 11-day closure of an Alaska fishery. In April 1994 the Pacific Fisheries Management Council unanimously approved the strictest regulations in 18 years, banning all commercial salmon fishing for that year from Cape Falcon north to the Canada–US border. In the winter of 1994, the return of coho salmon far exceeded expectations, which was attributed in part to the fishing ban.

Also in 1994, United States Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt proposed the removal of several Pacific Northwest dams because of their impact on salmon spawning. The Northwest Power Planning Council approved a plan that provided more water for fish and less for electricity, irrigation, and transportation. Environmental advocates have called for the removal of certain dams in the Columbia system in the years since. Of the 227 major dams in the Columbia River drainage basin, the four Washington dams on the lower Snake River are often identified for removal, for example in an ongoing lawsuit concerning a Bush administration plan for salmon recovery. These dams and reservoirs limit the recovery of upriver salmon runs to Idaho&#x27;s Salmon and Clearwater rivers. Historically, the Snake produced over 1.5 million spring and summer Chinook salmon, a number that has dwindled to several thousand in recent years. Idaho Power Company&#x27;s Hells Canyon dams have no fish ladders (and do not pass juvenile salmon downstream), and thus allow no steelhead or salmon to migrate above Hells Canyon. In 2007, the destruction of the Marmot Dam on the Sandy River was the first dam removal in the system. Other Columbia Basin dams that have been removed include Condit Dam on Washington&#x27;s White Salmon River, and the Milltown Dam on the Clark Fork in Montana.

=== Pollution ===

In southeastern Washington, a stretch of the river passes through the Hanford Site, established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project. The site served as a plutonium production complex, with nine nuclear reactors and related facilities along the banks of the river. From 1944 to 1971, pump systems drew cooling water from the river and, after treating this water for use by the reactors, returned it to the river. Before being released back into the river, the used water was held in large tanks known as retention basins for up to six hours. Longer-lived isotopes were not affected by this retention, and several terabecquerels entered the river every day. By 1957, the eight plutonium production reactors at Hanford dumped a daily average of 50,000 curies of radioactive material into the Columbia. These releases were kept secret by the federal government until the release of declassified documents in the late 1980s. Radiation was measured downstream as far west as the Washington and Oregon coasts.

The nuclear reactors were decommissioned at the end of the Cold War, and the Hanford site is the focus of one of the world&#x27;s largest environmental cleanup, managed by the Department of Energy under the oversight of the Washington Department of Ecology and the Environmental Protection Agency. Nearby aquifers contain an estimated 270 billion US gallons (1 billion m3) of groundwater contaminated by high-level nuclear waste that has leaked out of Hanford&#x27;s underground storage tanks. , 1 million US gallons (3,785 m3) of highly radioactive waste is traveling through groundwater toward the Columbia River. This waste is expected to reach the river in 12 to 50 years if cleanup does not proceed on schedule.

In addition to concerns about nuclear waste, numerous other pollutants are found in the river. These include chemical pesticides, bacteria, arsenic, dioxins, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB).

Studies have also found significant levels of toxins in fish and the waters they inhabit within the basin. Accumulation of toxins in fish threatens the survival of fish species, and human consumption of these fish can lead to health problems. Water quality is also an important factor in the survival of other wildlife and plants that grow in the Columbia River drainage basin. The states, indigenous tribes, and federal government are all engaged in efforts to restore and improve the water, land, and air quality of the Columbia River drainage basin and have committed to work together to accomplish critical ecosystem restoration efforts. Several cleanup efforts are underway, including Superfund projects at Portland Harbor, Hanford, and Lake Roosevelt.

In early 2022, thousands of protestors demonstrated a demand for heightened cleanup efforts within the Hanford Nuclear Site. In June 2022, nearly 200 protestors attended the Hanford Journey Event, an educational tour which allowed those concerned about the Hanford Nuclear Site to learn about proposed cleanup efforts.The Hanford Journey Event was co-sponsored by the Yakama Nation. Davis Washines, a representative from the Yakama Nation Department of Natural Resources, alluded to &quot;[the Hanford cleanup] has a lot of meaning to us, to our people. And not just for us, our personal safety, but to this ground, to the water, because they were here before we were&quot;. Congress responded in 2022 by increasing the budget for the Hanford clean-up efforts, after thousands of comments were sent to federal authorities to prevent high-level waste storage at Hanford.

Starting between April and June 2025, the Hanford Nuclear Site is expected to melt radioactive wastes combined with glass flakes at a rate of 21 metric tons per day.  The melters being utilized have a lifespan of five years, which requires their replacement in 2030. As of 2023, the Hanford site cleanup project is sixteen years behind schedule. One of the harmful chemicals located in the Hanford site, strontium-90, reached over 2,000 times the standard concentration for drinking water in August 2022.

Timber industry activity further contaminates river water, for example in the increased sediment runoff that results from clearcuts. The Northwest Forest Plan, a piece of federal legislation from 1994, mandated that timber companies consider the environmental impacts of their practices on rivers like the Columbia.

On July 1, 2003, Christopher Swain became the first person to swim the Columbia River&#x27;s entire length, to raise public awareness about the river&#x27;s environmental health.

Throughout 2019, a series of wildfires were ongoing in Oregon on indigenous land belonging to the Umpqua Tribe. The Umpqua Tribe lost possession to their former territory in 1853, which is now known as Elliott State Forest. Elliott State Forest has been the subject of many deforestation initiatives over past years. In December 2018, the Umpqua tribe settled in Oregon after purchasing land from the Bureau of Land Management. Michael Rondeau, a descendent of the Umpqua tribe, expressed his contradictory emotions on the acquisition, stating that he felt &quot;sadness that my grandparents and great aunts and uncles and beyond that did not have a day of recognition&quot;. On July 14, 2019, in the Milepost 97 wildfires, 25% of the Umpqua&#x27;s forest territory burned down.

On March 7, 2022, Columbia Riverkeeper, a climate advocacy group, sued Weyerhaeuser, a timber and forest products company, for possible contamination of the Columbia River. Columbia Riverkeeper accused Weyerhaeuser of releasing harmful levels of runoff through their Longview Mill into the Columbia River. Furthermore, Columbia Riverkeeper stated that runoff could result in harmful bacteria growth. As of May 6, 2022, Weyerhaeuser reached a settlement with Columbia Riverkeeper. Weyerhaeuser was determined to contribute US$600,000 for river restoration and proposed potential fines of up to US$5,000 for each subsequent act of pollution between 2023 and 2025.

=== Nutrient cycle ===
Both natural and anthropogenic processes are involved in the cycling of nutrients in the Columbia River basin. Natural processes in the system include estuarine mixing of fresh and ocean waters, and climate variability patterns such as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation and the El Nino Southern Oscillation (both climatic cycles that affect the amount of regional snowpack and river discharge). Natural sources of nutrients in the Columbia River include weathering, leaf litter, salmon carcasses, runoff from its tributaries, and ocean estuary exchange. Major anthropogenic impacts on nutrients in the basin are due to fertilizers from agriculture, sewage systems, logging, and the construction of dams.

Nutrient dynamics vary in the river basin from the headwaters to the main river and dams, to finally reaching the Columbia River estuary and ocean. Upstream in the headwaters, salmon runs are the main source of nutrients. Dams along the river impact nutrient cycling by increasing residence time of nutrients, and reducing the transport of silicate to the estuary, which directly impacts diatoms, a type of phytoplankton. The dams are also a barrier to salmon migration and can increase the amount of methane locally produced. The Columbia River estuary exports high rates of nutrients into the Pacific, except for nitrogen, which is delivered into the estuary by ocean upwelling sources.

== Watershed ==


Most of the Columbia&#x27;s drainage basin (which, at , is about the size of France) lies roughly between the Rocky Mountains on the east and the Cascade Mountains on the west. In the United States and Canada the term watershed is often used to mean drainage basin. The term &quot;Columbia Basin&quot; is used to refer not only to the entire drainage basin but also to subsets of the river&#x27;s watershed, such as the relatively flat and unforested area in eastern Washington bounded by the Cascades, the Rocky Mountains, and the Blue Mountains. Within the watershed are diverse landforms including mountains, arid plateaus, river valleys, rolling uplands, and deep gorges. Grand Teton National Park lies in the watershed, as well as parts of Yellowstone National Park, Glacier National Park, Mount Rainier National Park, and North Cascades National Park. Canadian National Parks in the watershed include Kootenay National Park, Yoho National Park, Glacier National Park, and Mount Revelstoke National Park. Hells Canyon, the deepest gorge in North America, and the Columbia Gorge are in the watershed. Vegetation varies widely, ranging from western hemlock and western redcedar in the moist regions to sagebrush in the arid regions. The watershed provides habitat for 609 known fish and wildlife species, including the bull trout, bald eagle, gray wolf, grizzly bear, and Canada lynx.

The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) divides the waters of the Columbia and its tributaries into three freshwater ecoregions: Columbia Glaciated, Columbia Unglaciated, and Upper Snake. The Columbia Glaciated ecoregion, about a third of the total watershed, lies in the north and was covered with ice sheets during the Pleistocene. The ecoregion includes the mainstem Columbia north of the Snake River and tributaries such as the Yakima, Okanagan, Pend Oreille, Clark Fork, and Kootenay rivers. The effects of glaciation include a number of large lakes and a relatively low diversity of freshwater fish. The Upper Snake ecoregion is defined as the Snake River watershed above Shoshone Falls, which totally blocks fish migration. This region has 14 species of fish, many of which are endemic. The Columbia Unglaciated ecoregion makes up the rest of the watershed. It includes the mainstem Columbia below the Snake River and tributaries such as the Salmon, John Day, Deschutes, and lower Snake Rivers. Of the three ecoregions it is the richest in terms of freshwater species diversity. There are 35 species of fish, of which four are endemic. There are also high levels of mollusk endemism.

In 2016, over eight million people lived within the Columbia&#x27;s drainage basin. Of this total about 3.5 million people lived in Oregon, 2.1 million in Washington, 1.7 million in Idaho, half a million in British Columbia, and 0.4 million in Montana. Population in the watershed has been rising for many decades and is projected to rise to about 10 million by 2030. The highest population densities are found west of the Cascade Mountains along the I-5 corridor, especially in the Portland-Vancouver urban area. High densities are also found around Spokane, Washington, and Boise, Idaho. Although much of the watershed is rural and sparsely populated, areas with recreational and scenic values are growing rapidly. The central Oregon county of Deschutes is the fastest-growing in the state. Populations have also been growing just east of the Cascades in central Washington around the city of Yakima and the Tri-Cities area. Projections for the coming decades assume growth throughout the watershed. The Canadian part of the Okanagan subbasin is also growing rapidly.

Climate varies greatly within the watershed. Elevation ranges from sea level at the river mouth to more than in the mountains, and temperatures vary with elevation. The highest peak is Mount Rainier, at . High elevations have cold winters and short cool summers; interior regions are subject to great temperature variability and severe droughts. Over some of the watershed, especially west of the Cascade Mountains, precipitation maximums occur in winter, when Pacific storms come ashore. Atmospheric conditions block the flow of moisture in summer, which is generally dry except for occasional thunderstorms in the interior. In some of the eastern parts of the watershed, especially shrub-steppe regions with Continental climate patterns, precipitation maximums occur in early summer. Annual precipitation varies from more than a year in the Cascades to less than in the interior. Much of the watershed gets less than a year.

Several major North American drainage basins and many minor ones border the Columbia River&#x27;s drainage basin. To the east, in northern Wyoming and Montana, the Continental Divide separates the Columbia watershed from the Mississippi-Missouri watershed, which empties into the Gulf of Mexico. To the northeast, mostly along the southern border between British Columbia and Alberta, the Continental Divide separates the Columbia watershed from the Nelson-Lake Winnipeg-Saskatchewan watershed, which empties into Hudson Bay. The Mississippi and Nelson watersheds are separated by the Laurentian Divide, which meets the Continental Divide at Triple Divide Peak near the headwaters of the Columbia&#x27;s Flathead River tributary. This point marks the meeting of three of North America&#x27;s main drainage patterns, to the Pacific Ocean, to Hudson Bay, and to the Atlantic Ocean via the Gulf of Mexico.

Further north along the Continental Divide, a short portion of the combined Continental and Laurentian divides separate the Columbia watershed from the Mackenzie-Slave-Athabasca watershed, which empties into the Arctic Ocean. The Nelson and Mackenzie watersheds are separated by a divide between streams flowing to the Arctic Ocean and those of the Hudson Bay watershed. This divide meets the Continental Divide at Snow Dome (also known as Dome), near the northernmost bend of the Columbia River.

To the southeast, in western Wyoming, another divide separates the Columbia watershed from the Colorado–Green watershed, which empties into the Gulf of California. The Columbia, Colorado, and Mississippi watersheds meet at Three Waters Mountain in the Wind River Range of . To the south, in Oregon, Nevada, Utah, Idaho, and Wyoming, the Columbia watershed is divided from the Great Basin, whose several watersheds are endorheic, not emptying into any ocean but rather drying up or sinking into sumps. Great Basin watersheds that share a border with the Columbia watershed include Harney Basin, Humboldt River, and Great Salt Lake. The associated triple divide points are Commissary Ridge North, Wyoming, and Sproats Meadow Northwest, Oregon. To the north, mostly in British Columbia, the Columbia watershed borders the Fraser River watershed. To the west and southwest the Columbia watershed borders a number of smaller watersheds that drain to the Pacific Ocean, such as the Klamath River in Oregon and California and the Puget Sound Basin in Washington.

=== Major tributaries ===

The Columbia receives more than 60 significant tributaries. The four largest that empty directly into the Columbia (measured either by discharge or by size of watershed) are the Snake River (mostly in Idaho), the Willamette River (in northwest Oregon), the Kootenay River (mostly in British Columbia), and the Pend Oreille River (mostly in northern Washington and Idaho, also known as the lower part of the Clark Fork). Each of these four averages more than and drains an area of more than .

The Snake is by far the largest tributary. Its watershed of is larger than the state of Idaho. Its discharge is roughly a third of the Columbia&#x27;s at the rivers&#x27; confluence but compared to the Columbia upstream of the confluence the Snake is longer (113%) and has a larger drainage basin (104%).

The Pend Oreille River system (including its main tributaries, the Clark Fork and Flathead rivers) is also similar in size to the Columbia at their confluence. Compared to the Columbia River above the two rivers&#x27; confluence, the Pend Oreille-Clark-Flathead is nearly as long (about 86%), its basin about three-fourths as large (76%), and its discharge over a third (37%).


== See also ==
* Columbia Park (Kennewick, Washington), a recreational area
* Columbia River Estuary
* Columbia River Maritime Museum, Astoria, Oregon
* Empire Builder, an Amtrak rail line that follows the river from Portland to Pasco, Washington
* Estella Mine, an abandoned mine with a view of the Columbia River Valley
* Historic Columbia River Highway, a scenic highway on the Oregon side
* List of crossings of the Columbia River
* List of dams in the Columbia River watershed
* List of longest rivers of Canada
* List of longest rivers of the United States (by main stem)
* List of longest streams of Oregon
* Lists of ecoregions in North America and Oregon
* Lists of rivers of British Columbia, Oregon, and Washington
* Okanagan Trail, a historic trail that followed the Columbia and Okanagan rivers
* Robert Gray&#x27;s Columbia River expedition
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (see for full online transcription)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Further reading===
* White, Richard. &quot;The Organic Machine: The Remaking of the Columbia River&quot; (Hill and Wang, 1996)

== External links ==

* BC Hydro
* Bibliography on Water Resources and International Law Peace Palace Library
* 
* Columbia River US Environmental Protection Agency
* Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area from the US Forest Service
* Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission
* , dating to the 17th century
* University of Washington Libraries Digital Collections – Tollman and Canaris Photographs Photographs document the salmon fishing industry on the southern Washington coast and in the lower Columbia River around the year 1897 and offer insights about commercial salmon fishing and the techniques used at the beginning of the 20th century.
* Virtual World: Columbia River &quot;National Geographic&quot; via Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="4" end="18" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645081" start="20" end="33" title="Upper Chinook language" label="Upper Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="35" end="44" title="Columbia River" label="&amp;#x27; or"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833015" start="52" end="60" title="Sahaptin language" label="Sahaptin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931662" start="111" end="125" title="Sinixt dialect" label="Sinixt dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="155" end="160" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="168" end="185" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="196" end="209" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="221" end="226" title="headwater" label="forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="234" end="249" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="253" end="269" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="327" end="346" title="state of Washington" label="state of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="427" end="433" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="459" end="472" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="509" end="518" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q272074" start="526" end="537" title="Snake River" label="Snake River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887539" start="539" end="557" title="Columbia River drainage basin" label="Its drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="581" end="587" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29425295" start="715" end="719" title="River flow" label="flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q852569" start="1059" end="1069" title="anadromous" label="anadromous"/>
<link wikidata="Q852569" start="1082" end="1089" title="fish migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="1098" end="1108" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q496805" start="1126" end="1132" title="saline water" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="1188" end="1194" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q966966" start="1237" end="1251" title="Indigenous peoples of the Northwest Plateau" label="native peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340694" start="1330" end="1345" title="Bruno de Heceta" label="Bruno de Heceta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333687" start="1559" end="1583" title="William Robert Broughton" label="William Robert Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631849" start="1621" end="1644" title="HMS Chatham (1788)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Chatham&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044451" start="1660" end="1680" title="Vancouver Expedition" label="Vancouver Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029517" start="1701" end="1719" title="Oregon Coast Range" label="Oregon Coast Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="1796" end="1807" title="fur trade" label="fur-trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703681" start="1898" end="1915" title="Willamette Valley" label="Willamette Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112581" start="1952" end="1972" title="Columbia River Gorge" label="Columbia River Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q388164" start="1978" end="1986" title="Oregon Country" label="pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="2037" end="2046" title="Steamship" label="Steamship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2110" end="2130" title="History of rail transport in the United States#Expansion and consolidation (1878–1916)" label="arrival of railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="2243" end="2249" title="public sector" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="2254" end="2268" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="2342" end="2347" title="lock (water transport)" label="locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="2414" end="2422" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="2460" end="2477" title="Nautical channel" label="shipping channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="2509" end="2513" title="dams" label="dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="2551" end="2567" title="power generation" label="power generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="2569" end="2579" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="2581" end="2591" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187968" start="2597" end="2610" title="flood control" label="flood control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243331" start="2616" end="2637" title="list of dams in the Columbia River watershed" label="14 hydroelectric dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q573344" start="2661" end="2670" title="main stem" label="main stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="2747" end="2771" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="2787" end="2800" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="2847" end="2856" title="Plutonium" label="Plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2861" end="2875" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284526" start="2909" end="2921" title="Hanford Site" label="Hanford Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975053" start="2940" end="2970" title="National Priorities List" label="most contaminated nuclear site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481093" start="3201" end="3222" title="Rocky Mountain Trench" label="Rocky Mountain Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q317292" start="3249" end="3262" title="Columbia Lake" label="Columbia Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="3269" end="3278" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575970" start="3297" end="3314" title="Columbia Wetlands" label="Columbia Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="3337" end="3347" title="river source" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="3387" end="3401" title="glacial valley" label="glacial valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353201" start="3414" end="3430" title="Canadian Rockies" label="Canadian Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q574528" start="3439" end="3457" title="Columbia Mountains" label="Columbia Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215281" start="3535" end="3550" title="Windermere Lake (British Columbia)" label="Windermere Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q282363" start="3567" end="3576" title="Invermere, British Columbia" label="Invermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554073" start="3606" end="3621" title="Columbia Valley" label="Columbia Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020179" start="3641" end="3647" title="Golden, British Columbia" label="Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q317407" start="3657" end="3671" title="Kinbasket Lake" label="Kinbasket Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420547" start="3706" end="3723" title="Selkirk Mountains" label="Selkirk Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905094" start="3785" end="3801" title="Big Bend Country" label="Big Bend Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215159" start="3819" end="3834" title="Revelstoke Lake" label="Revelstoke Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q280135" start="3843" end="3854" title="Arrow Lakes" label="Arrow Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149668" start="3953" end="3969" title="Columbia Country" label="Columbia Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026779" start="4028" end="4037" title="Castlegar, British Columbia" label="Castlegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="4070" end="4080" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262" start="4090" end="4104" title="Kootenay River" label="Kootenay River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808502" start="4110" end="4115" title="Trail, British Columbia" label="Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198833" start="4153" end="4166" title="West Kootenay" label="West Kootenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q270499" start="4179" end="4197" title="Pend Oreille River" label="Pend Oreille River"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="4236" end="4263" title="Canada–United States border" label="United States–Canada border"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046581" start="4286" end="4304" title="eastern Washington" label="eastern Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275618" start="4350" end="4363" title="Spokane River" label="Spokane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q951756" start="4425" end="4452" title="Colville Indian Reservation" label="Colville Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q491709" start="4483" end="4509" title="Spokane Indian Reservation" label="Spokane Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q271058" start="4543" end="4557" title="Okanogan River" label="Okanogan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002318" start="4618" end="4633" title="Wenatchee River" label="Wenatchee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q371794" start="4746" end="4761" title="Missoula Floods" label="Missoula Floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773219" start="4880" end="4892" title="Grand Coulee" label="Grand Coulee"/>
<link wikidata="Q930391" start="5007" end="5023" title="Grand Coulee Dam" label="Grand Coulee Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042661" start="5077" end="5091" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt Lake" label="Lake Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176129" start="5134" end="5140" title="coulee" label="coulee"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="5154" end="5163" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214732" start="5167" end="5177" title="Banks Lake" label="Banks Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q254740" start="5201" end="5223" title="The Gorge Amphitheatre" label="The Gorge Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885403" start="5282" end="5299" title="Priest Rapids Dam" label="Priest Rapids Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284526" start="5322" end="5349" title="Hanford Site" label="Hanford Nuclear Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126744" start="5386" end="5399" title="Hanford Reach" label="Hanford Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="5504" end="5511" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q272074" start="5517" end="5528" title="Snake River" label="Snake River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861254" start="5533" end="5545" title="Yakima River" label="Yakima River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810131" start="5571" end="5581" title="Tri-Cities, Washington" label="Tri-Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q387103" start="5743" end="5758" title="Deschutes River (Oregon)" label="Deschutes River"/>
<link wikidata="Q985271" start="5783" end="5793" title="The Dalles, Oregon" label="The Dalles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="5818" end="5826" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="5855" end="5868" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112581" start="5891" end="5911" title="Columbia River Gorge" label="Columbia River Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q234053" start="6205" end="6226" title="Vancouver, Washington" label="Vancouver, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q131071" start="6235" end="6251" title="Willamette River" label="Willamette River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="6345" end="6356" title="river delta" label="river delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q983801" start="6392" end="6412" title="Longview, Washington" label="Longview, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138229" start="6421" end="6434" title="Cowlitz River" label="Cowlitz River"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="6532" end="6547" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881995" start="6558" end="6570" title="Columbia Bar" label="Columbia Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="6583" end="6590" title="sandbar" label="sandbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="6902" end="6907" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="6991" end="6998" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="7011" end="7029" title="Continental Divide of the Americas" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="7053" end="7060" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="7062" end="7066" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="7072" end="7078" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q689531" start="8227" end="8239" title="John Day Dam" label="John Day Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="8526" end="8530" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692277" start="8558" end="8580" title="National Ocean Service" label="National Ocean Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q686697" start="8610" end="8620" title="tide gauge" label="tide gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q892800" start="8756" end="8770" title="Bonneville Dam" label="Bonneville Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689431" start="8776" end="8788" title="head of tide" label="head of tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="8840" end="8844" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="8851" end="8858" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="8882" end="8897" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208378" start="8961" end="8979" title="Panthalassic Ocean" label="Panthalassic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203170" start="9125" end="9139" title="Farallon Plate" label="Farallon Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="9140" end="9149" title="subduction" label="subducted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="9217" end="9227" title="island arc" label="island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="9580" end="9586" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="9599" end="9606" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q275662" start="9788" end="9798" title="Mount Hood" label="Mount Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961794" start="9944" end="9955" title="Northern Oregon Coast Range" label="Coast Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q384747" start="9961" end="9969" title="Vernonia, Oregon" label="Vernonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="10058" end="10070" title="flood basalt" label="flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q401815" start="10088" end="10110" title="Columbia River Plateau" label="Columbia River Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887539" start="10357" end="10375" title="Columbia River Drainage Basin" label="its drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="10475" end="10482" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801015" start="10522" end="10543" title="Glacial Lake Missoula" label="Glacial Lake Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062302" start="10927" end="10946" title="channeled scablands" label="channeled scablands"/>
<link wikidata="Q590219" start="11031" end="11038" title="braided river" label="braided"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554910" start="11143" end="11148" title="butte" label="butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215010" start="11304" end="11314" title="Lake Lewis" label="Lake Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565546" start="11390" end="11401" title="Wallula Gap" label="Wallula Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673142" start="11963" end="11977" title="Table Mountain (Skamania County, Washington)" label="Table Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116138" start="11982" end="11996" title="Greenleaf Peak" label="Greenleaf Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397373" start="12101" end="12117" title="Bonneville Slide" label="Bonneville Slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735004" start="12525" end="12549" title="1700 Cascadia earthquake" label="1700 Cascadia earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419596" start="12920" end="12934" title="Cascade Rapids" label="Cascade Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q778218" start="13112" end="13140" title="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens" label="eruption of Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q736102" start="13554" end="13572" title="Marmes Rockshelter" label="Marmes Rockshelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467701" start="13601" end="13608" title="Palouse River" label="Palouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q551700" start="13722" end="13735" title="Kennewick Man" label="Kennewick Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q844033" start="13753" end="13774" title="Kennewick, Washington" label="Kennewick, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="13957" end="13972" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="14070" end="14083" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q695067" start="14186" end="14194" title="Colville (tribe)" label="Colville"/>
<link wikidata="Q491709" start="14196" end="14203" title="Spokane (tribe)" label="Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q491755" start="14205" end="14223" title="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene Tribe" label="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540453" start="14225" end="14231" title="Yakama" label="Yakama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512367" start="14233" end="14240" title="Wanapum" label="Wanapum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="14242" end="14251" title="Nez Perce people" label="Nez Perce"/>
<link wikidata="Q494691" start="14253" end="14259" title="Cayuse people" label="Cayuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526730" start="14261" end="14266" title="Palus (tribe)" label="Palus"/>
<link wikidata="Q491747" start="14268" end="14276" title="Umatilla (tribe)" label="Umatilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138224" start="14278" end="14285" title="Cowlitz (tribe)" label="Cowlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538941" start="14295" end="14330" title="Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs" label="Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q601853" start="14390" end="14402" title="Salmon River (Idaho)" label="Salmon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="14408" end="14416" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q806902" start="14417" end="14424" title="Bannock (tribe)" label="Bannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545880" start="14449" end="14455" title="Sinixt" label="Sinixt"/>
<link wikidata="Q337550" start="14545" end="14559" title="Shuswap people" label="Shuswap people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550384" start="14784" end="14791" title="Ktunaxa" label="Ktunaxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q610586" start="14798" end="14805" title="Chinookan" label="Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="14826" end="14846" title="federally recognized tribes" label="federally recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645081" start="14920" end="14951" title="Upper Chinook language" label="Upper Chinook (Kiksht) language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833015" start="15018" end="15047" title="Sahaptin language" label="Sahaptin (Ichishkíin Sɨ́nwit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545880" start="15155" end="15168" title="Sinixt people" label="Sinixt people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397373" start="15377" end="15395" title="Bridge of the Gods (geologic event)" label="Bridge of the Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q267646" start="15659" end="15670" title="Mount Adams (Washington)" label="Mount Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q275662" start="15675" end="15685" title="Mount Hood" label="Mount Hood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15755" end="15771" title="Mount St. Helens" label="Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="15999" end="16017" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Spanish New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396049" start="16089" end="16106" title="Snake River Plain" label="Snake River Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q497587" start="16143" end="16151" title="Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Nation" label="Flathead"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="16247" end="16261" title="Plains Indian" label="plains culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q848937" start="16286" end="16300" title="horse training" label="horse training"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="16601" end="16613" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="16618" end="16623" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512882" start="17118" end="17124" title="Molala people" label="Molala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450853" start="17126" end="17135" title="Klickitat (tribe)" label="Klickitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q934750" start="17137" end="17145" title="Wenatchi" label="Wenatchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q918568" start="17161" end="17178" title="Sinkiuse-Columbia" label="Sinkiuse-Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q589322" start="17320" end="17327" title="Sanpoil (tribe)" label="Sanpoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978241" start="17332" end="17340" title="Nespelem (tribe)" label="Nespelem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="17780" end="17788" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q319657" start="17817" end="17836" title="Alexander Mackenzie (explorer)" label="Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="17915" end="17941" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q388164" start="17954" end="17968" title="Oregon Country" label="Oregon Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099574" start="17979" end="17989" title="Clearwater River (Idaho)" label="Clearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364902" start="18653" end="18669" title="Whitman Massacre" label="Whitman Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119015" start="18829" end="18839" title="Yakima War" label="Yakima War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893515" start="19200" end="19227" title="United States v. Washington" label="United States v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746999" start="19490" end="19502" title="Celilo Falls" label="Celilo Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419596" start="19862" end="19877" title="Cascades Rapids" label="Cascades Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291809" start="19911" end="19923" title="Kettle Falls" label="Kettle Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419597" start="19928" end="19941" title="Priest Rapids" label="Priest Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="20856" end="20874" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405556" start="20893" end="20903" title="salmon run" label="salmon run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194213" start="22138" end="22148" title="Kah-Nee-Ta High Desert Resort and Casino" label="Kah-Nee-Ta"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="24457" end="24460" title="Before Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q384392" start="24679" end="24693" title="Maris Pacifici" label="Maris Pacifici"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="24836" end="24850" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558706" start="25121" end="25145" title="Francis Drake&amp;#x27;s circumnavigation" label="Francis Drake expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="25170" end="25187" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873137" start="25230" end="25239" title="Sam Bawlf" label="Sam Bawlf"/>
<link wikidata="Q232916" start="25257" end="25265" title="Abraham Ortelius" label="Ortelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q576523" start="25461" end="25468" title="Clatsop" label="Clatsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="25630" end="25647" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="25892" end="25902" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="25910" end="25924" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340694" start="26000" end="26015" title="Bruno de Heceta" label="Bruno de Heceta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26211" end="26219" title=":wikt:ensenada" label="Ensenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="26245" end="26255" title="Assumption of Mary" label="Assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q152457" start="26376" end="26386" title="Saint Roch" label="Saint Roch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340694" start="26465" end="26480" title="Bruno de Hezeta" label="Bruno de Hezeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q323002" start="26546" end="26564" title="maritime fur trade" label="maritime fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701050" start="26574" end="26585" title="John Meares" label="John Meares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937028" start="26663" end="26682" title="Cape Disappointment (Washington)" label="Cape Disappointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="26951" end="26961" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205485" start="26972" end="26988" title="George Vancouver" label="George Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q777219" start="27211" end="27222" title="Robert Gray (sea captain)" label="Robert Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q867627" start="27230" end="27252" title="Strait of Juan de Fuca" label="Strait of Juan de Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062433" start="27444" end="27507" title="Robert Gray&amp;#x27;s Columbia River expedition" label="the first known explorer of European descent to enter the river"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709119" start="27562" end="27568" title="Boston, Oregon" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q383698" start="27632" end="27649" title="Columbia Rediviva" label="Columbia Rediviva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115864" start="27867" end="27878" title="Grays River (Washington)" label="Grays River"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="28030" end="28036" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="28038" end="28051" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333687" start="28122" end="28146" title="William Robert Broughton" label="William Robert Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584481" start="28213" end="28224" title="Sandy River (Oregon)" label="Sandy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="28363" end="28377" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313492" start="28794" end="28810" title="Meriwether Lewis" label="Meriwether Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q355348" start="28815" end="28828" title="William Clark" label="William Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="28869" end="28882" title="American West" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="28892" end="28911" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="overland expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="28986" end="29001" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q596073" start="29025" end="29037" title="dugout canoe" label="dugout canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593332" start="29185" end="29199" title="Bateman Island" label="Bateman Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375324" start="29303" end="29315" title="Fort Clatsop" label="Fort Clatsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q763043" start="29410" end="29424" title="David Thompson (explorer)" label="David Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142049" start="29433" end="29451" title="North West Company" label="North West Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198828" start="29483" end="29497" title="Kootanae House" label="Kootanae House"/>
<link wikidata="Q57423" start="29737" end="29753" title="John Jacob Astor" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535438" start="29761" end="29780" title="Pacific Fur Company" label="Pacific Fur Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="30002" end="30027" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438804" start="30046" end="30060" title="Fort Vancouver" label="Fort Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980922" start="30170" end="30187" title="Columbia District" label="Columbia District"/>
<link wikidata="Q323336" start="30305" end="30317" title="Factor (agent)" label="Chief Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465249" start="30318" end="30333" title="John McLoughlin" label="John McLoughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862312" start="30679" end="30691" title="Oregon Trail" label="Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443993" start="31090" end="31101" title="Barlow Road" label="Barlow Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q649599" start="31111" end="31125" title="Treaty of 1818" label="Treaty of 1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="32503" end="32519" title="Oregon boundary dispute" label="boundary dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q823433" start="32645" end="32658" title="Oregon Treaty" label="Oregon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="32899" end="32905" title="Oregon Territory" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710656" start="32910" end="32920" title="Washington Territory" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="32922" end="32928" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="32964" end="32974" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712949" start="33150" end="33163" title="Inland Empire (Pacific Northwest)" label="Inland Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="33332" end="33342" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666353" start="33344" end="33356" title="navigability" label="navigability"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="33816" end="33825" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877985" start="33877" end="33883" title="Beaver (steamship)" label="Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605429" start="34222" end="34244" title="Steamboats of Columbia River, Wenatchee Reach" label="on the Wenatchee Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605428" start="34268" end="34306" title="Steamboats of the Arrow Lakes" label="on British Columbia&amp;#x27;s Arrow Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605442" start="34312" end="34346" title="Steamboats of the Willamette River" label="on tributaries like the Willamette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783875" start="34362" end="34375" title="Kootenay Lake" label="Kootenay Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355813" start="34663" end="34701" title="Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company" label="Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082251" start="35016" end="35023" title="jetty" label="jetties"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="35051" end="35059" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="35085" end="35090" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="35096" end="35112" title="lock (water transport)" label="navigation locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q505539" start="35229" end="35244" title="Lewiston, Idaho" label="Lewiston, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128114" start="35453" end="35467" title="James A. Gibbs" label="James A. Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520345" start="35897" end="35910" title="The Columbian" label="The Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048147" start="36021" end="36044" title="Cascade Locks and Canal" label="Cascade Locks and Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935990" start="36174" end="36186" title="Celilo Canal" label="Celilo Canal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36469" end="36512" title="Snake River#Dams" label="navigation channel reaching Lewiston, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="36698" end="36709" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q127892" start="36714" end="36720" title="Paraná River" label="Paraná"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="37683" end="37718" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="37817" end="37843" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="US Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010548" start="38329" end="38364" title="United States Bureau of Reclamation" label="United States Bureau of Reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="38395" end="38415" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="38424" end="38438" title="Western United States" label="western states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984567" start="38537" end="38559" title="Columbia Basin Project" label="Columbia Basin Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="38601" end="38613" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="38670" end="38686" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q782878" start="38791" end="38827" title="International Boundary Waters Treaty" label="International Boundary Waters Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="38870" end="38892" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38904" end="38934" title="Rivers and Harbors Act#List of later acts" label="Rivers and Harbors Act of 1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067871" start="38992" end="39016" title="Federal Power Commission" label="Federal Power Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39318" end="39329" title="308 Reports" label="308 Reports"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40634" end="40650" title="George W. Joseph" label="George W. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101437" start="40658" end="40681" title="Oregon gubernatorial election, 1930" label="1930 Republican primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q373337" start="40709" end="40721" title="Julius Meier" label="Julius Meier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40825" end="40846" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959799" start="41021" end="41035" title="Charles McNary" label="Charles McNary"/>
<link wikidata="Q372316" start="41056" end="41069" title="Clarence Dill" label="Clarence Dill"/>
<link wikidata="Q372979" start="41094" end="41108" title="Charles Martin (Oregon politician)" label="Charles Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110555282" start="41134" end="41140" title="1948 Columbia River flood" label="floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q596232" start="41190" end="41197" title="Vanport, Oregon" label="Vanport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460043" start="41339" end="41364" title="Flood Control Act of 1950" label="Flood Control Act of 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187968" start="41431" end="41444" title="flood control" label="flood control"/>
<link wikidata="Q149621" start="41587" end="41610" title="public utility district" label="public utility district"/>
<link wikidata="Q281681" start="41614" end="41638" title="Grant County, Washington" label="Grant County, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536950" start="41754" end="41775" title="Columbia River Treaty" label="Columbia River Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q270562" start="42167" end="42179" title="Duncan River (British Columbia)" label="Duncan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="42725" end="42736" title="land reclamation" label="reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067857" start="43124" end="43159" title="Federal Columbia River Power System" label="Federal Columbia River Power System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643982" start="43208" end="43219" title="List of tributaries of the Columbia River" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="44002" end="44008" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q606619" start="44275" end="44286" title="Fish ladder" label="Fish ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072291" start="44880" end="44896" title="Chief Joseph Dam" label="Chief Joseph Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010548" start="46942" end="46963" title="Bureau of Reclamation" label="Bureau of Reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22723" start="47101" end="47106" title="loess" label="loess"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="47627" end="47635" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="47855" end="47869" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="48088" end="48095" title="orchard" label="orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q156106" start="48113" end="48120" title="alfalfa" label="alfalfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="48122" end="48126" title="mentha" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="48128" end="48132" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q165437" start="48135" end="48139" title="beet" label="beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="49287" end="49298" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="49465" end="49467" title="Gigawatt" label="GW"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="49854" end="49862" title="aluminum" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="49898" end="49907" title="Aluminium production" label="reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="49913" end="49920" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q261645" start="50648" end="50659" title="server farm" label="server farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910288" start="50802" end="50833" title="Bonneville Power Administration" label="Bonneville Power Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="50845" end="50873" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="51078" end="51100" title="Endangered Species Act" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="51346" end="51354" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="51366" end="51379" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283724" start="51513" end="51521" title="The Columbia River Collection" label="26 songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q852569" start="51695" end="51705" title="anadromous" label="anadromous"/>
<link wikidata="Q44064" start="51791" end="51805" title="Sockeye salmon" label="Sockeye salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q934874" start="51807" end="51811" title="Coho salmon" label="Coho"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="51816" end="51823" title="Chinook salmon" label="Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="51855" end="51864" title="Rainbow trout" label="steelhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q133325" start="51889" end="51901" title="Oncorhynchus" label="Oncorhynchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q592876" start="51993" end="52007" title="White sturgeon" label="White sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405552" start="52210" end="52219" title="salmon cannery" label="canneries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593203" start="52407" end="52415" title="penny (British pre-decimal coin)" label="8d or 9d"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280283" start="52588" end="52614" title="Oregon System" label="citizens&amp;#x27; initiatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q600580" start="52717" end="52727" title="seine fishing" label="seine nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q143844" start="54008" end="54027" title="northern pikeminnow" label="northern pikeminnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863309" start="54731" end="54767" title="U.S. Regional Fishery Management Councils" label="Pacific Fisheries Management Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658579" start="54885" end="54896" title="Cape Falcon, Oregon" label="Cape Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="55068" end="55107" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="United States Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q878739" start="55108" end="55121" title="Bruce Babbitt" label="Bruce Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060172" start="55225" end="55257" title="Northwest Power and Conservation Council" label="Northwest Power Planning Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="55668" end="55687" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147780" start="55976" end="55995" title="Idaho Power" label="Idaho Power Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q751691" start="56003" end="56015" title="Hells Canyon" label="Hells Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996612" start="56189" end="56199" title="Bull Run Hydroelectric Project" label="Marmot Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159226" start="56317" end="56327" title="Condit Hydroelectric Project" label="Condit Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567788" start="56349" end="56367" title="White Salmon River" label="White Salmon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704728" start="56377" end="56389" title="Milltown Dam" label="Milltown Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q664874" start="56397" end="56407" title="Clark Fork (river)" label="Clark Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284526" start="56510" end="56522" title="Hanford Site" label="Hanford Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="56559" end="56576" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="56599" end="56608" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="56639" end="56654" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="56999" end="57006" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q102573" start="57057" end="57071" title="becquerel" label="terabecquerels"/>
<link wikidata="Q229354" start="57194" end="57199" title="Curie (unit)" label="curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="57508" end="57516" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019586" start="57587" end="57608" title="environmental remediation" label="environmental cleanup"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="57625" end="57645" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044723" start="57673" end="57705" title="Washington Department of Ecology" label="Washington Department of Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="57714" end="57745" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754470" start="57853" end="57863" title="high-level" label="high-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q185252" start="57864" end="57877" title="nuclear waste" label="nuclear waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227103" start="58316" end="58322" title="dioxin" label="dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="58329" end="58353" title="polychlorinated biphenyl" label="polychlorinated biphenyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="59053" end="59062" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721219" start="60621" end="60630" title="clearcutting" label="clearcuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391326" start="60636" end="60657" title="Northwest Forest Plan" label="Northwest Forest Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="62479" end="62492" title="Human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070482" start="62523" end="62543" title="nutrient cycle" label="cycling of nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="62613" end="62622" title="Estuary" label="estuarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="62661" end="62668" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033747" start="62702" end="62729" title="Pacific Decadal Oscillation" label="Pacific Decadal Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="62738" end="62766" title="El Niño–Southern Oscillation" label="El Nino Southern Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="62914" end="62924" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="62939" end="62945" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="62973" end="62984" title="Tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401882" start="62990" end="63012" title="Estuarine water circulation" label="ocean estuary exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="63079" end="63089" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="63109" end="63115" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="63125" end="63132" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="63158" end="63161" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="63216" end="63226" title="River source" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149819" start="63279" end="63301" title="Columbia River Estuary" label="Columbia River estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405556" start="63341" end="63351" title="salmon run" label="salmon run"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030793" start="63446" end="63460" title="Residence time (fluid dynamics)" label="residence time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130787" start="63505" end="63513" title="silicate" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="63553" end="63559" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="63572" end="63585" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="63666" end="63673" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="63835" end="63844" title="upwelling" label="upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q222695" start="64549" end="64574" title="Grand Teton National Park" label="Grand Teton National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="64618" end="64643" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="64645" end="64666" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q944329" start="64668" end="64695" title="Mount Rainier National Park" label="Mount Rainier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163799" start="64701" end="64729" title="North Cascades National Park" label="North Cascades National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q903323" start="64780" end="64802" title="Kootenay National Park" label="Kootenay National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q828404" start="64804" end="64822" title="Yoho National Park" label="Yoho National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161253" start="64824" end="64845" title="Glacier National Park (Canada)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q862265" start="64851" end="64881" title="Mount Revelstoke National Park" label="Mount Revelstoke National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112581" start="64941" end="64955" title="Columbia Gorge" label="Columbia Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144409" start="65017" end="65032" title="Tsuga heterophylla" label="western hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="65037" end="65053" title="Thuja plicata" label="western redcedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399162" start="65078" end="65087" title="sagebrush" label="sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429513" start="65195" end="65205" title="bull trout" label="bull trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="65207" end="65217" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="65219" end="65228" title="gray wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="65230" end="65242" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="65248" end="65259" title="Canada lynx" label="Canada lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="65266" end="65292" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="65365" end="65385" title="freshwater ecoregion" label="freshwater ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="65771" end="65781" title="glacier" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635297" start="65937" end="65951" title="Shoshone Falls" label="Shoshone Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="66044" end="66051" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q54725" start="66902" end="66905" title="Interstate 5" label="I-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q187805" start="67002" end="67021" title="Spokane, Washington" label="Spokane, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q35775" start="67027" end="67039" title="Boise, Idaho" label="Boise, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q484420" start="67197" end="67206" title="Deschutes County, Oregon" label="Deschutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q499203" start="67346" end="67352" title="Yakima, Washington" label="Yakima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812222" start="67478" end="67486" title="Okanagan" label="Okanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q194057" start="67707" end="67720" title="Mount Rainier" label="Mount Rainier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504320" start="68206" end="68218" title="shrub-steppe" label="shrub-steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="68232" end="68251" title="Continental climate" label="Continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="68614" end="68632" title="Continental Divide" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="68730" end="68744" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="68826" end="68833" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292" start="68900" end="68906" title="Nelson River" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272" start="68907" end="68920" title="Lake Winnipeg" label="Lake Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047" start="68921" end="68933" title="Saskatchewan River" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042803" start="69035" end="69052" title="Laurentian Divide" label="Laurentian Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148432" start="69092" end="69110" title="Triple Divide Peak (Montana)" label="Triple Divide Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q268532" start="69154" end="69168" title="Flathead River" label="Flathead River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411" start="69506" end="69515" title="Mackenzie River" label="Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226" start="69516" end="69521" title="Slave River" label="Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216" start="69522" end="69531" title="Athabasca River" label="Athabasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874626" start="69703" end="69723" title="List of Hudson Bay rivers" label="Hudson Bay watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170485" start="69769" end="69778" title="Snow Dome (Canada)" label="Snow Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="69947" end="69955" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q952429" start="69956" end="69961" title="Green River (Colorado River)" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q132811" start="69996" end="70014" title="Gulf of California" label="Gulf of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722116" start="70104" end="70120" title="Wind River Range" label="Wind River Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q966943" start="70228" end="70239" title="Great Basin" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="70270" end="70279" title="endorheic basin" label="endorheic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592793" start="70346" end="70350" title="sump" label="sump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887483" start="70432" end="70444" title="Harney Basin" label="Harney Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361278" start="70446" end="70460" title="Humboldt River" label="Humboldt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q178741" start="70466" end="70481" title="Great Salt Lake" label="Great Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q269710" start="70671" end="70683" title="Fraser River" label="Fraser River"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="70875" end="70886" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="70983" end="70994" title="tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="71071" end="71080" title="discharge (hydrology)" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149787" start="72131" end="72168" title="Columbia Park (Kennewick, Washington)" label="Columbia Park (Kennewick, Washington)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149819" start="72192" end="72214" title="Columbia River Estuary" label="Columbia River Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330641" start="72217" end="72247" title="Columbia River Maritime Museum" label="Columbia River Maritime Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q197764" start="72267" end="72281" title="Empire Builder" label="Empire Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400911" start="72363" end="72375" title="Estella Mine" label="Estella Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620784" start="72438" end="72469" title="Historic Columbia River Highway" label="Historic Columbia River Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244899" start="72509" end="72548" title="List of crossings of the Columbia River" label="List of crossings of the Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243331" start="72551" end="72595" title="List of dams in the Columbia River watershed" label="List of dams in the Columbia River watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626726" start="72598" end="72630" title="List of longest rivers of Canada" label="List of longest rivers of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626728" start="72633" end="72691" title="List of longest rivers of the United States (by main stem)" label="List of longest rivers of the United States (by main stem)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626729" start="72694" end="72727" title="List of longest streams of Oregon" label="List of longest streams of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617798" start="72753" end="72766" title="List of ecoregions in North America (CEC)" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617803" start="72771" end="72777" title="List of ecoregions in Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839870" start="72799" end="72815" title="List of rivers of British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121741" start="72817" end="72823" title="List of rivers of Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q767780" start="72829" end="72839" title="List of rivers of Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081805" start="72842" end="72856" title="Okanagan Trail" label="Okanagan Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062433" start="72924" end="72968" title="Robert Gray&amp;#x27;s Columbia River expedition" label="Robert Gray&amp;#x27;s Columbia River expedition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5409" wikidata="Q290349" url="?curid=5409" title="Commelinales">
<text>Commelinales is an order of flowering plants. It comprises five families: Commelinaceae, Haemodoraceae, Hanguanaceae, Philydraceae, and Pontederiaceae. All the families combined contain over 885 species in about 70 genera; the majority of species are in the Commelinaceae. Plants in the order share a number of synapomorphies that tie them together, such as a lack of mycorrhizal associations and tapetal raphides. Estimates differ as to when the Commelinales evolved, but most suggest an origin and diversification sometime during the mid- to late Cretaceous. Depending on the methods used, studies suggest a range of origin between 123 and 73 million years, with diversification occurring within the group 110 to 66 million years ago. The order&#x27;s closest relatives are in the Zingiberales, which includes ginger, bananas, cardamom, and others.

==Taxonomy==
According to the most recent classification scheme, the APG IV of 2016, the order includes five families:
* Commelinaceae
* Haemodoraceae
* Hanguanaceae
* Philydraceae
* Pontederiaceae

This is unchanged from the APG III of 2009 and the APG II of 2003, but different from the older APG system of 1998, which did not include Hanguanaceae.

=== Previous classification systems ===
The older Cronquist system of 1981, which was based purely on morphological data, placed the order in subclass Commelinidae of class Liliopsida and included the families Commelinaceae, Mayacaceae, Rapateaceae and Xyridaceae. These families are now known to be only distantly related.
In the classification system of Dahlgren the Commelinales were one of four orders in the superorder Commeliniflorae (also called Commelinanae), and contained five families, of which only Commelinaceae has been retained by the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group.

==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q290349" start="0" end="12" title="Commelinales" label="Commelinales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="28" end="43" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q156674" start="74" end="87" title="Commelinaceae" label="Commelinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131291" start="89" end="102" title="Haemodoraceae" label="Haemodoraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131551" start="104" end="116" title="Hanguanaceae" label="Hanguanaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131506" start="118" end="130" title="Philydraceae" label="Philydraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q725748" start="136" end="150" title="Pontederiaceae" label="Pontederiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="215" end="221" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="311" end="325" title="Synapomorphy" label="synapomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q99974" start="368" end="392" title="Mycorrhiza" label="mycorrhizal associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414075" start="397" end="404" title="tapetum (botany)" label="tapetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575666" start="405" end="413" title="raphides" label="raphides"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="549" end="559" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q203779" start="783" end="795" title="Zingiberales" label="Zingiberales"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="812" end="818" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="820" end="826" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625808" start="829" end="837" title="cardamom" label="cardamom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="921" end="927" title="APG IV system" label="APG IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q156674" start="973" end="986" title="Commelinaceae" label="Commelinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131291" start="989" end="1002" title="Haemodoraceae" label="Haemodoraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131551" start="1005" end="1017" title="Hanguanaceae" label="Hanguanaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131506" start="1020" end="1032" title="Philydraceae" label="Philydraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q725748" start="1035" end="1049" title="Pontederiaceae" label="Pontederiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="1078" end="1085" title="APG III system" label="APG III"/>
<link wikidata="Q156518" start="1102" end="1108" title="APG II system" label="APG II"/>
<link wikidata="Q433179" start="1147" end="1157" title="APG system" label="APG system"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="1254" end="1270" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q868546" start="1355" end="1367" title="Commelinidae" label="Commelinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147601" start="1377" end="1387" title="Liliopsida" label="Liliopsida"/>
<link wikidata="Q131609" start="1429" end="1439" title="Mayacaceae" label="Mayacaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131516" start="1441" end="1452" title="Rapateaceae" label="Rapateaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131613" start="1457" end="1467" title="Xyridaceae" label="Xyridaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049579" start="1560" end="1568" title="Rolf Dahlgren" label="Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="1617" end="1627" title="superorder" label="superorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="1754" end="1780" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5411" wikidata="Q21875" url="?curid=5411" title="Cucurbitales">
<text>The Cucurbitales are an order of flowering plants, included in the rosid group of dicotyledons. This order mostly belongs to tropical areas, with limited presence in subtropical and temperate regions. The order includes shrubs and trees, together with many herbs and climbers. One major characteristic of the Cucurbitales is the presence of unisexual flowers, mostly pentacyclic, with thick pointed petals (whenever present). The pollination is usually performed by insects, but wind pollination is also present (in Coriariaceae and Datiscaceae).

The order consists of roughly 2600 species in eight families. The largest families are Begoniaceae (begonia family) with around 1500 species and Cucurbitaceae (gourd family) with around 900 species. These two families include the only economically important plants. Specifically, the Cucurbitaceae (gourd family) include some food species, such as squash, pumpkin (both from &quot;Cucurbita&quot;), watermelon (&quot;Citrullus vulgaris&quot;), and cucumber and melons (&quot;Cucumis&quot;). The Begoniaceae are known for their horticultural species, of which there are over 130 with many more varieties.

== Overview ==
The Cucurbitales are an order of plants with a cosmopolitan distribution, particularly diverse in the tropics. Most are herbs, climber herbs, woody lianas or shrubs but some genera include canopy-forming evergreen lauroid trees. Members of the Cucurbitales form an important component of low to montane tropical forest with greater representation in terms of the number of species. Although not known with certainty the total number of species in the order, conservative estimates indicate about 2600 species worldwide, distributed in 109 genera. Compared to other flowering plant orders, the taxonomy is poorly understood due to their great diversity, difficulty in identification, and limited study.

The order Cucurbitales in the eurosid I clade comprises almost 2600 species in 109 or 110 genera in eight families, tropical and temperate, of very different sizes, morphology, and ecology. It is a case of divergent evolution. In contrast, there is convergent evolution with other groups not related due to ecological or physical drivers toward a similar solution, including analogous structures.
Some species are trees that have similar foliage to the true laurels due to convergent evolution.

The patterns of speciation in the Cucurbitales are diversified in a high number of species. They have a pantropical distribution with centers of diversity in Africa, South America, and Southeast Asia. They most likely originated in West Gondwana 67–107 million years ago, so the oldest split could relate to the break-up of Gondwana in the middle Eocene to late Oligocene, 45–24 million years ago. The group reached their current distribution by multiple intercontinental dispersal events. One factor was product of aridification, other groups responded to favorable climatic periods and expanded across the available habitat, occurring as opportunistic species across wide distribution; other groups diverged over long periods within isolated areas.

The Cucurbitales comprise the families: Apodanthaceae, Anisophylleaceae, Begoniaceae, Coriariaceae, Corynocarpaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Tetramelaceae, and Datiscaceae. Some of the synapomorphies of the order are: leaves in spiral with secondary veins palmated, calyx or perianth valvate, and the elevated stomatal calyx/perianth bearing separate styles. The two whorls are similar in texture.

&quot;Tetrameles nudiflora&quot; is a tree of immense proportions of height and width; Tetramelaceae, Anisophylleaceae, and Corynocarpaceae are tall canopy trees in temperate and tropical forests. The genus &quot;Dendrosicyos&quot;, with the only species being the cucumber tree, is adapted to the arid semidesert island of Socotra. Deciduous perennial Cucurbitales lose all of their leaves for part of the year depending on variations in rainfall. The leaf loss coincides with the dry season in tropical, subtropical and arid regions. In temperate or polar climates, the dry season is due to the inability of the plant to absorb water available in the form of ice. Apodanthaceae are obligatory endoparasites that only emerge once a year in the form of small flowers that develop into small berries, however taxonomists have not agreed on the exact placement of this family within the Cucurbitales.
Over half of the known members of this order belong to the greatly diverse begonia family Begoniaceae, with around 1500 species in two genera. Before modern DNA-molecular classifications, some Cucurbitales species were assigned to orders as diverse as Ranunculales, Malpighiales, Violales, and Rafflesiales. Early molecular studies revealed several surprises, such as the nonmonophyly of the traditional Datiscaceae, including &quot;Tetrameles&quot; and &quot;Octomeles&quot;, but the exact relationships among the families remain unclear.
The lack of knowledge about the order in general is due to many species being found in countries with limited economic means or unstable political environments, factors unsuitable for plant collection and detailed study. Thus the vast majority of species remain poorly determined, and a future increase in the number of species is expected.

==Classification==
Under the Cronquist system, the families Begoniaceae, Cucurbitaceae, and Datiscaceae were placed in the order Violales, within the subclass Dilleniidae, with the Tetramelaceae subsumed into the Datiscaceae. Corynocarpaceae was placed in order Celastrales, and Anisophylleaceae in order Rosales, both under subclass Rosidae. Coriariaceae was placed in Ranunculaceae, subclass Magnoliidae. Apodanthaceae was not recognised as a family, its genera being assigned to another parasitic plant family, the Rafflesiaceae. The present classification is due to APG III (2009).

==Systematics==
Modern molecular phylogenetics suggest the following relationships:

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21875" start="4" end="16" title="Cucurbitales" label="Cucurbitales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="33" end="48" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="67" end="72" title="rosid" label="rosid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="82" end="93" title="dicotyledon" label="dicotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198211" start="367" end="378" title="pentacyclic" label="pentacyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047706" start="479" end="495" title="Anemophily" label="wind pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067620" start="516" end="528" title="Coriariaceae" label="Coriariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q867718" start="533" end="544" title="Datiscaceae" label="Datiscaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q161189" start="635" end="646" title="Begoniaceae" label="Begoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8314" start="693" end="706" title="Cucurbitaceae" label="Cucurbitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="896" end="902" title="squash (fruit)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q165308" start="904" end="911" title="pumpkin" label="pumpkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="929" end="938" title="Cucurbita" label="Cucurbita"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="947" end="957" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="996" end="1004" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881191" start="1009" end="1014" title="melon" label="melon"/>
<link wikidata="Q148758" start="1023" end="1030" title="Cucumis" label="Cucumis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="1141" end="1150" title="cultivar" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="1270" end="1277" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q788099" start="1382" end="1389" title="Laurel forest" label="lauroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q917925" start="2077" end="2096" title="divergent evolution" label="divergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="2120" end="2140" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="2246" end="2266" title="analogous structures" label="analogous structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q26538" start="2324" end="2336" title="Lauraceae" label="true laurels"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="2604" end="2612" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q134410" start="3159" end="3172" title="Apodanthaceae" label="Apodanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131739" start="3174" end="3190" title="Anisophylleaceae" label="Anisophylleaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q161189" start="3192" end="3203" title="Begoniaceae" label="Begoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067620" start="3205" end="3217" title="Coriariaceae" label="Coriariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140027" start="3219" end="3234" title="Corynocarpaceae" label="Corynocarpaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8314" start="3236" end="3249" title="Cucurbitaceae" label="Cucurbitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132333" start="3251" end="3264" title="Tetramelaceae" label="Tetramelaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q867718" start="3270" end="3281" title="Datiscaceae" label="Datiscaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281786" start="3515" end="3535" title="Tetrameles nudiflora" label="Tetrameles nudiflora"/>
<link wikidata="Q132333" start="3596" end="3609" title="Tetramelaceae" label="Tetramelaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131739" start="3611" end="3627" title="Anisophylleaceae" label="Anisophylleaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140027" start="3633" end="3648" title="Corynocarpaceae" label="Corynocarpaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q135733" start="3722" end="3734" title="Dendrosicyos" label="Dendrosicyos"/>
<link wikidata="Q82859" start="3833" end="3840" title="Socotra" label="Socotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="3893" end="3899" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="3991" end="4001" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="4048" end="4057" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193372" start="4061" end="4074" title="polar climate" label="polar climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q134410" start="4175" end="4188" title="Apodanthaceae" label="Apodanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21021" start="4660" end="4672" title="Ranunculales" label="Ranunculales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21887" start="4674" end="4686" title="Malpighiales" label="Malpighiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q902665" start="4688" end="4696" title="Violales" label="Violales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826165" start="4702" end="4714" title="Rafflesiales" label="Rafflesiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q867718" start="4812" end="4823" title="Datiscaceae" label="Datiscaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281786" start="4841" end="4851" title="Tetrameles" label="Tetrameles"/>
<link wikidata="Q14932372" start="4868" end="4877" title="Octomeles" label="Octomeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="5319" end="5335" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q161189" start="5350" end="5361" title="Begoniaceae" label="Begoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8314" start="5363" end="5376" title="Cucurbitaceae" label="Cucurbitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q867718" start="5382" end="5393" title="Datiscaceae" label="Datiscaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q902665" start="5419" end="5427" title="Violales" label="Violales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140027" start="5516" end="5531" title="Corynocarpaceae" label="Corynocarpaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21870" start="5552" end="5563" title="Celastrales" label="Celastrales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131739" start="5569" end="5585" title="Anisophylleaceae" label="Anisophylleaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21895" start="5595" end="5602" title="Rosales" label="Rosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067620" start="5633" end="5645" title="Coriariaceae" label="Coriariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q145869" start="5660" end="5673" title="Ranunculaceae" label="Ranunculaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134410" start="5697" end="5710" title="Apodanthaceae" label="Apodanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157019" start="5808" end="5821" title="Rafflesiaceae" label="Rafflesiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="5860" end="5874" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="APG III (2009)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="5900" end="5923" title="molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular phylogenetics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5412" wikidata="Q747339" url="?curid=5412" title="Contra dance">
<text>Contra dance (also contradance, contra-dance and other variant spellings) is a form of folk dancing made up of long lines of couples. It has mixed origins from English country dance, Scottish country dance, and French dance styles in the 17th century. Sometimes described as New England folk dance or Appalachian folk dance, contra dances can be found around the world, but are most common in the United States (periodically held in nearly every state), Canada, and other Anglophone countries.

A contra dance event is a social dance that one can attend without a partner. The dancers form couples, and the couples form sets of two couples in long lines starting from the stage and going down the length of the dance hall. Throughout the course of a dance, couples progress up and down these lines, dancing with each other couple in the line. The dance is led by a caller who teaches the sequence of moves, called &quot;figures,&quot; in the dance before the music starts. In a single dance, a caller may include anywhere from six to twelve figures, which are repeated as couples progress up and down the lines. Each time through the dance takes 64 beats, after which the pattern is repeated. The essence of the dance is in following the pattern with your set and your line; since there is no required footwork, many people find contra dance easier to learn than other forms of social dancing.
Almost all contra dances are danced to live music. The music played includes, but is not limited to, Irish, Scottish, old-time, bluegrass and French-Canadian folk tunes. The fiddle is considered the core instrument, though other stringed instruments can be used, such as the guitar, banjo, bass and mandolin, as well as the piano, accordion, flute, clarinet and more. Techno contra dances are done to techno music, typically accompanied by DJ lighting. Music in a dance can consist of a single tune or a medley of tunes, and key changes during the course of a dance are common.

Many callers and bands perform for local contra dances, and some are hired to play for dances around the U.S. and Canada. Many dancers travel regionally (or even nationally) to contra dance weekends and week-long contra dance camps, where they can expect to find other dedicated and skilled dancers, callers, and bands.

==History==

Contra dance has European origins, and over 100 years of cultural influences from many different sources.

At the end of the 17th century, English country dances were taken up by French dance masters. The French called these dances &quot;contredanses&quot; (which roughly translated by sound &quot;countrydance&quot; to &quot;contredanse&quot;), as indicated in a 1706 dance book called &quot;Recueil de Contredances&quot;. Over time these dances returned to England and were spread and reinterpreted in the United States, and eventually the French form of the name came to be associated with the American folk dances, where they were alternatively called &quot;country dances&quot; or in some parts of New England such as New Hampshire, &quot;contradances&quot;.

Contra dances were fashionable in the United States and were considered one of the most popular social dances across class lines in the late 18th century, though these events were usually referred to as &quot;country dances&quot; until the 1780s, when the term contra dance became more common to describe these events. In the mid-19th century, group dances started to decline in popularity in favor of quadrilles, lancers, and couple dances such as the waltz and polka. 

By the late 19th century, contras were mostly confined to rural settings. This began to change with the square dance revival of the 1920s, pioneered by Henry Ford, founder of the Ford Motor Company, in part as a response in opposition to modern jazz influences in the United States. In the 1920s, Ford asked his friend Benjamin Lovett, a dance coordinator in Massachusetts, to come to Michigan to begin a dance program. Initially, Lovett could not as he was under contract at a local inn; consequently, Ford bought the property rights to the inn. Lovett and Ford initiated a dance program in Dearborn, Michigan that included several folk dances, including contras. Ford also published a book titled &quot;Good Morning: After a Sleep of Twenty-Five Years, Old-Fashioned Dancing Is Being Revived&quot; in 1926 detailing steps for some contra dances.
In the 1930s and 1940s, the popularity of jazz, swing, and big band music caused contra dance to decline in several parts of the US; the tradition carried on primarily in towns within the northeastern portions of North America, such as Ohio, the Maritime provinces of Canada, and particularly in New England. Ralph Page almost single-handedly maintained the New England tradition until it was revitalized in the 1950s and 1960s, particularly by Ted Sannella and Dudley Laufman.

The New England contra dance tradition was also maintained in Vermont by the Ed Larkin Old Time Contra Dancers, formed by Edwin Loyal Larkin in 1934. The group Larkin founded is still performing, teaching the dances, and holding monthly open house dances in Tunbridge, Vermont.

By then, early dance camps, retreats, and weekends had emerged, such as Pinewoods Camp, in Plymouth, Massachusetts, which became primarily a music and dance camp in 1933, and NEFFA, the New England Folk Festival, also in Massachusetts, which began in 1944. Pittsburgh Contra Dance celebrated its 100th anniversary in 2015. These and others continue to be popular and some offer other dances and activities besides contra dancing.
In the 1970s, Sannella and other callers introduced dance moves from English Country Dance, such as heys and gypsies, to the contra dances. New dances, such as &quot;Shadrack&#x27;s Delight&quot; by Tony Parkes, featured symmetrical dancing by all couples. (Previously, the actives and inactives – see Progression – had significantly different roles). Double progression dances, popularized by Herbie Gaudreau, added to the aerobic nature of the dances, and one caller, Gene Hubert, wrote a quadruple progression dance, &quot;Contra Madness&quot;. Becket formation was introduced, with partners starting the dance next to each other in the line instead of opposite each other. 
The Brattleboro Dawn Dance started in 1976, and continues to run semiannually.

In the early 1980s, Tod Whittemore started the first Saturday dance in the Peterborough Town House, which remains one of the more popular regional dances. The Peterborough dance influenced Bob McQuillen, who became a notable musician in New England. As musicians and callers moved to other locations, they founded contra dances in Michigan, Washington, Oregon, California, Texas, and elsewhere.

==Events==

Contra dances take place in more than 200 cities and towns across the U.S. (), as well as in other countries.

Contra dance events are typically open to all, regardless of experience, unless explicitly stated otherwise. It is common to see dancers with a wide range of ages, from children to the elderly. Most dancers are white and middle or upper-middle class. Contra dances are family-friendly, and alcohol consumption is not part of the culture. Many events offer beginner-level instructions prior to the dance. A typical evening of contra dance is three hours long, including an intermission. The event consists of a number of individual &quot;contra dances&quot;, each lasting about 15 minutes, and typically a band intermission with some waltzes, schottisches, polkas, or Swedish hambos. In some places, square dances are thrown into the mix, sometimes at the discretion of the caller. Music for the evening is typically performed by a live band, playing jigs and reels from Ireland, Scotland, Canada, or the USA. The tunes may range from traditional originating a century ago, to modern compositions including electric guitar, synth keyboard, and driving percussion – so long as the music fits the timing for contra dance patterns. Sometimes, a rock tune will be woven in.

Generally, a leader, known as a caller, will teach each individual dance just before the music for that dance begins. During this introductory walk-through, participants learn the dance by walking through the steps and formations, following the caller&#x27;s instructions. The caller gives the instructions orally, and sometimes augments them with demonstrations of steps by experienced dancers in the group. The walk-through usually proceeds in the order of the moves as they will be done with the music; in some dances, the caller may vary the order of moves during the dance, a fact that is usually explained as part of the caller&#x27;s instructions.

After the walk-through, the music begins and the dancers repeat that sequence many times before that dance ends, often 10 to 15 minutes, depending on the length of the contra lines. Calls are normally given at least the first few times through, and often for the last. At the end of each dance, the dancers thank their partners. In North America, the norm at contra dances is to change partners after each dance. In the short break between individual dances, the dancers invite each other to dance. Booking ahead by asking partner or partners ahead of time for each individual dance is common at some venues, but has been discouraged by some.
Most contra dances do not have an expected dress code. No special outfits are worn, but comfortable and loose-fitting clothing that does not restrict movement is usually recommended. Women usually wear skirts or dresses as they are cooler than wearing trousers; some men also dance in kilts or skirts. Low heeled, broken-in, soft-soled, non-marking shoes, such as dance shoes, sneakers, or sandals, are recommended and, in some places, required. As dancing can be aerobic, dancers are sometimes encouraged to bring a change of clothes.

As in any social dance, cooperation is vital to contra dancing. Since over the course of any single dance individuals interact with not just their partners but everyone else in the set, contra dancing might be considered a group activity. As will necessarily be the case when beginners are welcomed in by more practiced dancers, mistakes are made; most dancers are willing to help beginners in learning the steps. However, because the friendly, social nature of the dances can be misinterpreted or even abused, some groups have created anti-harassment policies.

==Form==

===Formations===
Contra dances are arranged in long lines of couples. A pair of lines is called a &quot;set&quot;. Sets are generally arranged so they run the length of the hall, with the &quot;top&quot; of the set being the end closest to the band and caller, and the &quot;bottom&quot; of the set being the end farthest from the caller.

Couples consist of two people, traditionally one male and one female, though same-sex pairs are increasingly common. Traditionally the dancers are referred to as the &quot;lady&quot; and &quot;gent&quot;, though various other terms have been used: some dances have used &quot;men&quot; and &quot;women&quot;, rejecting &quot;ladies&quot; and &quot;gents&quot; as elitist; others have used gender-neutral role terms such as &quot;bares&quot; and &quot;bands&quot;, &quot;jets&quot; and &quot;rubies&quot; or &quot;larks&quot; and &quot;robins&quot;. Couples interact primarily with an adjacent couple for each round of the dance. Each sub-group of two interacting couples is known to choreographers as a &quot;minor set&quot; and to dancers as a &quot;foursome&quot; or &quot;hands four&quot;. Couples in the same minor set are &quot;neighbors&quot;. Minor sets originate at the head of the set, starting with the topmost dancers as the &quot;ones&quot; (the &quot;active couple&quot; or &quot;actives&quot;); the other couple are &quot;twos&quot; (or &quot;inactives&quot;). The ones are said to be &quot;above&quot; their neighboring twos; twos are &quot;below&quot;. If there is an uneven number of couples dancing, the bottom-most couple will wait out the first time through the dance.

There are four common ways of arranging couples in the minor sets: &quot;proper&quot;, &quot;improper&quot;, &quot;Becket&quot;, and &quot;triple&quot; formations. Traditionally, most dances were in the proper formation, with all the gents in one line and all the ladies in the other. Until the end of the nineteenth century, minor sets were most commonly triples. In the twentieth century, duple-minor dances became more common. Since the mid twentieth century, there has been a shift towards improper dances, in which gents and ladies alternate on each side of the set, being the most common formation. Triple dances have also lost popularity in modern contras, while Becket formation, in which dancers stand next to their partners, facing another couple, is a modern innovation.

===Progression===
A fundamental aspect of contra dancing is that, during a single dance, each dancer has one partner, but interacts with many different people. During a single dance, the same pattern is repeated over and over (one time through lasts roughly 30 seconds), but each time, a pair of dancers will dance with new neighbors (moving on to new neighbors is called &quot;progressing&quot;). Dancers do not need to memorize these patterns in advance, since the dance leader, or caller, will generally explain the pattern for this dance before the music begins, and give people a chance to walk through the pattern so dancers can learn the moves. The walk through also helps dancers understand how the dance pattern leads them toward new people each time. Once the music starts, the caller continues to describe each move until the dancers are comfortable with that dance pattern. The dance progression is built into the contra dance pattern as continuous motion with the music, and does not interrupt the dancing. While all dancers in the room are part of the same dance pattern, half of the couples in the room are moving toward the band at any moment and half are moving away, so when everybody steps forward, they find new people to dance with. Once a couple reaches the end of the set, they switch direction, dancing back along the set the other way.

A single dance runs around ten minutes, long enough to progress at least 15–20 times. If the sets are short to medium length the caller often tries to run the dance until each couple has danced with every other couple both as a one and a two and returned to where they started. A typical room of contra dancers may include about 120 people; but this varies from 30 people in smaller towns, to over 300 people in cities like Washington DC, Los Angeles, or New York. With longer sets (more than 60 people), one dance typically does not allow dancing with every dancer in the group.

==Choreography==
Contra dance choreography specifies the dance formation, the figures, and the sequence of those figures in a dance. Contra dance figures (with a few exceptions) do not have defined footwork; within the limits of the music and the comfort of their fellow dancers, individuals move according to their own taste.

Most contra dances consist of a sequence of about 6 to 12 individual figures, prompted by the caller in time to the music as the figures are danced. As the sequence repeats, the caller may cut down his or her prompting, and eventually drop out, leaving the dancers to each other and the music.

A &quot;figure&quot; is a pattern of movement that typically takes eight &quot;counts&quot;, although figures with four or 16 counts are also common. Each dance is a collection of figures assembled to allow the dancers to progress along the set (see &quot;Progression&quot;, above).

A &quot;count&quot; (as used above) is one half of a musical measure, such as one quarter note in time or three eighth notes in time. A count may also be called a &quot;step&quot;, as contra dance is a walking form, and each count of a dance typically matches a single physical step in a figure.

Typical contra dance choreography comprises four &quot;parts&quot;, each 16 counts (8 measures) long. The parts are called A1, A2, B1 and B2. This nomenclature stems from the music: Most contra dance tunes (as written) have two parts (A and B), each 8 measures long, and each fitting one part of the dance. The A and B parts are each played twice in a row, hence, A1, A2, B1, B2. While the same music is generally played in, for example, parts A1 and A2, distinct choreography is followed in those parts. Thus, a contra dance is typically 64 counts, and goes with a 32 measure tune. Tunes of this form are called &quot;square&quot;; tunes that deviate from this form are called &quot;crooked&quot;.

Sample contra dances:

* Traditional – the actives do most of the movement
:&quot;Chorus jig&quot; (proper duple minor)
::A1 (16) Actives down the outside and back. (The inactives stand still or substitute a swing).
::A2 (16) Actives down the center, turn individually, come back, and cast off. (The inactives stand still for the first , take a step up the hall, and then participate in the cast).
::B1 (16) Actives turn contra corners. (The inactives participate in half the turns.)
::B2 (16) Actives meet in the middle for a balance and swing, end swing facing up. (The inactives stand still.)
::&quot;Note:&quot; inactives will often clog in place or otherwise participate in the dance, even though the figures do not call for them to move.
* Modern – the dance is symmetrical for actives and inactives
:&quot;Hay in the Barn&quot; by Chart Guthrie (improper duple minor)
::A1 (16) Neighbors balance and swing
::A2 (8) Ladies chain across, (8) half hey, ladies pass right shoulders to start.
::B1 (16) Partners balance and swing.
::B2 (8) Ladies chain across, (8) half hey, ladies pass right shoulders to start.

Many modern contra dances have these characteristics:
* longways for as many as will
* first couples improper, or Becket formation
* flowing choreography
* no-one stationary for more than 16 beats (e.g. first couple balance and swing, finish facing down to make lines of four)
* containing at least one swing and normally both a partner swing and a neighbor swing
* the vast majority of the moves from a set of well-known moves that the dancers know already
* composed mostly of moves that keep all dancers connected 
* generally danced to 32 bar jigs or reels played at between 110 and 130 bpm
* danced with a smooth walk with many spins and twirls

An event which consists primarily (or solely) of dances in this style is sometimes referred to as a &quot;modern urban contra dance&quot;.

==Music==

The most common contra dance repertoire is rooted in the Anglo-Celtic tradition as it developed in North America. Irish, Scottish, French Canadian, and Old-time tunes are common, and Klezmer tunes have also been used. The old-time repertoire includes very few of the jigs common in the others.

Tunes used for a contra dance are nearly always &quot;square&quot; 64-beat tunes, in which one time through the tune is each of two 16-beat parts played twice (this is notated AABB). However, any 64-beat tune will do; for instance, three 8-beat parts could be played AABB AACC, or two 8-beat parts and one 16-beat part could be played AABB CC. Tunes not 64 beats long are called &quot;crooked&quot; and are almost never used for contra dancing, although a few crooked dances have been written as novelties. Contra tunes are played at a narrow range of tempos, between 108 and 132 bpm.

Fiddles are considered to be the primary melody instrument in contra dancing, though other stringed instruments can also be used, such as the mandolin or banjo, in addition to a few wind instruments; for example, the accordion. The piano, guitar, and double bass are frequently found in the rhythm section of a contra dance band. Occasionally, percussion instruments are also used in contra dancing, such as the Irish bodhran or less frequently, the dumbek or washboard. The last few years have seen some of the bands incorporate the Quebecois practice of tapping feet on a board while playing an instrument (often the fiddle).

Until the 1970s it was traditional to play a single tune for the duration of a contra dance (about 5 to 10 minutes). Since then, contra dance musicians have typically played tunes in sets of two or three related (and sometimes contrasting) tunes, though single-tune dances are again becoming popular with some northeastern bands. In the Celtic repertoires it is common to change keys with each tune. A set might start with a tune in G, switch to a tune in D, and end with a tune in Bm. Here, D is related to G as its dominant (5th), while D and Bm share a key signature of two sharps. In the old-time tradition the musicians will either play the same tune for the whole dance, or switch to tunes in the same key. This is because the tunings of the five-string banjo are key-specific. An old-time band might play a set of tunes in D, then use the time between dances to retune for a set of tunes in A. (Fiddlers also may take this opportunity to retune; tune- or key-specific fiddle tunings are uncommon in American Anglo-Celtic traditions other than old-time.)

In the Celtic repertoires it is most common for bands to play sets of reels and sets of jigs. However, since the underlying beat structure of jigs and reels is the same (two &quot;counts&quot; per bar) bands will occasionally mix jigs and reels in a set.
Some of the most popular contra dance bands in recent years are Great Bear, Perpetual E-Motion, Buddy System, Crowfoot, Elixir, the Mean Lids, Nor&#x27;easter, Nova, Pete&#x27;s Posse, the Stringrays, the Syncopaths, and Wild Asparagus.

===Techno contras===

In recent years, younger contra dancers have begun establishing &quot;crossover contra&quot; or &quot;techno contra&quot; – contra dancing to techno, hip-hop, and other modern forms of music. While challenging for DJs and callers, the fusion of contra patterns with moves from hip-hop, tango, and other forms of dance has made this form of contra dance a rising trend since 2008. Techno differs from other contra dancing in that it is usually done to recorded music, although there are some bands that play live for techno dances. Techno has become especially prevalent in Asheville, North Carolina, but regular techno contra dance series are spreading up the East Coast to locales such as Charlottesville, Virginia; Washington, D.C.; Amherst, Massachusetts; Greenfield, Massachusetts; and various North Carolina dance communities, with one-time or annual events cropping up in locations farther west, including California, Portland, Oregon, and Washington state. They also sometimes appear as late night events during contra dance weekends. In response to the demand for techno contra, a number of contra dance callers have developed repertoires of recorded songs to play that go well with particular contra dances; these callers are known as DJs. A kind of techno/traditional contra fusion has arisen, with at least one band, Buddy System, playing live music melded with synth sounds for techno contra dances.

==See also==
* Ceili dance
* Country Dance and Song Society
* Dutch crossing
* International folk dance
* Quadrille

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* See chapter VI, &quot;Frolics for Fun: Dances, Weddings and Dinner Parties, pages 109 – 124.
* 
* (Reprint: first published in 1956 by American Squares as a part of the &quot;American Squares Dance Series&quot;)
* 
* 
* 
*
* See chapter entitled &quot;Country Dancing,&quot; Pages 57 – 120. (The first edition was published in 1939.)
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

; Contra dance associations
:* Country Dance and Song Society (CDSS) preserves a variety of Anglo-American folk traditions in North America, including folk music, folk song, English country dance, contra dance and morris dance.
:* Anglo-American Dance Service Based in Belgium, promoting contra dance and English dance in Western Europe.

; Descriptions &amp; definitions
:* Gary Shapiro&#x27;s What Is Contra Dance?
:* Hamilton Contra Dances A Contra Dance Primer 
:* Hamilton Contra Dances Contraculture: An introduction to contradancing 
:* Sharon Barrett Kennedy&#x27;s &quot;Now, What in the World is Contra Dancing?&quot;

; Different traditions and cultures in contra dance
:* Colin Hume&#x27;s Advice to Americans in England

; Research resources
:* University of New Hampshire Special Collections: New Hampshire Library of Traditional Music and Dance 

; Finding contra dances
:* CDSS Dance Map – interactive, crowd sourced map of contra and folk dances around the world
:* Contra Dance Links – comprehensive, up-to-date lists of local dances, weekend dances, musicians, callers, etc.
:* The Dance Gypsy – locations of contra dances, and many other folk dances, around the world
:* Try Contra – Find contra dances using ZIP Code search.
:* National Contra Grid – Look up dances by day-of-week &amp; City.
:* ContraDance.org – Description, Links, videos, and local schedule.

:; In the United Kingdom
:* UK Contra Clubs
:* Are You Dancing – calendar of social dance events in the UK, including contras
:* English Folk Dance and Song Society dance calendar – calendar of folk dance events in the UK, including contras

:; In France
:* Paris Contra Dance

; Video
:* Contra dance in Oswego, New York, with music by the Great Bear Trio. 2013.
:* Two American country dance films on DVD: &quot;Country Corners&quot; (1976), and &quot;Full of Life A-Dancin&#x27;&quot; (1978).
:* Contra dance in Tacoma, Washington, with music by Crowfoot. 2009.
:* Welcome to the Contra Dance – dancers discuss their experiences contra dancing, set over photographs of contras
:* The New Contra Dance Commercial (2 minute look at contra in a few dance halls, see playlist)
:* Why We Contra Dance (dancers discuss why they enjoy contra dance, with video of dancing)
:* Dancing Community (dancers from Louisville talk about their contra dancing experiences, with video of dancing)
:* Contra Dancing and New Dancers (new contra dancers in Atlanta, Georgia, discuss their experience)
:* A History of Contra (documentary of contra dancing, spanning 150+ years of dance culture)
:* Contra dance in Chattanooga, Tennessee with music by Buddy System and calling by Seth Tepfer, 2019
:* The Contra Dance (Doug Plummer&#x27;s 3 minute slide + video set, with Ed Howe&#x27;s fiddle music from May 2019)
:* Contra dance in Glen Echo, Maryland with music by Elixir and calling by Nils Fredland, Contrastock 4, 2014.
:* Contra dance in Pinellas, Florida with music by ContraForce and calling by Charlotte Crittenden, 2017)
:* Example Contra Dance Lesson (caller Cis Hinkle explains the basics, with contra vocabulary)
:* Contra Nils Walkthrough and Dance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q747339" start="0" end="12" title="Contra dance" label="Contra dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q747339" start="19" end="30" title="Contra dance" label="contradance"/>
<link wikidata="Q747339" start="32" end="44" title="Contra dance" label="contra-dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q201022" start="87" end="99" title="folk dance" label="folk dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="160" end="181" title="English country dance" label="English country dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430164" start="183" end="205" title="Scottish country dance" label="Scottish country dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="275" end="286" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="301" end="311" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="472" end="482" title="English-speaking world" label="Anglophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209069" start="521" end="533" title="social dance" label="social dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165615" start="585" end="589" title="Contra dance form" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027244" start="865" end="871" title="caller (dance)" label="caller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165614" start="888" end="905" title="Contra dance choreography" label="sequence of moves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="1495" end="1500" title="Folk music of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018487" start="1502" end="1510" title="Scottish folk music" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="1512" end="1520" title="Old-time music" label="old-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="1522" end="1531" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501660" start="1536" end="1551" title="French-Canadian music" label="French-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="1568" end="1574" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="1669" end="1675" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="1677" end="1682" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="1684" end="1688" title="Double bass" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="1693" end="1701" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1718" end="1723" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="1725" end="1734" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="1736" end="1741" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="1743" end="1751" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="1795" end="1801" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205507" start="1834" end="1845" title="DJ lighting" label="DJ lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q750240" start="1919" end="1929" title="key change" label="key change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="2454" end="2467" title="country dance" label="country dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="3474" end="3484" title="quadrilles" label="quadrilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529665" start="3486" end="3493" title="Les Lanciers" label="lancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="3525" end="3530" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="3535" end="3540" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="3696" end="3706" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="3723" end="3741" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="3789" end="3793" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3863" end="3878" title="Benjamin Lovett" label="Benjamin Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q430464" start="4136" end="4154" title="Dearborn, Michigan" label="Dearborn, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="4440" end="4445" title="swing music" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="4451" end="4459" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="4628" end="4632" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q731613" start="4638" end="4656" title="Maritime provinces" label="Maritime provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="4688" end="4699" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q108846562" start="4701" end="4711" title="Ralph Page" label="Ralph Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693696" start="4837" end="4849" title="Ted Sannella" label="Ted Sannella"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958810" start="4854" end="4868" title="Dudley Laufman" label="Dudley Laufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348930" start="5129" end="5147" title="Tunbridge, Vermont" label="Tunbridge, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195603" start="5222" end="5236" title="Pinewoods Dance Camp" label="Pinewoods Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q326295" start="5241" end="5264" title="Plymouth, Massachusetts" label="Plymouth, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082971" start="5336" end="5361" title="New England Folk Festival" label="New England Folk Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="5649" end="5670" title="English Country Dance" label="English Country Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165614" start="5680" end="5696" title="contra dance choreography" label="heys and gypsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q125862916" start="5779" end="5790" title="Tony Parkes (caller)" label="Tony Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5882" end="5893" title="#Progression" label="Progression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6050" end="6061" title="Gene Hubert" label="Gene Hubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q899813" start="6262" end="6273" title="Brattleboro, Vermont" label="Brattleboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021395" start="6413" end="6425" title="Peterborough, New Hampshire" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019751" start="6527" end="6540" title="Bob McQuillen" label="Bob McQuillen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433004" start="7126" end="7141" title="family-friendly" label="family-friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="7147" end="7154" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="7490" end="7495" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q329385" start="7499" end="7510" title="schottische" label="schottische"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="7513" end="7518" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430717" start="7532" end="7537" title="hambo" label="hambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156994" start="7556" end="7568" title="square dance" label="square dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027244" start="7630" end="7636" title="caller (dance)" label="caller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079270" start="7707" end="7710" title="jig" label="jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q118120" start="7716" end="7721" title="reel (dance)" label="reels"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="7791" end="7802" title="traditional music" label="traditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="14822" end="14834" title="choreography" label="choreography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027244" start="15214" end="15220" title="Caller (dance)" label="caller"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="15236" end="15241" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="15752" end="15767" title="bar (music)" label="musical measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009438" start="16680" end="16687" title="crooked tune" label="crooked"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="18728" end="18733" title="Folk music of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048469" start="18735" end="18743" title="Scottish music" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501660" start="18745" end="18760" title="French-Canadian music" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="18766" end="18774" title="Old-time music" label="Old-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q212944" start="18797" end="18804" title="Klezmer" label="Klezmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="19461" end="19466" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="19637" end="19645" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="19649" end="19654" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="19712" end="19721" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="19727" end="19732" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="19734" end="19740" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="19746" end="19757" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q244976" start="19913" end="19920" title="bodhran" label="bodhran"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219842" start="19945" end="19951" title="dumbek" label="dumbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q21607265" start="19955" end="19964" title="washboard (musical instrument)" label="washboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393118" start="20051" end="20063" title="Podorythmie" label="tapping feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744016" start="21505" end="21515" title="Great Bear (band)" label="Great Bear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21537" end="21549" title="Buddy System" label="Buddy System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21551" end="21559" title="Crowfoot ( contra dance band)" label="Crowfoot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21573" end="21582" title="Mean Lids" label="Mean Lids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21584" end="21599" title="Nor&amp;#x27;easter (band)" label="Nor&amp;#x27;easter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21601" end="21605" title="Nova (American band)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21607" end="21624" title="Pete&amp;#x27;s Posse" label="Pete&amp;#x27;s Posse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21630" end="21640" title="Stringrays" label="Stringrays"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21646" end="21656" title="Syncopaths" label="Syncopaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740091" start="21662" end="21676" title="Wild Asparagus" label="Wild Asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="22274" end="22299" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="22391" end="22416" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="22436" end="22458" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="22460" end="22485" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="22625" end="22641" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="23074" end="23079" title="synthesizer" label="synth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150334" start="23129" end="23140" title="Ceili dance" label="Ceili dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279481" start="23143" end="23173" title="Country Dance and Song Society" label="Country Dance and Song Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q96415744" start="23176" end="23190" title="Yankee Dutch crossing" label="Dutch crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054681" start="23193" end="23217" title="International folk dance" label="International folk dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="23220" end="23229" title="Quadrille" label="Quadrille"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5413" wikidata="Q1437510" url="?curid=5413" title="Coin collecting">
<text>Coin collecting is the collecting of coins or other forms of minted legal tender. Coins of interest to collectors include beautiful, rare, and historically significant pieces. Collectors may be interested, for example, in complete sets of a particular design or denomination, coins that were in circulation for only a brief time, or coins with errors. Coin collecting can be differentiated from numismatics, in that the latter is the systematic study of currency as a whole, though the two disciplines are closely interlinked.

Many factors determine a coin&#x27;s value including grade, rarity, and popularity. Commercial organizations offer grading services and will grade, authenticate, attribute, and encapsulate most coins.

==History==
People have hoarded coins for their bullion value for as long as coins have been minted. However, the collection of coins for their artistic value was a later development. Evidence from the archaeological and historical record of Ancient Rome and medieval Mesopotamia indicates that coins were collected and catalogued by scholars and state treasuries. It also seems probable that individual citizens collected old, exotic or commemorative coins as an affordable, portable form of art. According to Suetonius in his &quot;De vita Caesarum&quot; (&quot;The Lives of the Twelve Caesars&quot;), written in the first century AD, the emperor Augustus sometimes presented old and exotic coins to friends and courtiers during festivals and other special occasions. While the literary sources are scarce, it&#x27;s evident that collecting of ancient coins persisted in the Western World during the Middle Ages among rulers and high nobility.

Contemporary coin collecting and appreciation began around the fourteenth century. During the Renaissance, it became a fad among some members of the privileged classes, especially kings and queens. The Italian scholar and poet Petrarch is credited with being the pursuit&#x27;s first and most famous aficionado. Following his lead, many European kings, princes, and other nobility kept collections of ancient coins. Some notable collectors were Pope Boniface VIII, Emperor Maximilian I of the Holy Roman Empire, Louis XIV of France, Ferdinand I of Spain and Holy Roman Emperor, Henry IV of France and Elector Joachim II of Brandenburg, who started the Berlin Coin Cabinet (German: &quot;Münzkabinett Berlin&quot;). Perhaps because only the very wealthy could afford the pursuit, in Renaissance times coin collecting became known as the &quot;Hobby of Kings&quot;.

During the 17th and 18th centuries coin collecting remained a pursuit of the well-to-do. But rational, Enlightenment thinking led to a more systematic approach to accumulation and study. Numismatics as an academic discipline emerged in these centuries at the same time as a growing middle class, eager to prove their wealth and sophistication, began to collect coins. During the 19th and 20th centuries, coin collecting increased further in popularity. The market for coins expanded to include not only antique coins, but foreign or otherwise exotic currency. Coin shows, trade associations, and regulatory bodies emerged during these decades. The first international convention for coin collectors was held 15–18 August 1962, in Detroit, Michigan, and was sponsored by the American Numismatic Association and the Royal Canadian Numismatic Association. Attendance was estimated at 40,000. As one of the oldest and most popular world pastimes, coin collecting is now often referred to as the &quot;King of Hobbies&quot;.

== Motivations ==
The motivations for collecting vary. Possibly the most common type of collectors are the hobbyists, who amass a collection primarily for the pleasure of it without the intention of making a profit.

Another frequent reason for purchasing coins is as an investment. As with stamps, precious metals, or other commodities, coin prices vary based on supply and demand. Prices drop for coins that are not in long-term demand, and increase along with a coin&#x27;s perceived or intrinsic value. Investors buy with the expectation that the value of their purchase will increase over the long term. As with all types of investment, the principle of &quot;caveat emptor&quot; applies, and study is recommended before buying. Likewise, as with most collectibles, a coin collection does not produce income until it is sold, and may even incur costs (for example, the cost of safe deposit box storage) in the interim.
Some people collect coins for patriotic reasons and mints from various countries create coins specifically for patriotic collectors. One example of a patriotic coin was minted in 1813 by the United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata. One of the first pieces of legislation the new country enacted (after the revolution that freed it from Spanish rule) was to mint coins to replace the Spanish currency that had been in use. Another example is the U.S. 2022 Purple Heart Commemorative Coin Program.

==Collector types==
Some coin collectors are generalists and accumulate examples from a broad variety of historical or geographically significant coins, but most collectors focus on a narrower, specialist interest. For example, some collectors focus on coins based on a common theme, such as coins from a country (often the collector&#x27;s own), a coin each year from a series, or coins with a common mint mark.

There are also completists who seek an example of every type of coin within a certain category. One of the most famous of this type of collector is Louis E. Eliasberg, the only collector thus far to assemble a complete set of known coins of the United States.
Foreign coin collecting is another type of collection that numismatics enjoy collecting.

Coin hoarders are similar to investors in the sense that they accumulate coins for potential long-term profit. However, they typically do not take into account aesthetic considerations. This is most common with coins whose metal value exceeds their spending value.
Speculators, be they amateurs or commercial buyers, may purchase coins in bulk or in small batches, and often act with the expectation of delayed profit. They may wish to take advantage of a spike in demand for a particular coin (for example, during the annual release of Canadian numismatic collectibles from the Royal Canadian Mint). The speculator might hope to buy the coin in large lots and sell at a profit within weeks or months. Speculators may also buy common circulation coins for their intrinsic metal value. Coins without collectible value may be melted down or distributed as bullion for commercial purposes. Typically they purchase coins that are composed of rare or precious metals, or coins that have a high purity of a specific metal.

A final type of collector is the inheritor, an accidental collector who acquires coins from another person as part of an inheritance. The inheritor type may not necessarily have an interest in or know anything about numismatics at the time of the acquisition.

== Grade and value ==


In coin collecting, the condition of a coin (its grade) is key to its value; a high-quality example with minimal wear is often worth many times more than a poor example. Collectors have created systems to describe the overall condition of coins. Any damage, such as wear or cleaning, can substantially decrease a coin&#x27;s value.

By the mid 20th century, with the growing market for rare coins, the American Numismatic Association helps identify most coins in North America, numbering coins from 1 (poor) to 70 (mint state), and setting aside a separate category for proof coinage. This system is often shunned by coin experts in Europe and elsewhere, who prefer to use adjectival grades. Nevertheless, most grading systems use similar terminology, and values and remain mutually intelligible.

==Certification services==
Third-party grading (TPG), aka &quot;coin certification services&quot;, emerged in the 1980s with the goals of standardizing grading, exposing alterations, and eliminating counterfeits. For tiered fees, certification services grade, authenticate, attribute, and encapsulate coins in clear plastic holders.

Coin certification has greatly reduced the number of counterfeits and grossly over graded coins, and improved buyer confidence. Certification services can sometimes be controversial because grading is subjective; coins may be graded differently by different services or even upon resubmission to the same service. The numeric grade alone does not represent all of a coin&#x27;s characteristics, such as toning, strike, brightness, color, luster, and attractiveness. Due to potentially large differences in value over slight differences in a coin&#x27;s condition, some submitters will repeatedly resubmit a coin to a grading service in the hope of receiving a higher grade. Because fees are charged for certification, submitters must funnel money away from purchasing additional coins.

== Clubs ==

Coin collector clubs offer a variety of benefits to members. They usually serve as a source of information and unification of people interested in coins. Collector clubs are popular both offline and online.

==See also==
* Challenge coin
* Coin
* Coin catalog
* Coin grading
* Coin slab
* Commemorative coin
* Exonumia
* Numismatics
* Regular issue coinage
* Seigniorage
* List of most expensive coins

===Examples===
* Byron Reed Collection
* Collection at Ibn Sina Academy



==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1437510" start="0" end="15" title="Coin collecting" label="Coin collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q208165" start="23" end="33" title="collecting" label="collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="37" end="41" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="61" end="65" title="Mint (facility)" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643989" start="68" end="80" title="legal tender" label="legal tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q943398" start="344" end="350" title="mint error" label="errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q631286" start="395" end="406" title="numismatics" label="numismatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="454" end="462" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q581730" start="643" end="659" title="coin grading" label="grading services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343347" start="754" end="761" title="hoarding" label="hoarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q557709" start="778" end="785" title="bullion" label="bullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="874" end="882" title="artistic" label="artistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686349" start="932" end="946" title="archaeological record" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="951" end="968" title="historical record" label="historical record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="972" end="984" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="998" end="1009" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="1241" end="1250" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="1363" end="1365" title="Anno Domini" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1379" end="1387" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1771" end="1782" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427002" start="1796" end="1799" title="fad" label="fad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="1904" end="1912" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="2122" end="2140" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="2142" end="2162" title="Emperor Maximilian I" label="Emperor Maximilian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2170" end="2187" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="2189" end="2198" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="2255" end="2273" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q506527" start="2278" end="2311" title="Joachim II Hector, Elector of Brandenburg" label="Elector Joachim II of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157825" start="2329" end="2348" title="Berlin Coin Cabinet" label="Berlin Coin Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2645" end="2658" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="2824" end="2836" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577544" start="3102" end="3112" title="Coin shows in the United States" label="Coin shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="3272" end="3279" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744601" start="3316" end="3347" title="American Numismatic Association" label="American Numismatic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373910" start="3356" end="3393" title="Royal Canadian Numismatic Association" label="Royal Canadian Numismatic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182965" start="3854" end="3860" title="Philatelic investment" label="stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="3862" end="3876" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="3927" end="3944" title="supply and demand" label="supply and demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q868257" start="4063" end="4068" title="value (economics)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q46119" start="4228" end="4241" title="caveat emptor" label="caveat emptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120101" start="4445" end="4461" title="safe deposit box" label="safe deposit box"/>
<link wikidata="Q738144" start="4678" end="4717" title="United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata" label="United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q616732" start="5386" end="5395" title="mint mark" label="mint mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687084" start="5546" end="5564" title="Louis E. Eliasberg" label="Louis E. Eliasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253199" start="5630" end="5656" title="United States coinage" label="coins of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="5666" end="5670" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q557709" start="5971" end="5982" title="bullion" label="metal value"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072260" start="6285" end="6317" title="Royal Canadian Mint Numismatic Coins (2000s)" label="Canadian numismatic collectibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647539" start="6327" end="6346" title="Royal Canadian Mint" label="Royal Canadian Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q200303" start="6887" end="6898" title="inheritance" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q631286" start="6982" end="6993" title="numismatics" label="numismatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q581730" start="7100" end="7105" title="Coin grading" label="grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q581730" start="7245" end="7252" title="coin grading" label="systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q48779726" start="7325" end="7333" title="Cleaning (coinage)" label="cleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744601" start="7453" end="7484" title="American Numismatic Association" label="American Numismatic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q388013" start="7621" end="7634" title="proof coinage" label="proof coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784735" start="7876" end="7895" title="Third-party grading" label="Third-party grading"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693352" start="8138" end="8149" title="Coin capsule" label="encapsulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q854851" start="8236" end="8248" title="counterfeit money" label="counterfeits"/>
<link wikidata="Q819874" start="9206" end="9220" title="Challenge coin" label="Challenge coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="9223" end="9227" title="Coin" label="Coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141544" start="9230" end="9242" title="Coin catalog" label="Coin catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q581730" start="9245" end="9257" title="Coin grading" label="Coin grading"/>
<link wikidata="Q121190012" start="9260" end="9269" title="Coin slab" label="Coin slab"/>
<link wikidata="Q855973" start="9272" end="9290" title="Commemorative coin" label="Commemorative coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q567792" start="9293" end="9301" title="Exonumia" label="Exonumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q631286" start="9304" end="9315" title="Numismatics" label="Numismatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478737" start="9318" end="9339" title="Regular issue coinage" label="Regular issue coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q478641" start="9342" end="9353" title="Seigniorage" label="Seigniorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629073" start="9356" end="9384" title="List of most expensive coins" label="List of most expensive coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004457" start="9403" end="9424" title="Byron Reed Collection" label="Byron Reed Collection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9427" end="9457" title="Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences#Fazlur Rahman Museum on Orientalism, Art and Culture" label="Collection at Ibn Sina Academy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5415" wikidata="Q3890237" url="?curid=5415" title="Crokinole">
<text>Crokinole ( ) is a disk-flicking dexterity board game, possibly of Canadian origin, similar to the games of pitchnut, carrom, and pichenotte, with elements of shuffleboard and curling reduced to table-top size. Players take turns shooting discs across the circular playing surface, trying to land their discs in the higher-scoring regions of the board, particularly the recessed centre hole of 20 points, while also attempting to knock opposing discs off the board, and into the &#x27;ditch&#x27;. In crokinole, the shooting is generally towards the centre of the board, unlike carroms and pitchnut, where the shooting is towards the four outer corner pockets, as in pool. Crokinole is also played using cue sticks, and there is a special category for cue stick participants at the World Crokinole Championships in Tavistock, Ontario, Canada.

==Equipment==
Board dimensions vary with a playing surface typically of polished wood or laminate approximately in diameter. The arrangement is 3 concentric rings worth 5, 10, and 15 points as you move in from the outside. There is a shallow 20-point hole at the centre. The inner 15-point ring is guarded with 8 small bumpers or posts. The outer ring of the board is divided into four quadrants. The outer edge of the board is raised slightly to keep errant shots from flying out, with a gutter between the playing surface and the edge to collect discarded pieces. Crokinole boards are typically octagonal or round in shape. The wooden discs are roughly checker-sized, slightly smaller in diameter than the board&#x27;s central hole, and typically have one side slightly concave and one side slightly convex, mainly due to the inherent features of wood, more than a planned design. Alternatively, the game may be played with ring-shaped pieces with a central hole.

===Powder===
The use of any lubricating powder in crokinole is controversial, with some purists reviling the practice.

Powder is sometimes used to ensure pieces slide smoothly on the surface. Boric acid was popular for a long time, but is now considered toxic and has been replaced with safer substitutes. The EU has classified Boric acid as a &quot;Serious Health Hazard&quot;. In the UK, many players use a version of anti-set-off spray powder, from the printing industry, which has specific electrostatic properties, with particles of 50-micrometre diameter (). The powder is made of pure food-grade plant/vegetable starch.

The World Crokinole Championships in Tavistock, Ontario, Canada, states: &quot;The WCC waxes boards, as required, with paste wax. On tournament day powdered shuffleboard wax (CAPO fast speed, yellow and white container) is placed in the ditch. Only tournament organizers will apply quality granular shuffleboard wax. Wax will be placed in the ditch area so that players can rub their discs in the wax prior to shooting, if they desire. Contestants are not allowed to apply lubricants of any type to the board. Absolutely no other lubricant will be allowed&quot;.

==Gameplay==
Crokinole is most commonly played by two players, or by four players in teams of two, with partners sitting across the board from each other. Players take turns flicking their discs from the outer edge of their quadrant of the board onto the playfield. Shooting is usually done by flicking the disc with a finger, though sometimes small cue sticks may be used. If there are any enemy discs on the board, a player must make contact, directly or indirectly, with an enemy disc during the shot. If unsuccessful, the shot disc is &quot;fouled&quot; and removed from the board, along with any of the player&#x27;s other discs that were moved during the shot.

When there are no enemy discs on the board, many (but not all) rules also state that a player must shoot for the centre of the board, and a shot disc must finish either completely inside the 15-point guarded ring line, or (depending on the specifics of the rules) be inside or touching this line. This is often called the &quot;no hiding&quot; rule, since it prevents players from placing their first shots where their opponent must traverse completely through the guarded centre ring to hit them and avoid fouling. When playing without this rule, a player may generally make any shot desired, and as long as a disc remains completely inside the outer line of the playfield, it remains on the board. During any shot, any disc that falls completely into the recessed central &quot;20&quot; hole (a.k.a. the &quot;Toad&quot; or &quot;Dukie&quot;) is removed from play, and counts as twenty points for the owner of the disc at the end of the round, assuming the shot is valid.

Scoring occurs after all pieces (generally 12 per player or team) have been played, and is differential: i.e., the player or team with higher score is awarded the difference between the higher and lower scores for the round, thus only one team or player each round gains points. Play continues until a predetermined winning score is reached.

==History of the game==

After 30 years of research, Wayne Kelly published his assessment of the first origins of crokinole, in &quot;The Crokinole Book&quot;, Third Edition, page 28, which leaves the door open to future research and discovery of the origins of the game of crokinole: &quot;The earliest American crokinole board and reference to the game is M. B. Ross&#x27;s patented New York board of 1880. The earliest Canadian reference is 1867 (&quot;Sports and Games in Canadian Life: 1700 to the Present&quot; by Howell and Howell, Toronto, MacMillan Company of Canada, 1969, p.61), and the oldest piece dated at 1875 by Ekhardt Wettlaufer. Could Ekhardt Wettlaufer have visited friends in New York state, noticed an unusual and entertaining parlour game being played, and upon arrival at home, made an imitation as a gift for his son? After all, he was a talented, and no doubt resourceful, painter and woodworker. Or was it the other way around? Did Mr. M. B. Ross travel to Ontario, take note of a quaint piece of rural folk art, and upon return to New York, put his American entrepreneurial skills to work - complete with patent name - on his new crokinole board? As the trail is more than 100 years old and no other authoritative source can be found, it appears, at the moment, that Eckhardt Wettlaufer or M. B. Ross are as close as we can get to answering the question WHO (made the first crokinole board.)&quot;

The earliest known crokinole board was made by craftsman Eckhardt Wettlaufer in 1876 in Perth County, Ontario, Canada. It is said Wettlaufer crafted the board as a fifth birthday present for his son Adam, which is now part of the collection at the Joseph Schneider Haus, a national historic site in Kitchener, Ontario, with a focus on Germanic folk art. Several other home-made boards dating from southwestern Ontario in the 1870s have been discovered since the 1990s. A board game similar to crokinole was patented on 20 April 1880 by Joshua K. Ingalls (US Patent No. 226,615).

Crokinole is often believed to be of Mennonite or Amish origins, but there is no factual data to support such a claim. The reason for this misconception may be due to its popularity in Mennonite and Amish groups. The game was viewed as a rather innocuous pastime – unlike the perception that diversions such as card playing or dancing were considered &quot;works of the Devil&quot; as held by many 19th-century Protestant groups.
The oldest roots of crokinole, from the 1860s, suggest the British and South Asian games, such as carrom, are the most likely antecedents of what became crokinole.

In 2006, a documentary film called &quot;Crokinole&quot; was released. The world premiere occurred at the Princess Cinema in Waterloo, Ontario, in early 2006. The movie follows some of the competitors of the 2004 World Crokinole Championship as they prepare for the event.

==Origins of the name==
The name &quot;crokinole&quot; derives from , a French word today designating:
#in France, a kind of cookie (or biscuit in British English), similar to a &quot;biscotto&quot;;
#in French Canada, a pastry somewhat similar to a doughnut (except for the shape).
It also used to designate the action of flicking with the finger (Molière, &quot;Le malade imaginaire&quot;; or Voltaire, &quot;Lettre à Frédéric II Roi de Prusse&quot;; etc.), and this seems the most likely origin of the name of the game. was also a synonym of , a word that gave its name to the different but related games of pichenotte and pitchnut.

From The Crokinole Book 3rd Edition by Wayne S. Kelly &quot;Is it possible that the English word &#x27;crokinole&#x27; is simply an etymological offspring of the French word &#x27;&#x27;? It would appear so for the following reasons. Going back to the entry for Crokinole in Webster&#x27;s Third New International Dictionary, within the etymological brackets, it says: [French , ]. This is a major clue. The word fillip, according to Webster&#x27;s, has two definitions: &quot;1. a blow or gesture made by the sudden forcible release of a finger curled up against the thumb; a short sharp blow. 2. to strike by holding the nail of a finger curled up against the ball of the thumb and then suddenly releasing it from that position&quot;. So it seems evident, then, that our game of crokinole derives its name from the verb form (of croquignole) defining the principal action in the game, that of flicking or &#x27;filliping&#x27; a playing piece across the board&quot;.

The word Crokinole is generally acknowledged to have been derived from the French Canadian word &quot;&quot;, a word with several meanings, such as fillip, snap, biscuit, bun and a woman&#x27;s wavy hairstyle popular at the turn of the century. The US state of New York shares border crossings with both of the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Quebec, all three of which are popular &quot;hotbeds&quot; of Crokinole playing.

Crokinole is called (&#x27;flick-board&#x27;) (and occasionally &quot;knipsdesh&quot; (flick-table)) in the Plautdietsch spoken by Russian Mennonites.

==World Crokinole Championship==

The World Crokinole Championship (WCC) tournament has been held annually since 1999 on the first Saturday of June in Tavistock, Ontario. Tavistock was chosen as the host city because it was the home of Eckhardt Wettlaufer, the maker of the earliest known board. The tournament has seen registration from every Canadian province, several American states, Germany, Australia, Spain and the UK.

The WCC singles competition begins with a qualifying round in which competitors play 10 matches against randomly assigned opponents. The qualifying round is played in a large randomly determined competition. At the end of the opening round, the top 16 competitors move on to the playoffs. The top four in the playoffs advance to a final round robin to play each other, and the top two compete in the finals. The WCC doubles competition begins with a qualifying round of 8 matches against randomly assigned opponents with the top six teams advancing to a playoff round robin to determine the champions.

The WCC has multiple divisions, including a singles finger-shooting category for competitive players (adult singles), novices (recreational), and younger players (intermediate, 11–14 yrs; junior, 6–10 yrs), as well as a division for cue-shooters (cues singles). The WCC also awards a prize for the top 20-hole shooter in the qualifying round of competitive singles, recreational singles, cues singles, intermediate singles, and in the junior singles. The tournament also holds doubles divisions for competitive fingers-shooting (competitive doubles), novices (recreational doubles), younger players (youth doubles, 6–16yrs), and cues-shooting (cues doubles).

The official board builder of the World Crokinole Championships is Jeremy Tracey.

==National Crokinole Association==
The National Crokinole Association (NCA) is an association that supports existing, and the development of new, crokinole clubs and tournaments. While the majority of NCA events are based in Ontario, Canada, the NCA has held sanctioned events in the Canadian provinces of PEI and BC, as well as in New York State.

The collection of NCA tournaments is referred to as the NCA Tour. Each NCA Tour season begins at the Tavistock World Crokinole Championships in June, and concludes at the Ontario Singles Crokinole Championship in May of the following years. The results of each tournament award points for each player, as they compete for their season-ending ranking classification.

==See also==

*Chapayev
*Novuss
*Pichenotte
*Table shuffleboard

==References==
==External links==

* Crokinole FAQ by Wayne and Caleb Kelly 
* World Crokinole Championships in Tavistock, Ontario
* National Crokinole Association
* The Crokinole Post
* Crokinole Skills Competition Videos
* Our Canada Magazine Article about Crokinole
*Crokinole Friends of the Pichenotte Guys
*Crokinole Canada by Ted Fuller
*Crokinole Game Boards by Jeremy Tracey
*The Crokinole Depot by The Beierling Brothers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3890237" start="0" end="9" title="Crokinole" label="Crokinole"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19" end="32" title=":Category:Disk-flicking games" label="disk-flicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="43" end="53" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198897" start="108" end="116" title="pitchnut" label="pitchnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q900489" start="118" end="124" title="carrom" label="carrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382485" start="130" end="140" title="pichenotte" label="pichenotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975513" start="159" end="171" title="shuffleboard" label="shuffleboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="176" end="183" title="curling" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q900489" start="578" end="584" title="carrom" label="carrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198897" start="590" end="598" title="pitchnut" label="pitchnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11020" start="667" end="671" title="Pool (cue sports)" label="pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q593707" start="704" end="713" title="cue stick" label="cue stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329738" start="815" end="824" title="East Zorra-Tavistock" label="Tavistock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="1499" end="1506" title="Draughts" label="checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774457" start="2232" end="2257" title="anti-set-off spray powder" label="anti-set-off spray powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="2306" end="2319" title="electrostatic" label="electrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q593707" start="3354" end="3363" title="cue stick" label="cue stick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6474" end="6493" title="Eckhardt Wettlaufer" label="Eckhardt Wettlaufer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177690" start="6505" end="6526" title="Perth County, Ontario" label="Perth County, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042976" start="6665" end="6681" title="Joseph Schneider" label="Joseph Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="7034" end="7043" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="7047" end="7052" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q142714" start="7308" end="7320" title="card playing" label="card playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q900489" start="7525" end="7531" title="carrom" label="carrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q639408" start="7717" end="7734" title="Waterloo, Ontario" label="Waterloo, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266" start="7991" end="7997" title="cookie" label="cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="8002" end="8009" title="biscuit" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q769635" start="8050" end="8058" title="biscotti" label="biscotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="8070" end="8083" title="Canadian French" label="French Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q192783" start="8116" end="8124" title="doughnut" label="doughnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="8215" end="8222" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="8261" end="8269" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382485" start="8477" end="8487" title="pichenotte" label="pichenotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198897" start="8492" end="8500" title="pitchnut" label="pitchnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751432" start="10008" end="10020" title="Plautdietsch" label="Plautdietsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q571942" start="10031" end="10049" title="Russian Mennonites" label="Russian Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329738" start="10203" end="10221" title="Tavistock, Ontario" label="Tavistock, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q350935" start="12556" end="12564" title="Chapayev (game)" label="Chapayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q178505" start="12566" end="12572" title="Novuss" label="Novuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382485" start="12574" end="12584" title="Pichenotte" label="Pichenotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678863" start="12586" end="12604" title="Table shuffleboard" label="Table shuffleboard"/>
</links>
</doc>
