<doc id="4862" wikidata="Q80338" url="?curid=4862" title="Bengal">
<text>Bengal ( ) is a historical geographical, ethnolinguistic and cultural term referring to a region in the eastern part of the Indian subcontinent at the apex of the Bay of Bengal. The region of Bengal proper is divided between the modern-day sovereign nation of Bangladesh and the Indian states of West Bengal, and Karimganj district of Assam.

The ancient Vanga Kingdom is widely regarded as the namesake of the Bengal region. The Bengali calendar dates back to the reign of Shashanka in the 7th century CE. The Pala Empire was founded in Bengal during the 8th century. The Sena dynasty and Deva dynasty ruled between the 11th and 13th centuries. By the 14th century, Bengal was absorbed by Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent. An independent Bengal Sultanate was formed and became the eastern frontier of the Islamic world. During this period, Bengal&#x27;s rule and influence spread to Assam, Arakan, Tripura, Bihar, and Odisha (formerly- Orissa). Bengal Subah later emerged as a prosperous part of the Mughal Empire.

The last independent Nawab of Bengal was defeated in 1757 at the Battle of Plassey by the East India Company. The company&#x27;s Bengal Presidency grew into the largest administrative unit of British India with Calcutta as the capital of both Bengal and India until 1911. As a result of the first partition of Bengal, a short-lived province called Eastern Bengal and Assam existed between 1905 and 1911 with its capital in the former Mughal capital Dhaka. Following the Sylhet referendum and votes by the Bengal Legislative Council and Bengal Legislative Assembly, the region was again divided along religious lines in 1947.

Bengali culture, particularly its literature, music, art and cinema, are well known in South Asia and beyond. The region is also notable for its economic and social scientists, which includes several Nobel laureates. Once home to the city with the highest per capita income level in British India, the region is today a leader in South Asia in terms of gender parity, the gender pay gap and other indices of human development.

== Etymology ==

The name of &quot;Bengal&quot; is derived from the ancient kingdom of Vanga (pronounced Bôngô), the earliest records of which date back to the &quot;Mahabharata&quot; epic in the first millennium BCE. The reference to &#x27;Vangalam&#x27; is present in an inscription in the Brihadisvara Temple at Thanjavur, which is one of the oldest references to Bengal. The term &quot;Vangaladesa&quot; is used to describe the region in 11th-century South Indian records. The modern term &quot;Bangla&quot; is prominent from the 14th century, which saw the establishment of the Sultanate of Bengal, whose first ruler Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah was known as the &quot;Shah of Bangala&quot;. The Portuguese referred to the region as &quot;Bengala&quot; in the Age of Discovery.

==History==
===Antiquity===

Neolithic sites have been found in several parts of the region. In the second millennium BCE, rice-cultivating communities dotted the region. By the eleventh century BCE, people in Bengal lived in systematically aligned homes, produced copper objects, and crafted black and red pottery. Remnants of Copper Age settlements are located in the region. At the advent of the Iron Age, people in Bengal adopted iron-based weapons, tools and irrigation equipment. From 600 BCE, the second wave of urbanisation engulfed the north Indian subcontinent as part of the Northern Black Polished Ware culture. Ancient archaeological sites and cities in Dihar, Pandu Rajar Dhibi, Mahasthangarh, Chandraketugarh and Wari-Bateshwar emerged. The Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna rivers were natural arteries for communication and transportation. Estuaries on the Bay of Bengal allowed for maritime trade with distant lands in Southeast Asia and elsewhere.

The ancient geopolitical divisions of Bengal included Varendra, Suhma, Anga, Vanga, Samatata and Harikela. These regions were often independent or under the rule of larger empires. The Mahasthan Brahmi Inscription indicates that Bengal was ruled by the Mauryan Empire in the 3rd century BCE. The inscription was an administrative order instructing relief for a distressed segment of the population. Punch-marked coins found in the region indicate that coins were used as currency during the Iron Age. The namesake of Bengal is the ancient Vanga Kingdom which was reputed as a naval power with overseas colonies. A prince from Bengal named Vijaya founded the first kingdom in Sri Lanka. The two most prominent pan-Indian empires of this period included the Mauryans and the Gupta Empire. The region was a centre of artistic, political, social, spiritual and scientific thinking, including the invention of chess, Indian numerals, and the concept of zero.

The region was known to the ancient Greeks and Romans as Gangaridai. The Greek ambassador Megasthenes chronicled its military strength and dominance of the Ganges delta. The invasion army of Alexander the Great was deterred by the accounts of Gangaridai&#x27;s power in 325 BCE, including a cavalry of war elephants. Later Roman accounts noted maritime trade routes with Bengal. 1st century Roman coins with images of Hercules were found in the region and point to trade links with Roman Egypt through the Red Sea. The Wari-Bateshwar ruins are believed to be the emporium (trading centre) of Sounagoura mentioned by Roman geographer Claudius Ptolemy. A Roman amphora was found in Purba Medinipur district of West Bengal which was made in Aelana (present-day Aqaba, Jordan) between the 4th and 7th centuries AD.

The first unified Bengali polity can be traced to the reign of Shashanka. The origins of the Bengali calendar can be traced to his reign. Shashanka founded the Gauda Kingdom. After Shashanka&#x27;s death, Bengal experienced a period of civil war known as Matsyanyayam. The ancient city of Gauda later gave birth to the Pala Empire. The first Pala emperor Gopala I was chosen by an assembly of chieftains in Gauda. The Pala kingdom grew into one of the largest empires in the Indian subcontinent. The Pala period saw advances in linguistics, sculpture, painting, and education. The empire achieved its greatest territorial extent under Dharmapala and Devapala. The Palas vied for control of Kannauj with the rival Gurjara-Pratihara and Rashtrakuta dynasties. Pala influence also extended to Tibet and Sumatra due to the travels and preachings of Atisa. The university of Nalanda was established by the Palas. They also built the Somapura Mahavihara, which was the largest monastic institution in the subcontinent. The rule of the Palas eventually disintegrated. The Chandra dynasty ruled southeastern Bengal and Arakan. The Varman dynasty ruled parts of northeastern Bengal and Assam. The Sena dynasty emerged as the main successor of the Palas by the 11th century. The Senas were a resurgent Hindu dynasty which ruled much of Bengal. The smaller Deva dynasty also ruled parts of the region. Ancient Chinese visitors like Xuanzang provided elaborate accounts of Bengal&#x27;s cities and monastic institutions.

Muslim trade with Bengal flourished after the fall of the Sasanian Empire and the Arab takeover of Persian trade routes. Much of this trade occurred with southeastern Bengal in areas east of the Meghna River. Bengal was probably used as a transit route to China by the earliest Muslims. Abbasid coins have been discovered in the archaeological ruins of Paharpur and Mainamati. A collection of Sasanian, Umayyad and Abbasid coins are preserved in the Bangladesh National Museum.

===Sultanate period===

In 1204, the Ghurid general Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khalji began the Islamic conquest of Bengal. The fall of Lakhnauti was recounted by historians circa 1243. Lakhnauti was the capital of the Sena dynasty. According to historical accounts, Ghurid cavalry swept across the Gangetic plains towards Bengal. They entered the Bengali capital disguised as horse traders. Once inside the royal compound, Bakhtiyar and his horsemen swiftly overpowered the guards of the Sena king who had just sat down to eat a meal. The king then hastily fled to the forest with his followers. The overthrow of the Sena king has been described as a coup d&#x27;état, which &quot;inaugurated an era, lasting over five centuries, during which most of Bengal was dominated by rulers professing the Islamic faith. In itself this was not exceptional, since from about this time until the eighteenth century, Muslim sovereigns ruled over most of the Indian subcontinent. What was exceptional, however, was that among India&#x27;s interior provinces only in Bengal—a region approximately the size of England and Scotland combined—did a majority of the indigenous population adopt the religion of the ruling class, Islam&quot;. Bengal became a province of the Delhi Sultanate. A coin featuring a horseman was issued to celebrate the Muslim conquest of Lakhnauti with inscriptions in Sanskrit and Arabic. An abortive Islamic invasion of Tibet was also mounted by Bakhtiyar. Bengal was under the formal rule of the Delhi Sultanate for approximately 150 years. Delhi struggled to consolidate control over Bengal. Rebel governors often sought to assert autonomy or independence. Sultan Iltutmish re-established control over Bengal in 1225 after suppressing the rebels. Due to the considerable overland distance, Delhi&#x27;s authority in Bengal was relatively weak. It was left to local governors to expand territory and bring new areas under Muslim rule, such as through the Conquest of Sylhet in 1303.

In 1338, new rebellions sprung up in Bengal&#x27;s three main towns. Governors in Lakhnauti, Satgaon and Sonargaon declared independence from Delhi. This allowed the ruler of Sonargaon, Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah, to annexe Chittagong to the Islamic administration. By 1352, the ruler of Satgaon, Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah, unified the region into an independent state. Ilyas Shah established his capital in Pandua. The new breakaway state emerged as the Bengal Sultanate, which developed into a territorial, mercantile and maritime empire. At the time, the Islamic world stretched from Muslim Spain in the west to Bengal in the east.

The initial raids of Ilyas Shah saw the first Muslim army enter Nepal and stretched from Varanasi in the west to Orissa in the south to Assam in the east. The Delhi army continued to fend off the new Bengali army. The Bengal-Delhi War ended in 1359 when Delhi recognised the independence of Bengal. Ilyas Shah&#x27;s son Sikandar Shah defeated Delhi Sultan Firuz Shah Tughluq during the Siege of Ekdala Fort. A subsequent peace treaty recognised Bengal&#x27;s independence and Sikandar Shah was gifted a golden crown by the Sultan of Delhi. The ruler of Arakan sought refuge in Bengal during the reign of Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah. Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah later helped the Arakanese king to regain control of his throne in exchange for becoming a tributary state of the Bengal Sultanate. Bengali influence in Arakan persisted for 300 years. Bengal also helped the king of Tripura to regain control of his throne in exchange for becoming a tributary state. The ruler of the Jaunpur Sultanate also sought refuge in Bengal. The vassal states of Bengal included Arakan, Tripura, Chandradwip and Pratapgarh. At its peak, the Bengal Sultanate&#x27;s territory included parts of Arakan, Assam, Bihar, Orissa, and Tripura. The Bengal Sultanate experienced its greatest military success under Alauddin Hussain Shah, who was proclaimed as the conqueror of Assam after his forces led by Shah Ismail Ghazi overthrew the Khen dynasty and annexed large parts of Assam. In maritime trade, the Bengal Sultanate benefited from Indian Ocean trade networks and emerged as a hub of re-exports. A giraffe was brought by African envoys from Malindi to Bengal&#x27;s court and was later gifted to Imperial China. Ship-owing merchants acted as envoys of the Sultan while travelling to different regions in Asia and Africa. Many rich Bengali merchants lived in Malacca. Bengali ships transported embassies from Brunei, Aceh and Malacca to China. Bengal and the Maldives had a vast trade in shell currency. The Sultan of Bengal donated funds to build schools in the Hejaz region of Arabia.

The five dynastic periods of the Bengal Sultanate spanned from the Ilyas Shahi dynasty, to a period of rule by Bengali converts, to the Hussain Shahi dynasty, to a period of rule by Abyssinian usurpers; an interruption by the Suri dynasty; and ended with the Karrani dynasty. The Battle of Raj Mahal and the capture of Daud Khan Karrani marked the end of the Bengal Sultanate during the reign of Mughal Emperor Akbar. In the late 16th-century, a confederation called the Baro-Bhuyan resisted Mughal invasions in eastern Bengal. The Baro-Bhuyan included twelve Muslim and Hindu leaders of the Zamindars of Bengal. They were led by Isa Khan, a former prime minister of the Bengal Sultanate. By the 17th century, the Mughals were able to fully absorb the region to their empire.

===Mughal period===


Mughal Bengal had the richest elite and was the wealthiest region in the subcontinent. Bengal&#x27;s trade and wealth impressed the Mughals so much that it was described as the &quot;Paradise of the Nations&quot; by the Mughal Emperors. A new provincial capital was built in Dhaka. Members of the imperial family were appointed to positions in Mughal Bengal, including the position of governor (&quot;subedar&quot;). Dhaka became a centre of palace intrigue and politics. Some of the most prominent governors included Rajput general Man Singh I, Emperor Shah Jahan&#x27;s son Prince Shah Shuja, Emperor Aurangzeb&#x27;s son and later Mughal emperor Azam Shah, and the influential aristocrat Shaista Khan. During the tenure of Shaista Khan, the Portuguese and Arakanese were expelled from the port of Chittagong in 1666. Bengal became the eastern frontier of the Mughal administration. By the 18th century, Bengal became home to a semi-independent aristocracy led by the Nawabs of Bengal. Bengal premier Murshid Quli Khan managed to curtail the influence of the governor due to his rivalry with Prince Azam Shah. Khan controlled Bengal&#x27;s finances since he was in charge of the treasury. He shifted the provincial capital from Dhaka to Murshidabad.

In 1717, the Mughal court in Delhi recognised the hereditary monarchy of the Nawab of Bengal. The ruler was officially titled as the &quot;Nawab of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa&quot;, as the Nawab ruled over the three regions in the eastern subcontinent. The Nawabs began issuing their own coins but continued to pledge nominal allegiance to the Mughal emperor. The wealth of Bengal was vital for the Mughal court because Delhi received its biggest share of revenue from the Nawab&#x27;s court. The Nawabs presided over a period of unprecedented economic growth and prosperity, including an era of growing organisation in textiles, banking, a military-industrial complex, the production of fine quality handicrafts, and other trades. A process of proto-industrialisation was underway. Under the Nawabs, the streets of Bengali cities were filled with brokers, workers, peons, naibs, wakils, and ordinary traders. The Nawab&#x27;s state was a major exporter of Bengal muslin, silk, gunpowder and saltpetre. The Nawabs also permitted European trading companies to operate in Bengal, including the British East India Company, the French East India Company, the Danish East India Company, the Austrian East India Company, the Ostend Company, and the Dutch East India Company. The Nawabs were also suspicious of the growing influence of these companies.
Under Mughal rule, Bengal was a centre of the worldwide muslin and silk trades. During the Mughal era, the most important centre of cotton production was Bengal, particularly around its capital city of Dhaka, leading to muslin being called &quot;daka&quot; in distant markets such as Central Asia. Domestically, much of India depended on Bengali products such as rice, silks and cotton textiles. Overseas, Europeans depended on Bengali products such as cotton textiles, silks and opium; Bengal accounted for 40% of Dutch imports from Asia, for example, including more than 50% of textiles and around 80% of silks. From Bengal, saltpetre was also shipped to Europe, opium was sold in Indonesia, raw silk was exported to Japan and the Netherlands, cotton and silk textiles were exported to Europe, Indonesia, and Japan, cotton cloth was exported to the Americas and the Indian Ocean. Bengal also had a large shipbuilding industry. In terms of shipbuilding tonnage during the 16th–18th centuries, economic historian Indrajit Ray estimates the annual output of Bengal at 223,250 tons, compared with 23,061 tons produced in nineteen colonies in North America from 1769 to 1771.

Since the 16th century, European traders traversed the sea routes to Bengal, following the Portuguese conquests of Malacca and Goa. The Portuguese established a settlement in Chittagong with permission from the Bengal Sultanate in 1528 but were later expelled by the Mughals in 1666. In the 18th-century, the Mughal Court rapidly disintegrated due to Nader Shah&#x27;s invasion and internal rebellions, allowing European colonial powers to set up trading posts across the territory. The British East India Company eventually emerged as the foremost military power in the region; and defeated the last independent Nawab of Bengal at the Battle of Plassey in 1757.

=== Colonial era (1757–1947) ===

The British East India Company began influencing and controlling the Nawab of Bengal from 1757 after the Battle of Plassey, thus signalling the start of British influence in India. British control of Bengal increased between 1757 and 1793 while the Nawab was reduced to a puppet figure.
with the Presidency of Fort William asserting greater control over the entire province of Bengal and neighbouring territories. Calcutta was named the capital of British territories in India in 1772. The presidency was run by a military-civil administration, including the Bengal Army, and had the world&#x27;s sixth earliest railway network. Between 1833 and 1854, the Governor of Bengal was concurrently the Governor-General of India for many years. Great Bengal famines struck several times during colonial rule (notably the Great Bengal famine of 1770 and Bengal famine of 1943). Under British rule, Bengal experienced the deindustrialisation of its pre-colonial economy.

Company policies led to the deindustrialisation of Bengal&#x27;s textile industry. The capital amassed by the East India Company in Bengal was invested in the emerging Industrial Revolution in Great Britain, in industries such as textile manufacturing. Economic mismanagement, alongside drought and a smallpox epidemic, directly led to the Great Bengal famine of 1770, which is estimated to have caused the deaths of between 1 million and 10 million people.

In 1862, the Bengal Legislative Council was set up as the first modern legislature in India. Elected representation was gradually introduced during the early 20th century, including with the Morley-Minto reforms and the system of dyarchy. In 1937, the council became the upper chamber of the Bengali legislature while the Bengal Legislative Assembly was created. Between 1937 and 1947, the chief executive of the government was the Prime Minister of Bengal.

The Bengal Presidency was the largest administrative unit in the British Empire. At its height, it covered large parts of present-day India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Burma, Malaysia, and Singapore. In 1830, the British Straits Settlements on the coast of the Malacca Straits was made a residency of Bengal. The area included the erstwhile Prince of Wales Island, Province Wellesley, Malacca and Singapore. In 1867, Penang, Singapore and Malacca were separated from Bengal into the Straits Settlements. British Burma became a province of India and a later a Crown colony in itself. Western areas, including the Ceded and Conquered Provinces and The Punjab, were further reorganised. Northeastern areas became Colonial Assam.

In 1876, about 200,000 people were killed in Bengal by the Great Backerganj Cyclone of 1876 in the Barisal region. About 50 million were killed in Bengal due to massive plague outbreaks and famines which happened in 1895 to 1920, mostly in western Bengal.
The Indian Rebellion of 1857 was initiated on the outskirts of Calcutta, and spread to Dhaka, Chittagong, Jalpaiguri, Sylhet and Agartala, in solidarity with revolts in North India. The failure of the rebellion led to the abolition of the Company Rule in India and establishment of direct rule over India by the British, commonly referred to as the British Raj. The late 19th and early 20th century Bengal Renaissance had a great impact on the cultural and economic life of Bengal and started a great advance in the literature and science of Bengal. Between 1905 and 1911, an abortive attempt was made to divide the province of Bengal into two: Bengal proper and the short-lived province of Eastern Bengal and Assam where the All India Muslim League was founded. In 1911, the Bengali poet and polymath Rabindranath Tagore became Asia&#x27;s first Nobel laureate when he won the Nobel Prize in Literature.

Bengal played a major role in the Indian independence movement, in which revolutionary groups were dominant. Armed attempts to overthrow the British Raj began with the rebellion of Titumir, and reached a climax when Subhas Chandra Bose led the Indian National Army against the British. Bengal was also central in the rising political awareness of the Muslim population—the All-India Muslim League was established in Dhaka in 1906. The Muslim homeland movement pushed for a sovereign state in eastern India with the Lahore Resolution in 1943. Hindu nationalism was also strong in Bengal, which was home to groups like the Hindu Mahasabha. In spite of a last-ditch effort by politicians Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy, Sarat Chandra Bose to form a United Bengal, when India gained independence in 1947, Bengal was partitioned along religious lines. The western joined India (and was named West Bengal) while the eastern part joined Pakistan as a province called East Bengal (later renamed East Pakistan, giving rise to Bangladesh in 1971). The circumstances of partition were bloody, with widespread religious riots in Bengal.

===Partition of Bengal (1947)===
On 27 April 1947, the last Prime Minister of Bengal Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy held a press conference in New Delhi where he outlined his vision for an independent Bengal. Suhrawardy said &quot;Let us pause for a moment to consider what Bengal can be if it remains united. It will be a great country, indeed the richest and the most prosperous in India capable of giving to its people a high standard of living, where a great people will be able to rise to the fullest height of their stature, a land that will truly be plentiful. It will be rich in agriculture, rich in industry and commerce and in course of time it will be one of the powerful and progressive states of the world. If Bengal remains united this will be no dream, no fantasy&quot;. On 2 June 1947, British Prime Minister Clement Attlee told the US Ambassador to the United Kingdom that there was a &quot;distinct possibility Bengal might decide against partition and against joining either Hindustan or Pakistan&quot;.

On 3 June 1947, the Mountbatten Plan outlined the partition of British India. On 20 June, the Bengal Legislative Assembly met to decide on the partition of Bengal. At the preliminary joint meeting, it was decided (126 votes to 90) that if the province remained united, it should join the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan. At a separate meeting of legislators from West Bengal, it was decided (58 votes to 21) that the province should be partitioned and West Bengal should join the Constituent Assembly of India. At another meeting of legislators from East Bengal, it was decided (106 votes to 35) that the province should not be partitioned and (107 votes to 34) that East Bengal should join the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan if Bengal was partitioned. On 6 July, the Sylhet district of Assam voted in a referendum to join East Bengal.

The English barrister Cyril Radcliffe was instructed to draw the borders of Pakistan and India. The Radcliffe Line created the boundary between the Dominion of India and the Dominion of Pakistan, which later became the Bangladesh-India border. The Radcliffe Line awarded two-thirds of Bengal as the eastern wing of Pakistan, although the historic Bengali capitals of Gaur, Pandua, Murshidabad and Calcutta fell on the Indian side close to the border with Pakistan. Dhaka&#x27;s status as a capital was also restored.

== Geography ==

Most of the Bengal region lies in the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta, but there are highlands in its north, northeast and southeast. The Ganges Delta arises from the confluence of the rivers Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Meghna rivers and their respective tributaries. The total area of Bengal is —West Bengal is and Bangladesh .

The flat and fertile Bangladesh Plain dominates the geography of Bangladesh. The Chittagong Hill Tracts and Sylhet region are home to most of the mountains in Bangladesh. Most parts of Bangladesh are within above the sea level, and it is believed that about 10% of the land would be flooded if the sea level were to rise by . Because of this low elevation, much of this region is exceptionally vulnerable to seasonal flooding due to monsoons.
The highest point in Bangladesh is in Mowdok range at . A major part of the coastline comprises a marshy jungle, the Sundarbans, the largest mangrove forest in the world and home to diverse flora and fauna, including the royal Bengal tiger. In 1997, this region was declared endangered.

West Bengal is on the eastern bottleneck of India, stretching from the Himalayas in the north to the Bay of Bengal in the south. The state has a total area of . The Darjeeling Himalayan hill region in the northern extreme of the state belongs to the eastern Himalaya. This region contains Sandakfu ()—the highest peak of the state. The narrow Terai region separates this region from the plains, which in turn transitions into the Ganges delta towards the south. The Rarh region intervenes between the Ganges delta in the east and the western plateau and high lands. A small coastal region is on the extreme south, while the Sundarbans mangrove forests form a remarkable geographical landmark at the Ganges delta.

At least nine districts in West Bengal and 42 districts in Bangladesh have arsenic levels in groundwater above the World Health Organization maximum permissible limit of 50 μg/L or 50 parts per billion and the untreated water is unfit for human consumption. The water causes arsenicosis, skin cancer and various other complications in the body.

=== Geographic distinctions ===

==== North Bengal ====
North Bengal is a term used for the north-western part of Bangladesh and northern part of West Bengal. The Bangladeshi part comprises Rajshahi Division and Rangpur Division. Generally, it is the area lying west of Jamuna River and north of Padma River, and includes the Barind Tract. Politically, West Bengal&#x27;s part comprises Jalpaiguri Division and most of Malda division (except Murshidabad district) together and Bihar&#x27;s parts include Kishanganj district. Darjeeling Hilly are also part of North Bengal. The people of Jaipaiguri, Alipurduar and Cooch Behar usually identify themselves as North Bengali. North Bengal is divided into Terai and Dooars regions. North Bengal is also noted for its rich cultural heritage, including two UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Aside from the Bengali majority, North Bengal is home to many other communities including Nepalis, Santhal people, Lepchas and Rajbongshis.

==== Northeast Bengal ====

Northeast Bengal refers to the Sylhet region, which today comprises the Sylhet Division of Bangladesh and Karimganj district in the Indian state of Assam. The region is famous for its fertile land terrain, many rivers, extensive tea plantations, rainforests and wetlands. The Brahmaputra and Barak river are the geographic markers of the area. The city of Sylhet is its largest urban centre, and the region is known for its unique regional Sylheti language. The ancient name of the region is Srihatta and Nasratshahi. The region was ruled by the Kamarupa and Harikela kingdoms as well as the Bengal Sultanate. It later became a district of the Mughal Empire. Alongside the predominant Bengali population resides a small Garo, Bishnupriya Manipuri, Khasia and other tribal minorities.

The region is the crossroads of Bengal and northeast India.
==== Central Bengal ====
Central Bengal refers to the Dhaka Division of Bangladesh. It includes the elevated Madhupur tract with a large Sal tree forest. The Padma River cuts through the southern part of the region, separating the greater Faridpur region. In the north lies the greater Mymensingh and Tangail regions.

==== South Bengal ====
South Bengal covers the southwestern Bangladesh and the southern part of the Indian state of West Bengal. The Bangladeshi part includes Khulna Division, Barisal Division and the proposed Faridpur Division The part of South Bengal of West Bengal includes Presidency division, Burdwan division and Medinipur division.

The Sundarbans, a major biodiversity hotspot, is located in South Bengal. Bangladesh hosts 60% of the forest, with the remainder in India.

==== Southeast Bengal ====

Southeast Bengal refers to the hilly-coastal Chittagonian-speaking and coastal Bengali-speaking areas of Chittagong Division in southeastern Bangladesh. The region is noted for its thalassocratic and seafaring heritage. The area was dominated by the Bengali Harikela and Samatata kingdoms in antiquity. It was known to Arab traders as &quot;Samandar&quot; in the 9th century. During the medieval period, the region was ruled by the Chandra dynasty, the sultanate of Bengal, the kingdom of Tripura, the kingdom of Mrauk U, the Portuguese Empire and the Mughal Empire, prior to the advent of British rule. The Chittagonian language, a sister of Bengali is prevalent in coastal areas of southeast Bengal. Along with its Bengali population, it is also home to Tibeto-Burman ethnic groups, including the Chakma, Marma, Tanchangya and Bawm peoples.

Southeast Bengal is considered a bridge to Southeast Asia and the northern parts of Arakan are also historically considered to be a part of it.

=== Places of interest ===
There are four World Heritage Sites in the region, including the Sundarbans, the Somapura Mahavihara, the Mosque City of Bagerhat and the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway. Other prominent places include the Bishnupur, Bankura temple city, the Adina Mosque, the Caravanserai Mosque, numerous zamindar palaces (like Ahsan Manzil and Cooch Behar Palace), the Lalbagh Fort, the Great Caravanserai ruins, the Shaista Khan Caravanserai ruins, the Kolkata Victoria Memorial, the Dhaka Parliament Building, archaeologically excavated ancient fort cities in Mahasthangarh, Mainamati, Chandraketugarh and Wari-Bateshwar, the Jaldapara National Park, the Lawachara National Park, the Teknaf Game Reserve and the Chittagong Hill Tracts.

Cox&#x27;s Bazar in southeastern Bangladesh is home to the longest natural sea beach in the world with an unbroken length of 120 km (75 mi). It is also a growing surfing destination. St. Martin&#x27;s Island, off the coast of Chittagong Division, is home to the sole coral reef in Bengal.

=== Other regions ===

Bengal was a regional power of the Indian subcontinent. The administrative jurisdiction of Bengal historically extended beyond the territory of Bengal proper. In the 9th century, the Pala Empire of Bengal ruled large parts of northern India. The Bengal Sultanate controlled Bengal, Assam, Arakan, Bihar and Orissa at different periods in history. In Mughal Bengal, the Nawab of Bengal had a jurisdiction covering Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. Bengal&#x27;s administrative jurisdiction reached its greatest extent under the British Empire, when the Bengal Presidency extended from the Straits of Malacca in the east to the Khyber Pass in the west. In the late-19th and early-20th centuries, administrative reorganisation drastically reduced the territory of Bengal.

Several regions bordering Bengal proper continue to have high levels of Bengali influence. The Indian state of Tripura has a Bengali majority population. Bengali influence is also prevalent in the Indian regions of Assam, Meghalaya, Bihar and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; as well as in Myanmar&#x27;s Rakhine State.

====Arakan====

Arakan (now Rakhine State, Myanmar) has historically been under strong Bengali influence. Since antiquity, Bengal has influenced the culture of Arakan. The ancient Bengali script was used in Arakan. An Arakanese inscription recorded the reign of the Bengali Candra dynasty. Paul Wheatley described the &quot;Indianization&quot; of Arakan.

According to Pamela Gutman, &quot;Arakan was ruled by kings who adopted Indian titles and traditions to suit their own environment. Indian Brahmins conducted royal ceremonies, Buddhist monks spread their teachings, traders came and went and artists and architects used Indian models for inspiration. In the later period, there was also influence from the Islamic courts of Bengal and Delhi&quot;. Arakan emerged as a vassal state of the Bengal Sultanate. It later became an independent kingdom. The royal court and culture of the Kingdom of Mrauk U was heavily influenced by Bengal. Bengali Muslims served in the royal court as ministers and military commanders. Bengali Hindus and Bengali Buddhists served as priests. Some of the most important poets of medieval Bengali literature lived in Arakan, including Alaol and Daulat Qazi. In 1660, Prince Shah Shuja, the governor of Mughal Bengal and a pretender of the Peacock Throne of India, was forced to seek asylum in Arakan. Bengali influence in the Arakanese royal court persisted until Burmese annexation in the 18th-century.

The modern-day Rohingya population is a legacy of Bengal&#x27;s influence on Arakan. The Rohingya genocide resulted in the displacement of over a million people between 2016 and 2017, with many being uprooted from their homes in Rakhine State.

====Assam====

The Indian state of Assam shares many cultural similarities with Bengal. The Assamese language uses the same script as the Bengali language. The Barak Valley has a Bengali-speaking majority population. During the Partition of India, Assam was also partitioned along with Bengal. The Sylhet Division joined East Bengal in Pakistan, with the exception of Karimganj which joined Indian Assam. Previously, East Bengal and Assam were part of a single province called Eastern Bengal and Assam between 1905 and 1912 under the British Raj.

Assam and Bengal were often part of the same kingdoms, including Kamarupa, Gauda and Kamata. Large parts of Assam were annexed by Alauddin Hussain Shah during the Bengal Sultanate. Assam was one of the few regions in the subcontinent to successfully resist Mughal expansion and never fell completely under Mughal rule.

====Andaman and Nicobar Islands====
Bengali is the most spoken language among the population of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a strategically important archipelago which is controlled by India as a federal territory. The islands were once used as a British penal colony. During World War II, the islands were seized by the Japanese and controlled by the Provisional Government of Free India. Anti-British leader Subhash Chandra Bose visited and renamed the islands. Between 1949 and 1971, the Indian government resettled many Bengali Hindus in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

====Bihar====

In antiquity, Bihar and Bengal were often part of the same kingdoms. The ancient region of Magadha covered both Bihar and Bengal. Magadha was the birthplace or bastion of several pan-Indian empires, including the Mauryan Empire, the Gupta Empire and the Pala Empire. Bengal, Bihar and Orissa together formed a single province under the Mughal Empire. The Nawab of Bengal was styled as the Nawab of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.

====Chittagong Hill Tracts====
The Chittagong Hill Tracts is the southeastern frontier of Bangladesh. Its indigenous population includes Tibeto-Burman ethnicities, including the Chakma people, Bawm people and Mro people among others. The region was historically ruled by tribal chieftains of the Chakma Circle and Bohmong Circle. In 1713, the Chakma Raja signed a treaty with Mughal Bengal after obtaining permission from Emperor Farrukhsiyar for trade with the plains of Chittagong. Like the kings of Arakan, the Chakma Circle began to fashion themselves using Mughal nomenclatures and titles. They initially resisted the Permanent Settlement and the activities of the East India Company. The tribal royal families of the region came under heavy Bengali influence. The Chakma queen Benita Roy was a friend of Rabindranath Tagore. The region was governed by the Chittagong Hill Tracts manual under colonial rule. The manual was significantly amended after the end of British rule; and the region became fully integrated with Bangladesh.

====Malay Archipelago====

Through trade, settlements and the exchange of ideas; parts of Maritime Southeast Asia became linked with Bengal. Language, literature, art, governing systems, religions and philosophies in ancient Sumatra and Java were influenced by Bengal. Hindu-Buddhist kingdoms in Southeast Asia depended on the Bay of Bengal for trade and ideas. Islam in Southeast Asia also spread through the Bay of Bengal, which was a bridge between the Malay Archipelago and Indo-Islamic states of the Indian subcontinent. A large number of wealthy merchants from Bengal were based in Malacca. Bengali ships were the largest ships in the waters of the Malay Archipelago during the 15th century.

Between 1830 and 1867, the ports of Singapore and Malacca, the island of Penang, and a portion of the Malay Peninsula were ruled under the jurisdiction of the Bengal Presidency of the British Empire. These areas were known as the Straits Settlements, which was separated from the Bengal Presidency and converted into a Crown colony in 1867.

====Meghalaya====
The Indian state of Meghalaya historically came under the influence of Shah Jalal, a Muslim missionary and conqueror from Sylhet. During British rule, the city of Shillong was the summer capital of Eastern Bengal and Assam (modern Bangladesh and Northeast India). Shillong boasted the highest per capita income in British India.

====North India====

The ancient Mauryan, Gupta and Pala empires of the Magadha region (Bihar and Bengal) extended into northern India. The westernmost border of the Bengal Sultanate extended towards Varanasi and Jaunpur. In the 19th century, Punjab and the Ceded and Conquered Provinces formed the western extent of the Bengal Presidency. According to the British historian Rosie Llewellyn-Jones, &quot;The Bengal Presidency, an administrative jurisdiction introduced by the East India Company, would later include not only the whole of northern India up to the Khyber Pass on the north-west frontier with Afghanistan, but would spread eastwards to Burma and Singapore as well&quot;.

====Odisha====
Odisha, previously known as Orissa, has a significant Bengali minority. Historically, the region has faced invasions from Bengal, including an invasion by Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah. Parts of the region were ruled by the Bengal Sultanate and Mughal Bengal. The Nawab of Bengal was styled as the &quot;Nawab of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa&quot; because the Nawab was granted jurisdiction over Orissa by the Mughal Emperor.

====Tibet====
During the Pala dynasty, Tibet received missionaries from Bengal who influenced the emergence of Tibetan Buddhism. One of the most notable missionaries was Atisa. During the 13th century, Tibet experienced an Islamic invasion by the forces of Bakhtiyar Khalji, the Muslim conqueror of Bengal.

====Tripura====
The princely state of Tripura was ruled by the Manikya dynasty until the 1949 Tripura Merger Agreement. Tripura was historically a vassal state of Bengal. After assuming the throne with military support from the Bengal Sultanate in 1464, Ratna Manikya I introduced administrative reforms inspired by the government of Bengal. The Tripura kings requested Sultan Barbak Shah to provide manpower for developing the administration of Tripura. As a result, Bengali Hindu bureaucrats, cultivators and artisans began settling in Tripura. Today, the Indian state of Tripura has a Bengali-majority population. Modern Tripura is a gateway for trade and transport links between Bangladesh and Northeast India. In Bengali culture, the celebrated singer S. D. Burman was a member of the Tripura royal family.

=== Flora and fauna ===

The flat Bengal Plain, which covers most of Bangladesh and West Bengal, is one of the most fertile areas on Earth, with lush vegetation and farmland dominating its landscape. Bengali villages are buried among groves of mango, jackfruit, betel nut and date palm. Rice, jute, mustard and sugarcane plantations are a common sight. Water bodies and wetlands provide a habitat for many aquatic plants in the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta. The northern part of the region features Himalayan foothills (&quot;Dooars&quot;) with densely wooded Sal and other tropical evergreen trees. Above an elevation of 1,000 metres (3,300 ft), the forest becomes predominantly subtropical, with a predominance of temperate-forest trees such as oaks, conifers and rhododendrons. Sal woodland is also found across central Bangladesh, particularly in the Bhawal National Park. The Lawachara National Park is a rainforest in northeastern Bangladesh. The Chittagong Hill Tracts in southeastern Bangladesh is noted for its high degree of biodiversity.

The littoral Sundarbans in the southwestern part of Bengal is the largest mangrove forest in the world and a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The region has over 89 species of mammals, 628 species of birds and numerous species of fish. For Bangladesh, the water lily, the oriental magpie-robin, the hilsa and mango tree are national symbols. For West Bengal, the white-throated kingfisher, the chatim tree and the night-flowering jasmine are state symbols. The Bengal tiger is the national animal of Bangladesh and India. The fishing cat is the state animal of West Bengal.

== Politics ==
Today, the region of Bengal proper is divided between the sovereign state of the People&#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh and the Indian state of West Bengal. The Bengali-speaking Barak Valley forms part of the Indian state of Assam. The Indian state of Tripura has a Bengali-speaking majority and was formerly the princely state of Hill Tipperah. In the Bay of Bengal, St. Martin&#x27;s Island is governed by Bangladesh; while the Andaman and Nicobar Islands has a plurality of Bengali speakers and is governed by India&#x27;s federal government as a union territory.

=== Bangladeshi Republic ===
The state of Bangladesh is a parliamentary republic based on the Westminster system, with a written constitution and a President elected by parliament for mostly ceremonial purposes. The government is headed by a Prime Minister, who is appointed by the President from among the popularly elected 300 Members of Parliament in the Jatiyo Sangshad, the national parliament. The Prime Minister is traditionally the leader of the single largest party in the Jatiyo Sangshad. Under the constitution, while recognising Islam as the country&#x27;s established religion, the constitution grants freedom of religion to non-Muslims.

Between 1975 and 1990, Bangladesh had a presidential system of government. Since the 1990s, it was administered by non-political technocratic caretaker governments on four occasions, the last being under military-backed emergency rule in 2007 and 2008. The Awami League and the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) are the two most dominant political parties in Bangladesh.

Bangladesh is a member of the UN, WTO, IMF, the World Bank, ADB, OIC, IDB, SAARC, BIMSTEC and the IMCTC. Bangladesh has achieved significant strides in human development compared to its neighbours.

=== Indian Bengal ===
West Bengal is a constituent state of the Republic of India, with local executives and assemblies- features shared with other states in the Indian federal system. The president of India appoints a governor as the ceremonial representative of the union government. The governor appoints the chief minister on the nomination of the legislative assembly. The chief minister is the traditionally the leader of the party or coalition with most seats in the assembly. President&#x27;s rule is often imposed in Indian states as a direct intervention of the union government led by the prime minister of India. The Bengali-speaking zone of India carries 48 seats in the lower house of India, Lok Sabha.

Each state has popularly elected members in the Indian lower house of parliament, the Lok Sabha. Each state nominates members to the Indian upper house of parliament, the Rajya Sabha.

The state legislative assemblies also play a key role in electing the ceremonial president of India. The former president of India, Pranab Mukherjee, was a native of West Bengal and a leader of the Indian National Congress. The current leader of opposition of India, Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury is from West Bengal. He has been elected from Baharampur Lok Sabha constituency.

The major political forces in the Bengali-speaking zone of India are the Left Front and the Trinamool Congress, the Indian National Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party. The Bengali-speaking zone of India is considered stronghold for Communism in India. Bengalis are known not to vote on communal lines but in recent years this conception has how changed. The West Bengal based Trinamool Congress is now the third largest party of India in terms of number of MP or MLA after the Bharatiya Janata Party and the Indian National Congress. Earlier the Communist Party of India (Marxist) held this position.

=== Crossborder relations ===
India and Bangladesh are the world&#x27;s first and eighth most populous countries respectively. Bangladesh-India relations began on a high note in 1971 when India played a major role in the liberation of Bangladesh, with the Indian Bengali populace and media providing overwhelming support to the independence movement in the former East Pakistan. The two countries had a twenty five-year friendship treaty between 1972 and 1996. However, differences over river sharing, border security and access to trade have long plagued the relationship. In more recent years, a consensus has evolved in both countries on the importance of developing good relations, as well as a strategic partnership in South Asia and beyond. Commercial, cultural and defence co-operation have expanded since 2010, when Prime Ministers Sheikh Hasina and Manmohan Singh pledged to reinvigorate ties.

The Bangladesh High Commission in New Delhi operates a Deputy High Commission in Kolkata and a consular office in Agartala. India has a High Commission in Dhaka with consulates in Chittagong and Rajshahi. Frequent international air, bus and rail services connect major cities in Bangladesh and Indian Bengal, particularly the three largest cities- Dhaka, Kolkata and Chittagong. Undocumented immigration of Bangladeshi workers is a controversial issue championed by right-wing nationalist parties in India but finds little sympathy in West Bengal. India has since fenced the border which has been criticised by Bangladesh.

== Economy ==

The Ganges Delta provided advantages of fertile soil, ample water, and an abundance of fish, wildlife, and fruit. Living standards for Bengal&#x27;s elite were relatively better than other parts of the Indian subcontinent. Between 400 and 1200, Bengal had a well-developed economy in terms of land ownership, agriculture, livestock, shipping, trade, commerce, taxation, and banking. The apparent vibrancy of the Bengal economy in the beginning of the 15th century is attributed to the end of tribute payments to the Delhi Sultanate, which ceased after the creation of the Bengal Sultanate and stopped the outflow of wealth. Ma Huan&#x27;s travelogue recorded a booming shipbuilding industry and significant international trade in Bengal.

In 1338, Ibn Battuta noticed that the silver taka was the most popular currency in the region instead of the Islamic dinar. In 1415, members of Admiral Zheng He&#x27;s entourage also noticed the dominance of the taka. The currency was the most important symbol of sovereignty for the Sultan of Bengal. The Sultanate of Bengal established an estimated 27 mints in provincial capitals across the kingdom. These provincial capitals were known as Mint Towns. These Mint Towns formed an integral aspect of governance and administration in Bengal.

The taka continued to be issued in Mughal Bengal, which inherited the sultanate&#x27;s legacy. As Bengal became more prosperous and integrated into the world economy under Mughal rule, the taka replaced shell currency in rural areas and became the standardised legal tender. It was also used in commerce with the Dutch East India Company, the French East India Company, the Danish East India Company and the British East India Company. Under Mughal rule, Bengal was the centre of the worldwide muslin trade. The muslin trade in Bengal was patronised by the Mughal imperial court. Muslin from Bengal was worn by aristocratic ladies in courts as far away as Europe, Persia and Central Asia. The treasury of the Nawab of Bengal was the biggest source of revenue for the imperial Mughal court in Delhi. Bengal had a large shipbuilding industry. The shipbuilding output of Bengal during the 16th and 17th centuries stood at 223,250tons annually, which was higher than the volume of shipbuilding in the nineteen colonies of North America between 1769 and 1771.

Historically, Bengal has been the industrial leader of the subcontinent. Mughal Bengal saw the emergence of a proto-industrial economy backed up by textiles and gunpowder. The organised early modern economy flourished till the beginning of British rule in the mid 18th-century, when the region underwent radical and revolutionary changes in government, trade, and regulation. The British displaced the indigenous ruling class and transferred much of the region&#x27;s wealth back to the colonial metropole in Britain. In the 19th century, the British began investing in railways and limited industrialisation. However, the Bengali economy was dominated by trade in raw materials during much of the colonial period, particularly the jute trade.

The partition of India changed the economic geography of the region. Calcutta in West Bengal inherited a thriving industrial base from the colonial period, particularly in terms of jute processing. East Pakistan soon developed its industrial base, including the world&#x27;s largest jute mill. In 1972, the newly independent government of Bangladesh nationalised 580 industrial plants. These industries were later privatised in the late 1970s as Bangladesh moved towards a market-oriented economy. Liberal reforms in 1991 paved the way for a major expansion of Bangladesh&#x27;s private sector industry, including in telecoms, natural gas, textiles, pharmaceuticals, ceramics, steel and shipbuilding. In 2022, Bangladesh was the second largest economy in South Asia after India.

The region is one of the largest rice producing areas in the world, with West Bengal being India&#x27;s largest rice producer and Bangladesh being the world&#x27;s fourth largest rice producer. Three Bengali economists have been Nobel laureates, including Amartya Sen and Abhijit Banerjee who won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics and Muhammad Yunus who won the Nobel Peace Prize.

===Stock markets===
*Dhaka Stock Exchange
*Chittagong Stock Exchange
*Calcutta Stock Exchange

===Ports and harbours===
*Port of Chittagong
*Port of Kolkata
*Port of Mongla
*Port of Haldia
*Port of Payra
*Port of Pangaon
*Port of Farakka
*Port of Narayanganj
*Port of Ashuganj
*Port of Barisal
*Matarbari Port
*Land port of Benapole-Petrapole

===Chambers of commerce===
*Bengal Chamber of Commerce and Industry
*Bengal National Chamber of Commerce &amp; Industry
*Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FBCCI)
*Chittagong Chamber of Commerce &amp; Industry
*Dhaka Chamber of Commerce &amp; Industry (DCCI)
*Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (MCCI)

=== Intra-Bengal trade ===
Bangladesh and India are the largest trading partners in South Asia, with two-way trade valued at an estimated US$16 billion. Most of this trade relationship is centred on some of the world&#x27;s busiest land ports on the Bangladesh-India border. The Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal Initiative seeks to boost trade through a Regional Motor Vehicles Agreement.

== Demographics ==
The Bengal region is one of the most densely populated areas in the world. With a population of 300 million, Bengalis are the third largest ethnic group in the world after the Han Chinese and Arabs.
According to provisional results of 2011 Bangladesh census, the population of Bangladesh was 149,772,364; however, CIA&#x27;s &quot;The World Factbook&quot; gives 163,654,860 as its population in a July 2013 estimate. According to the provisional results of the 2011 Indian national census, West Bengal has a population of 91,347,736. &quot;So, the Bengal region, , has at least 241.1 million people. This figures give a population density of 1003.9/km2; making it among the most densely populated areas in the world.

Bengali is the main language spoken in Bengal. Many phonological, lexical, and structural differences from the standard variety occur in peripheral varieties of Bengali across the region. Other regional languages closely related to Bengali include Sylheti, Chittagonian, Chakma, Rangpuri/Rajbangshi, Hajong, Rohingya, and Tangchangya.

According to the 2011 Indian census, 18% of the Bengali-speakers are bilingual of whom half can speak Hindi, and 5% are trilingual.

In general, Bengalis are followers of Islam, Hinduism, Christianity and Buddhism with a significant number are Irreligious.

In addition, several minority ethnolinguistic groups are native to the region. These include speakers of other Indo-Aryan languages (e.g., Bishnupriya Manipuri, Oraon Sadri, various Bihari languages), Tibeto-Burman languages (e.g., A&#x27;Tong, Chak, Koch, Garo, Megam, Meitei (officially called &quot;Manipuri&quot;), Mizo, Mru, Pangkhua, Rakhine/Marma, Kok Borok, Riang, Tippera, Usoi, various Chin languages), Austroasiatic languages (e.g., Khasi, Koda, Mundari, Pnar, Santali, War), and Dravidian languages (e.g., Kurukh, Sauria Paharia).

Life expectancy is around 72.49 years for Bangladesh and 70.2 for West Bengal. In terms of literacy, West Bengal leads with 77% literacy rate, in Bangladesh the rate is approximately 72.9%. The level of poverty in West Bengal is at 19.98%, while in Bangladesh it stands at 12.9%

West Bengal has one of the lowest total fertility rates in India. West Bengal&#x27;s TFR of 1.6 roughly equals that of Canada.

=== Major cities ===
The Bengal region is home to the some of major urban areas of the world, Dhaka is the 4th largest urban areas of the world. Kolkata is 17th largest urban area.
== Culture ==
=== Language ===
The Bengali language developed between the 7th and 10th centuries from Apabhraṃśa and Magadhi Prakrit. It is written using the indigenous Bengali alphabet, a descendant of the ancient Brahmi script. Bengali is the 5th most spoken language in the world. It is an eastern Indo-Aryan language and one of the easternmost branches of the Indo-European language family. It is part of the Bengali-Assamese languages. Bengali has greatly influenced other languages in the region, including Odia, Assamese, Chakma, Nepali and Rohingya. It is the sole state language of Bangladesh and the second most spoken language in India. It is also the seventh most spoken language by total number of speakers in the world.

Bengali binds together a culturally diverse region and is an important contributor to regional identity. The 1952 Bengali Language Movement in East Pakistan is commemorated by UNESCO as International Mother Language Day, as part of global efforts to preserve linguistic identity.

=== Currency ===
In both Bangladesh and West Bengal, currency is commonly denominated as taka. The Bangladesh taka is an official standard bearer of this tradition, while the Indian rupee is also written as taka in Bengali script on all of its banknotes. The history of the taka dates back centuries. Bengal was home one of the world&#x27;s earliest coin currencies in the first millennium BCE. Under the Delhi Sultanate, the taka was introduced by Muhammad bin Tughluq in 1329. Bengal became the stronghold of the taka. The silver currency was the most important symbol of sovereignty of the Sultanate of Bengal. It was traded on the Silk Road and replicated in Nepal and China&#x27;s Tibetan protectorate. The Pakistani rupee was scripted in Bengali as taka on its banknotes until Bangladesh&#x27;s creation in 1971.

=== Literature ===
Bengali literature has a rich heritage. It has a history stretching back to the 3rd century BCE, when the main language was Sanskrit written in the brahmi script. The Bengali language and script evolved from Magadhi Prakrit. Bengal has a long tradition in folk literature, evidenced by the &quot;Chôrjapôdô&quot;, &quot;Mangalkavya&quot;, &quot;Shreekrishna Kirtana&quot;, &quot;Maimansingha Gitika&quot; or &quot;Thakurmar Jhuli&quot;. Bengali literature in the medieval age was often either religious (e.g. Chandidas), or adaptations from other languages (e.g. Alaol). During the Bengal Renaissance of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, Bengali literature was modernised through the works of authors such as Michael Madhusudan Dutta, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay, Rabindranath Tagore, Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay, Kazi Nazrul Islam, Satyendranath Dutta, Begum Rokeya and Jibanananda Das. In the 20th century, prominent modern Bengali writers included Syed Mujtaba Ali, Jasimuddin, Manik Bandopadhyay, Tarasankar Bandyopadhyay, Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay, Buddhadeb Bose, Sunil Gangopadhyay and Humayun Ahmed.

Prominent contemporary Bengali writers in English include Amitav Ghosh, Tahmima Anam, Jhumpa Lahiri and Zia Haider Rahman among others.

=== Personification ===

The Bangamata is a female personification of Bengal which was created during the Bengali Renaissance and later adopted by the Bengali nationalists. Hindu nationalists adopted a modified Bharat Mata as a national personification of India. The Mother Bengal represents not only biological motherness but its attributed characteristics as well – protection, never ending love, consolation, care, the beginning and the end of life. In Amar Sonar Bangla, the national anthem of Bangladesh, Rabindranath Tagore has used the word &quot;Maa&quot; (Mother) numerous times to refer to the motherland i.e. Bengal.

=== Art ===
The Pala-Sena School of Art developed in Bengal between the 8th and 12th centuries and is considered a high point of classical Asian art. It included sculptures and paintings.

Islamic Bengal was noted for its production of the finest cotton fabrics and saris, notably the Jamdani, which received warrants from the Mughal court. The Bengal School of painting flourished in Kolkata and Shantiniketan in the British Raj during the early 20th century. Its practitioners were among the harbingers of modern painting in India. Zainul Abedin was the pioneer of modern Bangladeshi art. The country has a thriving and internationally acclaimed contemporary art scene.

=== Architecture ===
Classical Bengali architecture features terracotta buildings. Ancient Bengali kingdoms laid the foundations of the region&#x27;s architectural heritage through the construction of monasteries and temples (for example, the Somapura Mahavihara). During the sultanate period, a distinct and glorious Islamic style of architecture developed the region. Most Islamic buildings were small and highly artistic terracotta mosques with multiple domes and no minarets. Bengal was also home to the largest mosque in South Asia at Adina. Bengali vernacular architecture is credited for inspiring the popularity of the bungalow.

The Bengal region also has a rich heritage of Indo-Saracenic architecture, including numerous zamindar palaces and mansions. The most prominent example of this style is the Victoria Memorial, Kolkata.

In the 1950s, Muzharul Islam pioneered the modernist terracotta style of architecture in South Asia. This was followed by the design of the Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban by the renowned American architect Louis Kahn in the 1960s, which was based on the aesthetic heritage of Bengali architecture and geography.

=== Sciences ===

The Gupta dynasty, which is believed to have originated in North Bengal, pioneered the invention of chess, the concept of zero, the theory of Earth orbiting the Sun, the study of solar and lunar eclipses and the flourishing of Sanskrit literature and drama.&lt;

The educational reforms during the British Raj gave birth to many distinguished scientists in Bengal. Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose pioneered the investigation of radio and microwave optics, made very significant contributions to plant science, and laid the foundations of experimental science in the Indian subcontinent. IEEE named him one of the fathers of radio science. He was the first person from the Indian subcontinent to receive a US patent, in 1904. In 1924–25, while researching at the University of Dhaka, Satyendra Nath Bose well known for his works in quantum mechanics, provided the foundation for Bose–Einstein statistics and the theory of the Bose–Einstein condensate. Meghnad Saha was the first scientist to relate a star&#x27;s spectrum to its temperature, developing thermal ionization equations (notably the Saha ionization equation) that have been foundational in the fields of astrophysics and astrochemistry. Amal Kumar Raychaudhuri was a physicist, known for his research in general relativity and cosmology. His most significant contribution is the eponymous Raychaudhuri equation, which demonstrates that singularities arise inevitably in general relativity and is a key ingredient in the proofs of the Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems.

In the United States, the Bangladeshi-American engineer Fazlur Rahman Khan emerged as the &quot;father of tubular designs&quot; in skyscraper construction. Ashoke Sen is an Indian theoretical physicist whose main area of work is string theory. He was among the first recipients of the Fundamental Physics Prize &quot;for opening the path to the realisation that all string theories are different limits of the same underlying theory&quot;.

=== Music ===
The Baul tradition is a unique heritage of Bengali folk music. The 19th century mystic poet Lalon Shah is the most celebrated practitioner of the tradition. Other folk music forms include Gombhira, Bhatiali and Bhawaiya. Hason Raja is a renowned folk poet of the Sylhet region. Folk music in Bengal is often accompanied by the ektara, a one-stringed instrument. Other instruments include the dotara, dhol, flute, and tabla. The region also has a rich heritage in North Indian classical music.

=== Cuisine ===

Bengali cuisine is the only traditionally developed multi-course tradition from the Indian subcontinent. Rice and fish are traditional favourite foods, leading to a saying that &quot;fish and rice make a Bengali&quot;. Bengal&#x27;s vast repertoire of fish-based dishes includes Hilsa preparations, a favourite among Bengalis. Bengalis make distinctive sweetmeats from milk products, including &quot;Rôshogolla&quot;, &quot;Chômchôm&quot;, and several kinds of &quot;Pithe&quot;. The old city of Dhaka is noted for its distinct Indo-Islamic cuisine, including biryani, bakarkhani and kebab dishes.

=== Boats ===
There are 150 types of Bengali country boats plying the 700 rivers of the Bengal delta, the vast floodplain and many oxbow lakes. They vary in design and size. The boats include the dinghy and sampan among others. Country boats are a central element of Bengali culture and have inspired generations of artists and poets, including the ivory artisans of the Mughal era. The country has a long shipbuilding tradition, dating back many centuries. Wooden boats are made of timber such as &quot;Jarul&quot; (dipterocarpus turbinatus),&quot; sal&quot; (shorea robusta), &quot;sundari&quot; (heritiera fomes), and &quot;Burma teak&quot; (tectons grandis). Medieval Bengal was shipbuilding hub for the Mughal and Ottoman navies. The British Royal Navy later utilised Bengali shipyards in the 19th century, including for the Battle of Trafalgar.

=== Attire ===

Bengali women commonly wear the &quot;shaŗi&quot; , often distinctly designed according to local cultural customs. In urban areas, many women and men wear Western-style attire. Among men, European dressing has greater acceptance. Men also wear traditional costumes such as the &quot;panjabi&quot; with &quot;dhoti&quot; or &quot;pyjama&quot;, often on religious occasions. The lungi, a kind of long skirt, is widely worn by Bangladeshi men.

=== Festivals ===
For Bengali Muslims, the major religious festivals are Eid al-Fitr, Eid al-Adha, Mawlid, Muharram, and Shab-e-Barat. For Bengali Hindus, the major religious festivals include Durga Puja, Kali Puja, Janmashtami and Rath Yatra. In honour of Bengali Buddhists and Bengali Christians, both Buddha&#x27;s Birthday and Christmas are public holidays in the region. The Bengali New Year is the main secular festival of Bengali culture celebrated by people regardless of religious and social backgrounds. The biggest congregation in Bengal is the Bishwa ijtema, which is also the world&#x27;s second largest Islamic congregation. Other Bengali festivals include the first day of spring and the Nabanna harvest festival in autumn.

=== Media ===

Bangladesh has a diverse, outspoken and privately owned press, with the largest circulated Bengali language newspapers in the world. English-language titles are popular in the urban readership. West Bengal had 559 published newspapers in 2005, of which 430 were in Bengali. Bengali cinema is divided between the media hubs of Dhaka and Kolkata.

=== Sports ===

Cricket and football are popular sports in the Bengal region. Local games include sports such as Kho Kho and Kabaddi, the latter being the national sport of Bangladesh. An Indo-Bangladesh &quot;Bengali Games&quot; has been organised among the athletes of the Bengali speaking areas of the two countries.

== See also ==
* Greater Bangladesh
* Bangladeshi diaspora
* List of Bengalis
* Zerat

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="0" end="6" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q384001" start="16" end="39" title="Historical geography" label="historical geographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q853085" start="41" end="56" title="ethnolinguistic" label="ethnolinguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055678" start="104" end="116" title="Eastern South Asia" label="eastern part"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="124" end="143" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="163" end="176" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="260" end="270" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="279" end="291" title="States and union territories of India" label="Indian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="296" end="307" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42542" start="313" end="331" title="Karimganj district" label="Karimganj district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="335" end="340" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q845478" start="355" end="368" title="Vanga Kingdom" label="Vanga Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q817181" start="430" end="446" title="Bengali calendar" label="Bengali calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599441" start="474" end="483" title="Shashanka" label="Shashanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="511" end="522" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428714" start="573" end="585" title="Sena dynasty" label="Sena dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156330" start="590" end="602" title="Deva dynasty" label="Deva dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566899" start="690" end="733" title="Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent" label="Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="750" end="766" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="Bengal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="817" end="830" title="Islamic world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="895" end="900" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q40632742" start="902" end="908" title="Arakan" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="910" end="917" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="919" end="924" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="930" end="936" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083684" start="957" end="969" title="Bengal Subah" label="Bengal Subah"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="1012" end="1025" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637089" start="1049" end="1064" title="Nawab of Bengal" label="Nawab of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q203233" start="1093" end="1110" title="Battle of Plassey" label="Battle of Plassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1118" end="1136" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="1157" end="1174" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="1220" end="1233" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="1239" end="1247" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047143" start="1319" end="1344" title="Partition of Bengal (1905)" label="first partition of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126447" start="1376" end="1400" title="Eastern Bengal and Assam" label="Eastern Bengal and Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="1477" end="1482" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136181" start="1498" end="1515" title="Sylhet referendum, 1947" label="Sylhet referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055394" start="1533" end="1559" title="Bengal Legislative Council" label="Bengal Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055409" start="1564" end="1591" title="Bengal Legislative Assembly" label="Bengal Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596142" start="1614" end="1651" title="Partition of Bengal (1947)" label="divided along religious lines in 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144248" start="1688" end="1698" title="Bengali literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349675" start="1700" end="1705" title="Bengali music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855436" start="1707" end="1710" title="Bangladeshi art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="1854" end="1868" title="Nobel laureate" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530951" start="2007" end="2020" title="Gender Parity Index" label="gender parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531013" start="2026" end="2040" title="gender pay gap" label="gender pay gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="2062" end="2079" title="Human Development Index" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q845478" start="2169" end="2174" title="Vanga Kingdom" label="Vanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="2248" end="2259" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q25716" start="2278" end="2298" title="first millennium BCE" label="first millennium BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q916943" start="2374" end="2393" title="Brihadisvara Temple" label="Brihadisvara Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q41496" start="2397" end="2406" title="Thanjavur" label="Thanjavur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="2665" end="2684" title="Sultanate of Bengal" label="Sultanate of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487786" start="2704" end="2725" title="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah" label="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="2749" end="2753" title="Shah" label="Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="2776" end="2786" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="2840" end="2856" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2888" end="2897" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="3187" end="3197" title="Copper Age" label="Copper Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="3258" end="3266" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495995" start="3445" end="3473" title="Northern Black Polished Ware" label="Northern Black Polished Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q122842366" start="3526" end="3531" title="Dihar (archaeological site)" label="Dihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130757" start="3533" end="3550" title="Pandu Rajar Dhibi" label="Pandu Rajar Dhibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085127" start="3552" end="3565" title="Mahasthangarh" label="Mahasthangarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071385" start="3567" end="3582" title="Chandraketugarh" label="Chandraketugarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969421" start="3587" end="3601" title="Wari-Bateshwar ruins" label="Wari-Bateshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="3615" end="3621" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="3623" end="3634" title="Brahmaputra" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125242" start="3639" end="3645" title="Meghna" label="Meghna"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="3713" end="3722" title="Estuary" label="Estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="3730" end="3743" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="3756" end="3764" title="maritime industry" label="maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347092" start="3878" end="3886" title="Varendra" label="Varendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635252" start="3888" end="3893" title="Suhma" label="Suhma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155818" start="3895" end="3899" title="Anga" label="Anga"/>
<link wikidata="Q845478" start="3901" end="3906" title="Vanga Kingdom" label="Vanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470658" start="3908" end="3916" title="Samatata" label="Samatata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495832" start="3921" end="3929" title="Harikela" label="Harikela"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="4019" end="4025" title="Brahmi" label="Brahmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="4077" end="4091" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259957" start="4223" end="4241" title="Punch-marked coins" label="Punch-marked coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="4276" end="4280" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q888673" start="4463" end="4469" title="Prince Vijaya" label="Vijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="4499" end="4508" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="4597" end="4609" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="4729" end="4734" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="4736" end="4751" title="Indian numerals" label="Indian numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="4772" end="4776" title="zero" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4815" end="4821" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200427" start="4826" end="4832" title="Roman world" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q835313" start="4836" end="4846" title="Gangaridai" label="Gangaridai"/>
<link wikidata="Q312548" start="4869" end="4880" title="Megasthenes" label="Megasthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163759" start="4935" end="4947" title="Ganges delta" label="Ganges delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="4970" end="4989" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="5070" end="5077" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="5081" end="5093" title="war elephant" label="war elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="5197" end="5205" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="5261" end="5272" title="Roman Egypt" label="Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="5285" end="5292" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969421" start="5298" end="5318" title="Wari-Bateshwar ruins" label="Wari-Bateshwar ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="5412" end="5428" title="Claudius Ptolemy" label="Claudius Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431920" start="5459" end="5483" title="Purba Medinipur district" label="Purba Medinipur district"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="5517" end="5523" title="Aelana" label="Aelana"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="5544" end="5550" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599441" start="5654" end="5663" title="Shashanka" label="Shashanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q817181" start="5684" end="5700" title="Bengali calendar" label="Bengali calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076645" start="5751" end="5764" title="Gauda Kingdom" label="Gauda Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496277" start="5880" end="5885" title="Gauda (city)" label="Gauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="5910" end="5921" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352284" start="5946" end="5954" title="Gopala I" label="Gopala I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183804" start="6226" end="6236" title="Dharmapala (emperor)" label="Dharmapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649142" start="6241" end="6249" title="Devapala (Pala dynasty)" label="Devapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="6281" end="6288" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324" start="6304" end="6321" title="Gurjara-Pratihara" label="Gurjara-Pratihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="6326" end="6337" title="Rashtrakuta" label="Rashtrakuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="6381" end="6386" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="6391" end="6398" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q320150" start="6436" end="6441" title="Atisa" label="Atisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216243" start="6461" end="6468" title="Nalanda" label="Nalanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q305044" start="6519" end="6538" title="Somapura Mahavihara" label="Somapura Mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032034" start="6656" end="6671" title="Chandra dynasty" label="Chandra dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q40632742" start="6702" end="6708" title="Arakan" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109008" start="6714" end="6728" title="Varman dynasty" label="Varman dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="6768" end="6773" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428714" start="6779" end="6791" title="Sena dynasty" label="Sena dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156330" start="6937" end="6949" title="Deva dynasty" label="Deva dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="7012" end="7020" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="7159" end="7174" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="7183" end="7187" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125242" start="7296" end="7308" title="Meghna River" label="Meghna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="7388" end="7395" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q305044" start="7454" end="7462" title="Somapura Mahavihara" label="Paharpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736254" start="7467" end="7476" title="Mainamati" label="Mainamati"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="7504" end="7511" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q51876" start="7551" end="7577" title="Bangladesh National Museum" label="Bangladesh National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="7617" end="7623" title="Ghurid Empire" label="Ghurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698200" start="7632" end="7661" title="Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khalji" label="Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="8831" end="8846" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628354" start="8987" end="9012" title="Islamic invasion of Tibet" label="Islamic invasion of Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q336312" start="9253" end="9262" title="Iltutmish" label="Iltutmish"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792673" start="9543" end="9561" title="Conquest of Sylhet" label="Conquest of Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346510" start="9665" end="9672" title="Satgaon" label="Satgaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350313" start="9677" end="9686" title="Sonargaon" label="Sonargaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431562" start="9758" end="9781" title="Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah" label="Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="9793" end="9803" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487786" start="9866" end="9887" title="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah" label="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130759" start="9973" end="9979" title="Pandua, Malda" label="Pandua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="10020" end="10036" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="Bengal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="10123" end="10136" title="Islamic world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="10152" end="10164" title="Muslim Spain" label="Muslim Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="10265" end="10270" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="10290" end="10298" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="10314" end="10320" title="Orissa" label="Orissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="10337" end="10342" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29413987" start="10419" end="10435" title="Bengal Sultanate-Delhi Sultanate War" label="Bengal-Delhi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475864" start="10522" end="10535" title="Sikandar Shah" label="Sikandar Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q455442" start="10558" end="10576" title="Firuz Shah Tughluq" label="Firuz Shah Tughluq"/>
<link wikidata="Q40632742" start="10755" end="10761" title="Arakan" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556783" start="10806" end="10827" title="Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah" label="Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126005" start="10829" end="10853" title="Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah" label="Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="10945" end="10960" title="tributary state" label="tributary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q167134" start="11171" end="11188" title="Jaunpur Sultanate" label="Jaunpur Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="11223" end="11235" title="vassal state" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071330" start="11273" end="11284" title="Chandradwip" label="Chandradwip"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630375" start="11289" end="11299" title="Pratapgarh Kingdom" label="Pratapgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060542" start="11482" end="11503" title="Alauddin Hussain Shah" label="Alauddin Hussain Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q25588154" start="11574" end="11591" title="Shah Ismail Ghazi" label="Shah Ismail Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250511" start="11606" end="11618" title="Khen dynasty" label="Khen dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021159" start="11708" end="11726" title="Indian Ocean trade" label="Indian Ocean trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136657" start="11760" end="11769" title="re-export" label="re-export"/>
<link wikidata="Q271411" start="11817" end="11824" title="Malindi" label="Malindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="11872" end="11886" title="Imperial China" label="Imperial China"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="12084" end="12090" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061057" start="12092" end="12096" title="Aceh Sultanate" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q46652" start="12101" end="12108" title="Malacca Sultanate" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="12134" end="12142" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060600" start="12163" end="12177" title="shell currency" label="shell currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="12238" end="12243" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859654" start="12330" end="12349" title="Ilyas Shahi dynasty" label="Ilyas Shahi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949588" start="12399" end="12420" title="Hussain Shahi dynasty" label="Hussain Shahi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q373650" start="12489" end="12501" title="Sur Empire" label="Suri dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373352" start="12522" end="12537" title="Karrani dynasty" label="Karrani dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895686" start="12543" end="12562" title="Battle of Raj Mahal" label="Battle of Raj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227852" start="12582" end="12599" title="Daud Khan Karrani" label="Daud Khan Karrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="12659" end="12673" title="Mughal Emperor" label="Mughal Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="12674" end="12679" title="Akbar" label="Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862041" start="12734" end="12745" title="Baro-Bhuyan" label="Baro-Bhuyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065866" start="12855" end="12874" title="Zamindars of Bengal" label="Zamindars of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q549915" start="12893" end="12901" title="Isa Khan" label="Isa Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083684" start="13062" end="13075" title="Mughal Bengal" label="Mughal Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="13282" end="13296" title="Mughal Emperor" label="Mughal Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="13337" end="13342" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502507" start="13463" end="13470" title="subedar" label="subedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="13580" end="13586" title="Rajput" label="Rajput"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630505" start="13595" end="13606" title="Man Singh I" label="Man Singh I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83672" start="13616" end="13626" title="Shah Jahan" label="Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645415" start="13645" end="13655" title="Shah Shuja (Mughal prince)" label="Shah Shuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q485547" start="13665" end="13674" title="Aurangzeb" label="Aurangzeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932430" start="13711" end="13720" title="Muhammad Azam Shah" label="Azam Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462487" start="13753" end="13765" title="Shaista Khan" label="Shaista Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637089" start="14032" end="14048" title="Nawabs of Bengal" label="Nawabs of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634642" start="14065" end="14082" title="Murshid Quli Khan" label="Murshid Quli Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017175" start="14301" end="14312" title="Murshidabad" label="Murshidabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="14471" end="14476" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="14481" end="14487" title="Orissa" label="Orissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="15014" end="15025" title="handicrafts" label="handicrafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668294" start="15058" end="15081" title="proto-industrialisation" label="proto-industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225227" start="15270" end="15283" title="muslin trade in Bengal" label="Bengal muslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="15291" end="15300" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="15305" end="15314" title="saltpetre" label="saltpetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="15405" end="15431" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192494" start="15437" end="15462" title="John Law&amp;#x27;s Company" label="French East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q826616" start="15468" end="15493" title="Danish East India Company" label="Danish East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825472" start="15499" end="15526" title="Austrian East India Company" label="Austrian East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q700040" start="15532" end="15546" title="Ostend Company" label="Ostend Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="15556" end="15580" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q725457" start="15715" end="15721" title="muslin" label="muslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="16174" end="16179" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="16342" end="16351" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="16565" end="16577" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933320" start="16994" end="17018" title="Portuguese Chittagong" label="settlement in Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957844" start="17184" end="17210" title="Nader Shah&amp;#x27;s invasion of India" label="Nader Shah&amp;#x27;s invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203233" start="17469" end="17486" title="Battle of Plassey" label="Battle of Plassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="17543" end="17561" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637089" start="17600" end="17615" title="Nawab of Bengal" label="Nawab of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="17827" end="17853" title="Presidency of Fort William" label="Presidency of Fort William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="17945" end="17953" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="17979" end="18007" title="British territories in India" label="British territories in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083685" start="18090" end="18101" title="Bengal Army" label="Bengal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572090" start="18187" end="18205" title="Governor of Bengal" label="Governor of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="18227" end="18252" title="Governor-General of India" label="Governor-General of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658557" start="18275" end="18289" title="Famines in India" label="Bengal famines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477522" start="18345" end="18372" title="Great Bengal famine of 1770" label="Great Bengal famine of 1770"/>
<link wikidata="Q522837" start="18377" end="18398" title="Bengal famine of 1943" label="Bengal famine of 1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="18444" end="18463" title="deindustrialisation" label="deindustrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="18662" end="18683" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="18687" end="18700" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708483" start="18724" end="18745" title="Textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution" label="textile manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055394" start="18966" end="18992" title="Bengal Legislative Council" label="Bengal Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417238" start="19024" end="19044" title="List of legislatures in South Asia" label="legislature in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567939" start="19144" end="19164" title="Morley-Minto reforms" label="Morley-Minto reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="19183" end="19190" title="dyarchy" label="dyarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055409" start="19275" end="19302" title="Bengal Legislative Assembly" label="Bengal Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844387" start="19385" end="19409" title="Prime Minister of Bengal" label="Prime Minister of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="19477" end="19491" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="19668" end="19683" title="Malacca Straits" label="Malacca Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="19748" end="19770" title="Prince of Wales Island (Malaysia)" label="Prince of Wales Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861984" start="19772" end="19790" title="Province Wellesley" label="Province Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="19792" end="19799" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="19804" end="19813" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="19824" end="19830" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="19890" end="19909" title="Straits Settlements" label="Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="19911" end="19924" title="British Burma" label="British Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="19966" end="19978" title="Crown colony" label="Crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478340" start="20019" end="20048" title="Ceded and Conquered Provinces" label="Ceded and Conquered Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629708" start="20053" end="20063" title="Punjab Province (British India)" label="The Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148287" start="20117" end="20131" title="Colonial Assam" label="Colonial Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598680" start="20193" end="20225" title="1876 Bangladesh cyclone" label="Great Backerganj Cyclone of 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q747840" start="20233" end="20240" title="Barisal" label="Barisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="20394" end="20418" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="20629" end="20650" title="Company Rule in India" label="Company Rule in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="20739" end="20750" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q817169" start="20789" end="20807" title="Bengal Renaissance" label="Bengal Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047143" start="20995" end="21024" title="Partition of Bengal (1905)" label="divide the province of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126447" start="21081" end="21105" title="Eastern Bengal and Assam" label="Eastern Bengal and Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q223898" start="21116" end="21139" title="All India Muslim League" label="All India Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="21192" end="21211" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="21268" end="21293" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="21330" end="21358" title="Indian independence movement" label="Indian independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344861" start="21369" end="21389" title="Revolutionary movement for Indian independence" label="revolutionary groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346553" start="21477" end="21484" title="Titumir" label="Titumir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="21512" end="21531" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q156062" start="21540" end="21560" title="Indian National Army" label="Indian National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q223898" start="21669" end="21692" title="All-India Muslim League" label="All-India Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800631" start="21811" end="21828" title="Lahore Resolution" label="Lahore Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307223" start="21838" end="21855" title="Hindu nationalism" label="Hindu nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418473" start="21917" end="21932" title="Hindu Mahasabha" label="Hindu Mahasabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046354" start="21981" end="22006" title="Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy" label="Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4094983" start="22008" end="22026" title="Sarat Chandra Bose" label="Sarat Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330398" start="22037" end="22050" title="United Bengal" label="United Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294296" start="22063" end="22082" title="History of the Republic of India" label="gained independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596142" start="22103" end="22114" title="Partition of Bengal (1947)" label="partitioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347909" start="22251" end="22262" title="East Bengal" label="East Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="22278" end="22291" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844387" start="22477" end="22501" title="Prime Minister of Bengal" label="Prime Minister of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046354" start="22502" end="22527" title="Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy" label="Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="23214" end="23236" title="British Prime Minister" label="British Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="23237" end="23251" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156830" start="23261" end="23296" title="US Ambassador to the United Kingdom" label="US Ambassador to the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="23456" end="23472" title="Mountbatten Plan" label="Mountbatten Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="23486" end="23512" title="partition of British India" label="partition of British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304678" start="23724" end="23756" title="Constituent Assembly of Pakistan" label="Constituent Assembly of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="23800" end="23811" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340149" start="23917" end="23946" title="Constituent Assembly of India" label="Constituent Assembly of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347909" start="23987" end="23998" title="East Bengal" label="East Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="24156" end="24164" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459732" start="24207" end="24222" title="Sylhet Division" label="Sylhet district"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136181" start="24243" end="24273" title="1947 Sylhet referendum" label="referendum to join East Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q472691" start="24298" end="24313" title="Cyril Radcliffe" label="Cyril Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419358" start="24376" end="24390" title="Radcliffe Line" label="Radcliffe Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775277" start="24424" end="24441" title="Dominion of India" label="Dominion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006542" start="24450" end="24470" title="Dominion of Pakistan" label="Dominion of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399139" start="24495" end="24518" title="Bangladesh-India border" label="Bangladesh-India border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496277" start="24643" end="24647" title="Gauda (city)" label="Gaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130759" start="24649" end="24655" title="Pandua, Malda" label="Pandua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017175" start="24657" end="24668" title="Murshidabad" label="Murshidabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163759" start="24849" end="24873" title="Ganges-Brahmaputra delta" label="Ganges-Brahmaputra delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="24996" end="25002" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="25004" end="25015" title="Brahmaputra River" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125242" start="25021" end="25027" title="Meghna River" label="Meghna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347883" start="25183" end="25206" title="geography of Bangladesh" label="geography of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074977" start="25212" end="25234" title="Chittagong Hill Tracts" label="Chittagong Hill Tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q459732" start="25239" end="25252" title="Sylhet region" label="Sylhet region"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068307" start="25277" end="25300" title="List of mountains in Bangladesh" label="mountains in Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="25672" end="25677" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191086" start="25679" end="25685" title="jungle" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526" start="25691" end="25701" title="Sundarbans" label="Sundarbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="25715" end="25723" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q80952" start="25795" end="25813" title="royal Bengal tiger" label="royal Bengal tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="25933" end="25941" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223073" start="26027" end="26059" title="Darjeeling Himalayan hill region" label="Darjeeling Himalayan hill region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981161" start="26151" end="26159" title="Sandakfu" label="Sandakfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133636" start="26205" end="26217" title="Terai region" label="Terai region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825118" start="26328" end="26339" title="Rarh region" label="Rarh region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908932" start="26396" end="26426" title="western plateau and high lands" label="western plateau and high lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796457" start="26651" end="26680" title="Arsenic contamination of groundwater" label="arsenic levels in groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q13395623" start="26978" end="26990" title="North Bengal" label="North Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q379382" start="27112" end="27129" title="Rajshahi Division" label="Rajshahi Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q876023" start="27134" end="27150" title="Rangpur Division" label="Rangpur Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q150062" start="27192" end="27204" title="Jamuna River (Bangladesh)" label="Jamuna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q930773" start="27218" end="27229" title="Padma River" label="Padma River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860756" start="27248" end="27260" title="Barind Tract" label="Barind Tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132351" start="27309" end="27328" title="Jalpaiguri Division" label="Jalpaiguri Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025136" start="27341" end="27355" title="Malda division" label="Malda division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546240" start="27364" end="27384" title="Murshidabad district" label="Murshidabad district"/>
<link wikidata="Q77375" start="27426" end="27445" title="Kishanganj district" label="Kishanganj district"/>
<link wikidata="Q169997" start="27447" end="27457" title="Darjeeling" label="Darjeeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133636" start="27623" end="27628" title="Terai" label="Terai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975243" start="27633" end="27639" title="Dooars" label="Dooars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260346" start="27850" end="27864" title="Santhal people" label="Santhal people"/>
<link wikidata="Q459732" start="27992" end="28007" title="Sylhet Division" label="Sylhet Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q42542" start="28026" end="28044" title="Karimganj district" label="Karimganj district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="28068" end="28073" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="28196" end="28207" title="Brahmaputra River" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709169" start="28212" end="28217" title="Barak River" label="Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q466221" start="28276" end="28282" title="Sylhet" label="Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044560" start="28360" end="28376" title="Sylheti language" label="Sylheti language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194765" start="28466" end="28474" title="Kamarupa" label="Kamarupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495832" start="28479" end="28487" title="Harikela" label="Harikela"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="28512" end="28528" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="Bengal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="28564" end="28577" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q532916" start="28640" end="28644" title="Garo people" label="Garo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37059" start="28646" end="28666" title="Bishnupriya Manipuri" label="Bishnupriya Manipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261144" start="28668" end="28674" title="Khasi people" label="Khasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="28748" end="28763" title="northeast India" label="northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q330158" start="28819" end="28833" title="Dhaka Division" label="Dhaka Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q17045437" start="28874" end="28888" title="Madhupur tract" label="Madhupur tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="28902" end="28917" title="Sal (tree)" label="Sal tree forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093552" start="29004" end="29012" title="Faridpur District" label="Faridpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006303" start="29051" end="29061" title="Mymensingh" label="Mymensingh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306321" start="29066" end="29073" title="Tangail" label="Tangail"/>
<link wikidata="Q501696" start="29243" end="29258" title="Khulna Division" label="Khulna Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q459723" start="29260" end="29276" title="Barisal Division" label="Barisal Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891455" start="29294" end="29311" title="Faridpur Division" label="Faridpur Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132340" start="29361" end="29380" title="Presidency division" label="Presidency division"/>
<link wikidata="Q808013" start="29382" end="29398" title="Burdwan division" label="Burdwan division"/>
<link wikidata="Q29289380" start="29403" end="29421" title="Medinipur division" label="Medinipur division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526" start="29428" end="29438" title="Sundarbans" label="Sundarbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="29448" end="29468" title="biodiversity hotspot" label="biodiversity hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q33173" start="29637" end="29649" title="Chittagonian language" label="Chittagonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q158087" start="29697" end="29716" title="Chittagong Division" label="Chittagong Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="29773" end="29787" title="thalassocracy" label="thalassocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q351363" start="29792" end="29801" title="seafaring" label="seafaring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495832" start="29850" end="29858" title="Harikela" label="Harikela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470658" start="29863" end="29871" title="Samatata" label="Samatata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032034" start="30024" end="30039" title="Chandra dynasty" label="Chandra dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="30045" end="30064" title="sultanate of Bengal" label="sultanate of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620265" start="30070" end="30088" title="kingdom of Tripura" label="kingdom of Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791211" start="30094" end="30112" title="kingdom of Mrauk U" label="kingdom of Mrauk U"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="30118" end="30135" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="30144" end="30157" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33173" start="30200" end="30221" title="Chittagonian language" label="Chittagonian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="30348" end="30361" title="Tibeto-Burman" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059355" start="30391" end="30397" title="Chakma people" label="Chakma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929668" start="30399" end="30404" title="Marma people" label="Marma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349806" start="30406" end="30416" title="Tanchangya people" label="Tanchangya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940333" start="30421" end="30425" title="Bawm people" label="Bawm"/>
<link wikidata="Q40632742" start="30520" end="30526" title="Arakan" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="30623" end="30643" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526" start="30673" end="30683" title="Sundarbans" label="Sundarbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q305044" start="30689" end="30708" title="Somapura Mahavihara" label="Somapura Mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q799893" start="30714" end="30737" title="Mosque City of Bagerhat" label="Mosque City of Bagerhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q463874" start="30746" end="30774" title="Darjeeling Himalayan Railway" label="Darjeeling Himalayan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q533087" start="30811" end="30829" title="Bishnupur, Bankura" label="Bishnupur, Bankura"/>
<link wikidata="Q357320" start="30847" end="30859" title="Adina Mosque" label="Adina Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377841" start="30865" end="30884" title="Katra Masjid" label="Caravanserai Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q145811" start="30895" end="30903" title="zamindar" label="zamindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q402937" start="30918" end="30930" title="Ahsan Manzil" label="Ahsan Manzil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166812" start="30935" end="30953" title="Cooch Behar Palace" label="Cooch Behar Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801226" start="30960" end="30972" title="Lalbagh Fort" label="Lalbagh Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350774" start="30978" end="31002" title="Bara Katra" label="Great Caravanserai ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105405" start="31008" end="31039" title="Choto Katra" label="Shaista Khan Caravanserai ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356352" start="31053" end="31070" title="Victoria Memorial (Kolkata)" label="Victoria Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085127" start="31153" end="31166" title="Mahasthangarh" label="Mahasthangarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736254" start="31168" end="31177" title="Mainamati" label="Mainamati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071385" start="31179" end="31194" title="Chandraketugarh" label="Chandraketugarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969421" start="31199" end="31213" title="Wari-Bateshwar" label="Wari-Bateshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350362" start="31219" end="31242" title="Jaldapara National Park" label="Jaldapara National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350641" start="31248" end="31271" title="Lawachara National Park" label="Lawachara National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695454" start="31277" end="31296" title="Teknaf Game Reserve" label="Teknaf Game Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074977" start="31305" end="31327" title="Chittagong Hill Tracts" label="Chittagong Hill Tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q949746" start="31330" end="31346" title="Cox&amp;#x27;s Bazar" label="Cox&amp;#x27;s Bazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="31492" end="31499" title="surfing" label="surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q254495" start="31513" end="31537" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Island" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="31597" end="31607" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q40632742" start="32742" end="32748" title="Arakan" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q233838" start="32754" end="32767" title="Rakhine State" label="Rakhine State"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="32769" end="32776" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032034" start="33000" end="33014" title="Candra dynasty" label="Candra dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534873" start="33016" end="33029" title="Paul Wheatley (geographer)" label="Paul Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q118466791" start="33095" end="33108" title="Pamela Gutman" label="Pamela Gutman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="33499" end="33511" title="vassal state" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="33519" end="33535" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="Bengal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791211" start="33612" end="33630" title="Kingdom of Mrauk U" label="Kingdom of Mrauk U"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209005" start="33665" end="33680" title="Bengali Muslims" label="Bengali Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887679" start="33745" end="33759" title="Bengali Hindus" label="Bengali Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23904945" start="33764" end="33781" title="Bengali Buddhists" label="Bengali Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144248" start="33846" end="33864" title="Bengali literature" label="Bengali literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350443" start="33892" end="33897" title="Alaol" label="Alaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227999" start="33902" end="33913" title="Daulat Qazi" label="Daulat Qazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645415" start="33924" end="33941" title="Shah Shuja (Mughal prince)" label="Prince Shah Shuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q938332" start="33996" end="34010" title="Peacock Throne" label="Peacock Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q464529" start="34177" end="34185" title="Rohingya people" label="Rohingya"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136551" start="34251" end="34268" title="Rohingya genocide" label="Rohingya genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="34442" end="34447" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581002" start="34567" end="34579" title="Barak Valley" label="Barak Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="34635" end="34653" title="Partition of India" label="Partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q459732" start="34705" end="34720" title="Sylhet Division" label="Sylhet Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347909" start="34728" end="34739" title="East Bengal" label="East Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729385" start="34775" end="34784" title="Karimganj" label="Karimganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126447" start="34884" end="34908" title="Eastern Bengal and Assam" label="Eastern Bengal and Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="34941" end="34952" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194765" start="35020" end="35028" title="Kamarupa" label="Kamarupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076645" start="35030" end="35035" title="Gauda Kingdom" label="Gauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932032" start="35040" end="35046" title="Kamata Kingdom" label="Kamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060542" start="35085" end="35106" title="Alauddin Hussain Shah" label="Alauddin Hussain Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="35375" end="35402" title="Andaman and Nicobar Islands" label="Andaman and Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="35556" end="35568" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q715197" start="35632" end="35668" title="Provisional Government of Free India" label="Provisional Government of Free India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="35690" end="35710" title="Subhash Chandra Bose" label="Subhash Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887679" start="35804" end="35818" title="Bengali Hindus" label="Bengali Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="35962" end="35969" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="36084" end="36098" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="36104" end="36116" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="36125" end="36136" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="36207" end="36220" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074977" start="36331" end="36353" title="Chittagong Hill Tracts" label="Chittagong Hill Tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="36433" end="36446" title="Tibeto-Burman" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059355" start="36474" end="36487" title="Chakma people" label="Chakma people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940333" start="36489" end="36500" title="Bawm people" label="Bawm people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568909" start="36505" end="36515" title="Mru people" label="Mro people"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881206" start="36592" end="36605" title="Chakma Circle" label="Chakma Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744458" start="36610" end="36624" title="Bohmong Circle" label="Bohmong Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881206" start="36639" end="36650" title="Chakma Raja" label="Chakma Raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083684" start="36672" end="36685" title="Mughal Bengal" label="Mughal Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q559490" start="36718" end="36738" title="Farrukhsiyar" label="Emperor Farrukhsiyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q569762" start="36919" end="36939" title="Permanent Settlement" label="Permanent Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="36966" end="36984" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110387" start="37079" end="37089" title="Benita Roy" label="Benita Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="37106" end="37125" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102394" start="37158" end="37187" title="Chittagong Hill Tracts manual" label="Chittagong Hill Tracts manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="37424" end="37447" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="37559" end="37566" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="37571" end="37575" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="37603" end="37625" title="Indianized kingdom" label="Hindu-Buddhist kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082007" start="37696" end="37719" title="Islam in Southeast Asia" label="Islam in Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="38083" end="38090" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="38106" end="38112" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="38135" end="38150" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="38192" end="38209" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="38217" end="38231" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="38263" end="38282" title="Straits Settlements" label="Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="38352" end="38364" title="Crown colony" label="Crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="38413" end="38422" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461285" start="38464" end="38474" title="Shah Jalal" label="Shah Jalal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466221" start="38515" end="38521" title="Sylhet" label="Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="38530" end="38542" title="British Raj" label="British rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q207752" start="38556" end="38564" title="Shillong" label="Shillong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912045" start="38573" end="38587" title="summer capital" label="summer capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126447" start="38591" end="38615" title="Eastern Bengal and Assam" label="Eastern Bengal and Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="38775" end="38779" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="38795" end="38802" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="38923" end="38931" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356060" start="38936" end="38943" title="Jaunpur district" label="Jaunpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629708" start="38966" end="38972" title="Punjab Province (British India)" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478340" start="38981" end="39010" title="Ceded and Conquered Provinces" label="Ceded and Conquered Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368898" start="39098" end="39119" title="Rosie Llewellyn-Jones" label="Rosie Llewellyn-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="39424" end="39430" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487786" start="39579" end="39600" title="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah" label="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="39640" end="39656" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="Bengal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083684" start="39661" end="39674" title="Mughal Bengal" label="Mughal Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637089" start="39680" end="39695" title="Nawab of Bengal" label="Nawab of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="39822" end="39836" title="Mughal Emperor" label="Mughal Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="39864" end="39876" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="39950" end="39966" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q320150" start="40009" end="40014" title="Atisa" label="Atisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628354" start="40062" end="40078" title="Islamic invasion of Tibet" label="Islamic invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698200" start="40096" end="40112" title="Bakhtiyar Khalji" label="Bakhtiyar Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q17342164" start="40167" end="40192" title="Tripura (princely state)" label="princely state of Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749646" start="40210" end="40225" title="Manikya dynasty" label="Manikya dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843863" start="40241" end="40265" title="Tripura Merger Agreement" label="Tripura Merger Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="40294" end="40306" title="vassal state" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q26458887" start="40401" end="40416" title="Ratna Manikya I" label="Ratna Manikya I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378898" start="40524" end="40535" title="Ruknuddin Barbak Shah" label="Barbak Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887679" start="40615" end="40628" title="Bengali Hindu" label="Bengali Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="40721" end="40728" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="40830" end="40840" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="40845" end="40860" title="Northeast India" label="Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193531" start="40865" end="40880" title="Bengali culture" label="Bengali culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723913" start="40904" end="40916" title="S. D. Burman" label="S. D. Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="41076" end="41083" title="Soil fertility" label="fertile"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="41204" end="41209" title="mango" label="mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q45757" start="41211" end="41220" title="jackfruit" label="jackfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816679" start="41222" end="41231" title="betel nut" label="betel nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q25292" start="41236" end="41245" title="date palm" label="date palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211" start="41253" end="41257" title="jute" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q30076" start="41259" end="41266" title="mustard plant" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="41271" end="41280" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15324" start="41313" end="41325" title="Body of water" label="Water bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="41330" end="41337" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975243" start="41482" end="41488" title="Dooars" label="Dooars"/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="41516" end="41519" title="Sal (tree)" label="Sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="41539" end="41548" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="41703" end="41706" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="41709" end="41716" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="41722" end="41734" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901585" start="41811" end="41831" title="Bhawal National Park" label="Bhawal National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350641" start="41837" end="41860" title="Lawachara National Park" label="Lawachara National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="41866" end="41876" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="41991" end="42003" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="42010" end="42018" title="littoral" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526" start="42019" end="42029" title="Sundarbans" label="Sundarbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817834" start="42080" end="42095" title="mangrove forest" label="mangrove forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="42115" end="42141" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068578" start="42163" end="42184" title="List of mammals in Bangladesh" label="89 species of mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436362" start="42186" end="42206" title="List of birds of Bangladesh" label="628 species of birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058747" start="42211" end="42235" title="List of fishes in Bangladesh" label="numerous species of fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q146628" start="42257" end="42267" title="Nymphaea" label="water lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q266761" start="42273" end="42294" title="oriental magpie-robin" label="oriental magpie-robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709642" start="42300" end="42305" title="hilsa" label="hilsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919027" start="42310" end="42320" title="mango tree" label="mango tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q735158" start="42364" end="42389" title="white-throated kingfisher" label="white-throated kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475725" start="42395" end="42406" title="Alstonia" label="chatim tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q764525" start="42415" end="42438" title="night-flowering jasmine" label="night-flowering jasmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80952" start="42462" end="42474" title="Bengal tiger" label="Bengal tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245895" start="42482" end="42497" title="national animal" label="national animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190674" start="42527" end="42538" title="fishing cat" label="fishing cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="42649" end="42664" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="42672" end="42708" title="Bangladesh" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="42717" end="42729" title="States and union territories of India" label="Indian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="42733" end="42744" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581002" start="42767" end="42779" title="Barak Valley" label="Barak Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="42814" end="42819" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="42841" end="42848" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q17342164" start="42920" end="42933" title="Hill Tipperah" label="Hill Tipperah"/>
<link wikidata="Q254495" start="42957" end="42981" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Island" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="43019" end="43046" title="Andaman and Nicobar Islands" label="Andaman and Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="43139" end="43154" title="union territory" label="union territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="43215" end="43237" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="43251" end="43269" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995170" start="43278" end="43298" title="Constitution of Bangladesh" label="written constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q596123" start="43305" end="43314" title="President of Bangladesh" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056319" start="43373" end="43383" title="Government of Bangladesh" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684080" start="43515" end="43530" title="Jatiyo Sangshad" label="Jatiyo Sangshad"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="43698" end="43703" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="43726" end="43746" title="established religion" label="established religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="43772" end="43791" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="43849" end="43868" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039068" start="43951" end="43972" title="Caretaker government of Bangladesh" label="caretaker governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="44066" end="44078" title="Awami League" label="Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q496810" start="44087" end="44115" title="Bangladesh Nationalist Party" label="Bangladesh Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="44212" end="44214" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="44216" end="44219" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="44221" end="44224" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="44230" end="44240" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="44242" end="44245" title="Asian Development Bank" label="ADB"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="44247" end="44250" title="Organization of Islamic Cooperation" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q41230" start="44252" end="44255" title="Islamic Development Bank" label="IDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="44257" end="44262" title="South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation" label="SAARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q795985" start="44264" end="44271" title="Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation" label="BIMSTEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q21723343" start="44280" end="44285" title="Islamic Military Counter Terrorism Coalition" label="IMCTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="44334" end="44351" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="44445" end="44462" title="India" label="Republic of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603691" start="44475" end="44485" title="State governments of India" label="executives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091020" start="44490" end="44500" title="Vidhan Sabha" label="assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="44570" end="44588" title="president of India" label="president of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="44649" end="44665" title="Government of India" label="union government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670755" start="44693" end="44707" title="chief minister" label="chief minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486618" start="44865" end="44886" title="President&amp;#x27;s rule" label="President&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="44981" end="45004" title="prime minister of India" label="prime minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="45087" end="45096" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="45185" end="45194" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="45270" end="45281" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q57446" start="45416" end="45432" title="Pranab Mukherjee" label="Pranab Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="45482" end="45506" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q63098715" start="45520" end="45540" title="Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha" label="leader of opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682540" start="45551" end="45573" title="Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury" label="Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="45582" end="45593" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842446" start="45620" end="45653" title="Baharampur Lok Sabha constituency" label="Baharampur Lok Sabha constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455015" start="45729" end="45739" title="Left Front (West Bengal)" label="Left Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q912899" start="45748" end="45766" title="Trinamool Congress" label="Trinamool Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="45772" end="45796" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="45805" end="45827" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q56440112" start="45893" end="45911" title="Communism in India" label="Communism in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="46019" end="46030" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q912899" start="46037" end="46055" title="Trinamool Congress" label="Trinamool Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="46138" end="46160" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="46169" end="46193" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q234277" start="46207" end="46241" title="Communist Party of India (Marxist)" label="Communist Party of India (Marxist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855501" start="46390" end="46416" title="Bangladesh-India relations" label="Bangladesh-India relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="46484" end="46508" title="liberation of Bangladesh" label="liberation of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q52183" start="47103" end="47116" title="Sheikh Hasina" label="Sheikh Hasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="47121" end="47135" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="47248" end="47255" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q170454" start="47281" end="47289" title="Agartala" label="Agartala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="47322" end="47327" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="47347" end="47357" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q322155" start="47362" end="47370" title="Rajshahi" label="Rajshahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163759" start="47810" end="47822" title="Ganges Delta" label="Ganges Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="48008" end="48027" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="48322" end="48337" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="48378" end="48394" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="Bengal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q702918" start="48430" end="48437" title="Ma Huan" label="Ma Huan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="48513" end="48532" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="48554" end="48565" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191830" start="48662" end="48667" title="dinar" label="dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="48689" end="48705" title="Admiral Zheng He" label="Admiral Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="48829" end="48845" title="Sultan of Bengal" label="Sultan of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="48899" end="48904" title="Mint (facility)" label="mints"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083684" start="49123" end="49136" title="Mughal Bengal" label="Mughal Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q473750" start="49240" end="49253" title="world economy" label="world economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643989" start="49349" end="49361" title="legal tender" label="legal tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="49401" end="49425" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192494" start="49431" end="49456" title="John Law&amp;#x27;s Company" label="French East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q826616" start="49462" end="49487" title="Danish East India Company" label="Danish East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="49496" end="49522" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q725457" start="49582" end="49588" title="muslin" label="muslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225227" start="49600" end="49622" title="muslin trade in Bengal" label="muslin trade in Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637089" start="49797" end="49812" title="Nawab of Bengal" label="Nawab of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="49906" end="49918" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318699" start="50876" end="50886" title="jute trade" label="jute trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="50893" end="50911" title="partition of India" label="partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680160" start="51151" end="51181" title="Adamjee Jute Mills" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest jute mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="51387" end="51402" title="Economic liberalization" label="Liberal reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="51925" end="51936" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q320578" start="51941" end="51957" title="Abhijit Banerjee" label="Abhijit Banerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="51970" end="52003" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics" label="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43969" start="52008" end="52022" title="Muhammad Yunus" label="Muhammad Yunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="52035" end="52052" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974408" start="52076" end="52096" title="Dhaka Stock Exchange" label="Dhaka Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349831" start="52098" end="52123" title="Chittagong Stock Exchange" label="Chittagong Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997295" start="52125" end="52148" title="Calcutta Stock Exchange" label="Calcutta Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348944" start="52176" end="52194" title="Port of Chittagong" label="Port of Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231171" start="52196" end="52211" title="Port of Kolkata" label="Port of Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025642" start="52213" end="52227" title="Port of Mongla" label="Port of Mongla"/>
<link wikidata="Q29053931" start="52229" end="52243" title="Haldia Port" label="Port of Haldia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18987918" start="52245" end="52258" title="Port of Payra" label="Port of Payra"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056119" start="52260" end="52275" title="Port of Pangaon" label="Port of Pangaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33422432" start="52277" end="52292" title="Farakka Port" label="Port of Farakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056286" start="52294" end="52313" title="Port of Narayanganj" label="Port of Narayanganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056324" start="52315" end="52331" title="Port of Ashuganj" label="Port of Ashuganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794049" start="52333" end="52348" title="Port of Barisal" label="Port of Barisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55978237" start="52350" end="52364" title="Matarbari Port" label="Matarbari Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886850" start="52379" end="52387" title="Benapole" label="Benapole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15266073" start="52388" end="52397" title="Petrapole" label="Petrapole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887608" start="52427" end="52466" title="Bengal Chamber of Commerce and Industry" label="Bengal Chamber of Commerce and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q24946727" start="52468" end="52518" title="Bengal National Chamber of Commerce &amp;amp; Industry" label="Bengal National Chamber of Commerce &amp;amp; Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424552" start="52520" end="52578" title="Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry" label="Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247638" start="52588" end="52633" title="Chittagong Chamber of Commerce &amp;amp; Industry" label="Chittagong Chamber of Commerce &amp;amp; Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13058108" start="52635" end="52675" title="Dhaka Chamber of Commerce &amp;amp; Industry" label="Dhaka Chamber of Commerce &amp;amp; Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622910" start="52684" end="52729" title="Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Dhaka" label="Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q757292" start="52970" end="52979" title="land port" label="land port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399139" start="52988" end="53011" title="Bangladesh-India border" label="Bangladesh-India border"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015627" start="53017" end="53046" title="Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal" label="Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="53176" end="53204" title="Population density" label="most densely populated areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="53253" end="53261" title="Bengalis" label="Bengalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="53320" end="53331" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="53336" end="53341" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="53475" end="53493" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="53862" end="53869" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044560" start="54110" end="54117" title="Sylheti language" label="Sylheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q33173" start="54119" end="54131" title="Chittagonian language" label="Chittagonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32952" start="54133" end="54139" title="Chakma language" label="Chakma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241618" start="54141" end="54160" title="Rangpuri language" label="Rangpuri/Rajbangshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350576" start="54162" end="54168" title="Hajong language" label="Hajong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241177" start="54170" end="54178" title="Rohingya language" label="Rohingya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682361" start="54184" end="54195" title="Tangchangya language" label="Tangchangya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="54300" end="54305" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="54343" end="54351" title="Bengalis" label="Bengalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="54369" end="54374" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="54376" end="54384" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="54386" end="54398" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="54403" end="54411" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="54442" end="54453" title="Irreligion" label="Irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q37059" start="54595" end="54615" title="Bishnupriya Manipuri language" label="Bishnupriya Manipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q765922" start="54617" end="54628" title="Sadri language" label="Oraon Sadri"/>
<link wikidata="Q135305" start="54638" end="54654" title="Bihari languages" label="Bihari languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="54657" end="54680" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646" start="54688" end="54699" title="A&amp;#x27;Tong language" label="A&amp;#x27;Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402721" start="54701" end="54705" title="Chak language" label="Chak"/>
<link wikidata="Q56431" start="54707" end="54711" title="Koch language" label="Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36137" start="54713" end="54717" title="Garo language" label="Garo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808589" start="54719" end="54724" title="Megam language" label="Megam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="54726" end="54732" title="Meitei language" label="Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="54758" end="54766" title="Manipuri language" label="Manipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q36147" start="54775" end="54779" title="Mizo language" label="Mizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951521" start="54781" end="54784" title="Mru language" label="Mru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130962" start="54786" end="54794" title="Pangkhua language" label="Pangkhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450749" start="54796" end="54803" title="Rakhine language" label="Rakhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450749" start="54804" end="54809" title="Marma Language" label="Marma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35947" start="54811" end="54820" title="Kok Borok language" label="Kok Borok"/>
<link wikidata="Q35947" start="54822" end="54827" title="Reang language" label="Riang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35947" start="54829" end="54836" title="Tippera language" label="Tippera"/>
<link wikidata="Q35947" start="54838" end="54842" title="Usoi language" label="Usoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q832413" start="54852" end="54866" title="Chin languages" label="Chin languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="54869" end="54892" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33584" start="54900" end="54905" title="Khasi language" label="Khasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425038" start="54907" end="54911" title="Koda language" label="Koda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327828" start="54913" end="54920" title="Mundari language" label="Mundari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501850" start="54922" end="54926" title="Pnar language" label="Pnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33965" start="54928" end="54935" title="Santali language" label="Santali"/>
<link wikidata="Q56321" start="54937" end="54940" title="War language" label="War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33311" start="54947" end="54966" title="Dravidian languages" label="Dravidian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33492" start="54974" end="54980" title="Kurukh language" label="Kurukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q33907" start="54982" end="54996" title="Sauria Paharia language" label="Sauria Paharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496553" start="55470" end="55487" title="List of urban areas by population" label="major urban areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="55502" end="55507" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496553" start="55515" end="55538" title="List of urban areas by population" label="4th largest urban areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="55553" end="55560" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496553" start="55564" end="55587" title="List of urban areas by population" label="17th largest urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="55624" end="55640" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali language"/>
<link wikidata="Q616419" start="55691" end="55701" title="Apabhraṃśa" label="Apabhraṃśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652214" start="55706" end="55721" title="Magadhi Prakrit" label="Magadhi Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q756802" start="55758" end="55774" title="Bengali alphabet" label="Bengali alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="55804" end="55817" title="Brahmi script" label="Brahmi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319" start="55834" end="55871" title="List of languages by number of native speakers" label="5th most spoken language in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="55890" end="55909" title="Indo-Aryan language" label="Indo-Aryan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="55953" end="55982" title="Indo-European language family" label="Indo-European language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179137" start="56002" end="56028" title="Bengali-Assamese languages" label="Bengali-Assamese languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33810" start="56102" end="56106" title="Odia language" label="Odia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29401" start="56108" end="56116" title="Assamese language" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q32952" start="56118" end="56124" title="Chakma language" label="Chakma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="56126" end="56132" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241177" start="56137" end="56145" title="Rohingya language" label="Rohingya"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="56162" end="56176" title="state language" label="state language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975418" start="56438" end="56463" title="Bengali Language Movement" label="Bengali Language Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="56500" end="56506" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q42375" start="56510" end="56543" title="International Mother Language Day" label="International Mother Language Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q194453" start="56704" end="56719" title="Bangladesh taka" label="Bangladesh taka"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="56780" end="56792" title="Indian rupee" label="Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591844" start="56864" end="56883" title="history of the taka" label="history of the taka"/>
<link wikidata="Q381830" start="57054" end="57074" title="Muhammad bin Tughluq" label="Muhammad bin Tughluq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="57198" end="57217" title="Sultanate of Bengal" label="Sultanate of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="57240" end="57249" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="57268" end="57273" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="57291" end="57296" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q188289" start="57317" end="57332" title="Pakistani rupee" label="Pakistani rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="57568" end="57576" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="57592" end="57598" title="brahmi" label="brahmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="57611" end="57627" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438487" start="57632" end="57638" title="Bengali–Assamese script" label="script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652214" start="57652" end="57667" title="Magadhi Prakrit" label="Magadhi Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580743" start="57740" end="57750" title="Charyapada" label="Chôrjapôdô"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108003" start="57764" end="57775" title="Mangalkavya" label="Mangalkavya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503552" start="57789" end="57809" title="Shreekrishna Kirtana" label="Shreekrishna Kirtana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346955" start="57823" end="57842" title="Maimansingha Gitika" label="Maimansingha Gitika"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350396" start="57858" end="57873" title="Thakurmar Jhuli" label="Thakurmar Jhuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659595" start="57953" end="57962" title="Chandidas" label="Chandidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350443" start="58007" end="58012" title="Alaol" label="Alaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q817169" start="58026" end="58044" title="Bengal Renaissance" label="Bengal Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144248" start="58088" end="58106" title="Bengali literature" label="Bengali literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q666864" start="58159" end="58183" title="Michael Madhusudan Dutta" label="Michael Madhusudan Dutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q964111" start="58185" end="58210" title="Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar" label="Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q377881" start="58212" end="58240" title="Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay" label="Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="58242" end="58261" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q404622" start="58263" end="58290" title="Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay" label="Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q334818" start="58292" end="58309" title="Kazi Nazrul Islam" label="Kazi Nazrul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426956" start="58311" end="58330" title="Satyendranath Dutta" label="Satyendranath Dutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q467083" start="58332" end="58344" title="Begum Rokeya" label="Begum Rokeya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116411" start="58349" end="58364" title="Jibanananda Das" label="Jibanananda Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660404" start="58429" end="58445" title="Syed Mujtaba Ali" label="Syed Mujtaba Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683785" start="58447" end="58457" title="Jasimuddin" label="Jasimuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115772" start="58459" end="58477" title="Manik Bandopadhyay" label="Manik Bandopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351726" start="58479" end="58503" title="Tarasankar Bandyopadhyay" label="Tarasankar Bandyopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900953" start="58505" end="58533" title="Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay" label="Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q155114" start="58535" end="58549" title="Buddhadeb Bose" label="Buddhadeb Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392093" start="58551" end="58569" title="Sunil Gangopadhyay" label="Sunil Gangopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12052777" start="58574" end="58587" title="Humayun Ahmed" label="Humayun Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q336125" start="58648" end="58660" title="Amitav Ghosh" label="Amitav Ghosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675594" start="58662" end="58674" title="Tahmima Anam" label="Tahmima Anam"/>
<link wikidata="Q465208" start="58676" end="58689" title="Jhumpa Lahiri" label="Jhumpa Lahiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914140" start="58694" end="58711" title="Zia Haider Rahman" label="Zia Haider Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068927" start="58756" end="58765" title="Bangamata" label="Bangamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142281" start="58778" end="58793" title="national personification" label="personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q817169" start="58833" end="58852" title="Bengali Renaissance" label="Bengali Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250202" start="58878" end="58898" title="Bengali nationalism" label="Bengali nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307223" start="58900" end="58918" title="Hindu nationalism" label="Hindu nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072991" start="58938" end="58949" title="Bharat Mata" label="Bharat Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q199739" start="59183" end="59200" title="Amar Sonar Bangla" label="Amar Sonar Bangla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="59237" end="59256" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q172827" start="59622" end="59626" title="sari" label="sari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127877" start="59641" end="59648" title="Jamdani" label="Jamdani"/>
<link wikidata="Q948504" start="59701" end="59714" title="Bengal School of Art" label="Bengal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="59741" end="59748" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026431" start="59753" end="59766" title="Shantiniketan" label="Shantiniketan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="59774" end="59785" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443222" start="59890" end="59903" title="Zainul Abedin" label="Zainul Abedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855436" start="59930" end="59945" title="Bangladeshi art" label="Bangladeshi art"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="60004" end="60020" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="60090" end="60100" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q305044" start="60272" end="60291" title="Somapura Mahavihara" label="Somapura Mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="60305" end="60321" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="sultanate period"/>
<link wikidata="Q357320" start="60569" end="60574" title="Adina Mosque" label="Adina"/>
<link wikidata="Q850107" start="60656" end="60664" title="bungalow" label="bungalow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374557" start="60713" end="60740" title="Indo-Saracenic architecture" label="Indo-Saracenic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q145811" start="60761" end="60769" title="zamindar" label="zamindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356352" start="60840" end="60866" title="Victoria Memorial, Kolkata" label="Victoria Memorial, Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944447" start="60883" end="60897" title="Muzharul Islam" label="Muzharul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q497536" start="61009" end="61031" title="Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban" label="Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q210134" start="61067" end="61077" title="Louis Kahn" label="Louis Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="61196" end="61209" title="Gupta dynasty" label="Gupta dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="61292" end="61297" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="61314" end="61318" title="zero" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="61324" end="61356" title="heliocentrism" label="theory of Earth orbiting the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="61371" end="61376" title="Sun" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="61381" end="61386" title="Moon" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053936" start="61419" end="61438" title="Sanskrit literature" label="Sanskrit literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351966" start="61443" end="61448" title="Sanskrit drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="61490" end="61501" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q314267" start="61561" end="61582" title="Jagadish Chandra Bose" label="Jagadish Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="61624" end="61633" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="61634" end="61640" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="61681" end="61694" title="plant science" label="plant science"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="61773" end="61777" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120059" start="61799" end="61806" title="People known as the father or mother of something" label="fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039740" start="61891" end="61900" title="United States patent law" label="US patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q45789" start="61969" end="61988" title="Satyendra Nath Bose" label="Satyendra Nath Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="62017" end="62034" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q191076" start="62064" end="62088" title="Bose–Einstein statistics" label="Bose–Einstein statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="62111" end="62135" title="Bose–Einstein condensate" label="Bose–Einstein condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q377898" start="62137" end="62149" title="Meghnad Saha" label="Meghnad Saha"/>
<link wikidata="Q631222" start="62280" end="62304" title="Saha ionization equation" label="Saha ionization equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351003" start="62384" end="62407" title="Amal Kumar Raychaudhuri" label="Amal Kumar Raychaudhuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134013" start="62536" end="62557" title="Raychaudhuri equation" label="Raychaudhuri equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62918" start="62776" end="62794" title="Fazlur Rahman Khan" label="Fazlur Rahman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q726244" start="62876" end="62886" title="Ashoke Sen" label="Ashoke Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314470" start="63005" end="63030" title="Fundamental Physics Prize" label="Fundamental Physics Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q811449" start="63179" end="63183" title="Baul" label="Baul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347988" start="63267" end="63277" title="Lalon Shah" label="Lalon Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581134" start="63363" end="63371" title="Gombhira" label="Gombhira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346909" start="63373" end="63381" title="Bhatiali" label="Bhatiali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347022" start="63386" end="63394" title="Bhawaiya" label="Bhawaiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679407" start="63396" end="63406" title="Hason Raja" label="Hason Raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236670" start="63502" end="63508" title="ektara" label="ektara"/>
<link wikidata="Q611259" start="63567" end="63573" title="dotara" label="dotara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="63575" end="63579" title="dhol" label="dhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="63592" end="63597" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="63638" end="63666" title="Hindustani classical music" label="North Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572982" start="63686" end="63701" title="Bengali cuisine" label="Bengali cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709642" start="63965" end="63970" title="Hilsa" label="Hilsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="64039" end="64049" title="confectionery" label="sweetmeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349224" start="64086" end="64096" title="Rasgulla" label="Rôshogolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430883" start="64153" end="64158" title="Pithe" label="Pithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q271555" start="64246" end="64253" title="biryani" label="biryani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849020" start="64255" end="64265" title="bakarkhani" label="bakarkhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q179010" start="64270" end="64275" title="kebab" label="kebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248880" start="64355" end="64385" title="List of rivers in Bangladesh" label="700 rivers of the Bengal delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="64396" end="64406" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q209333" start="64416" end="64426" title="oxbow lake" label="oxbow lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q239617" start="64481" end="64487" title="dinghy" label="dinghy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79205" start="64492" end="64498" title="sampan" label="sampan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193531" start="64552" end="64567" title="Bengali culture" label="Bengali culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q232722" start="64802" end="64815" title="dipterocarpus" label="dipterocarpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="64846" end="64860" title="shorea robusta" label="shorea robusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739222" start="64884" end="64899" title="heritiera fomes" label="heritiera fomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="64912" end="64922" title="Teak" label="Burma teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="64993" end="64999" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="65004" end="65011" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="65032" end="65042" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="65115" end="65134" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172827" start="65191" end="65196" title="sari" label="shaŗi"/>
<link wikidata="Q850794" start="65461" end="65466" title="dhoti" label="dhoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q193204" start="65482" end="65488" title="pyjama" label="pyjama"/>
<link wikidata="Q677458" start="65530" end="65535" title="lungi" label="lungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209005" start="65617" end="65632" title="Bengali Muslims" label="Bengali Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="65668" end="65679" title="Eid al-Fitr" label="Eid al-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q514400" start="65681" end="65692" title="Eid al-Adha" label="Eid al-Adha"/>
<link wikidata="Q193027" start="65694" end="65700" title="Mawlid" label="Mawlid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952053" start="65702" end="65710" title="Muharram" label="Muharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505620" start="65716" end="65728" title="Barat Night" label="Shab-e-Barat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887679" start="65734" end="65748" title="Bengali Hindus" label="Bengali Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145922" start="65788" end="65798" title="Durga Puja" label="Durga Puja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349216" start="65800" end="65809" title="Kali Puja" label="Kali Puja"/>
<link wikidata="Q430574" start="65811" end="65822" title="Janmashtami" label="Janmashtami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423773" start="65827" end="65837" title="Rath Yatra" label="Rath Yatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23904945" start="65852" end="65869" title="Bengali Buddhists" label="Bengali Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q23904975" start="65874" end="65892" title="Bengali Christians" label="Bengali Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348941" start="65899" end="65921" title="Buddha&amp;#x27;s Birthday" label="Buddha&amp;#x27;s Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="65926" end="65935" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490734" start="65975" end="65991" title="Bengali New Year" label="Bengali New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918154" start="66151" end="66164" title="Bishwa ijtema" label="Bishwa ijtema"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014106" start="66270" end="66289" title="Pohela Falgun" label="first day of spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219687" start="66298" end="66305" title="Nabanna" label="Nabanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="66406" end="66411" title="News media" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304693" start="66624" end="66638" title="Cinema of Bangladesh" label="Bengali cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="66712" end="66719" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="66724" end="66732" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520517" start="66809" end="66816" title="Kho Kho" label="Kho Kho"/>
<link wikidata="Q148636" start="66821" end="66828" title="Kabaddi" label="Kabaddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600457" start="67034" end="67052" title="Greater Bangladesh" label="Greater Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855465" start="67055" end="67075" title="Bangladeshi diaspora" label="Bangladeshi diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563738" start="67078" end="67094" title="List of Bengalis" label="List of Bengalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069371" start="67097" end="67102" title="Zerat" label="Zerat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4864" wikidata="Q2585683" url="?curid=4864" title="Bucket argument">
<text>Isaac Newton&#x27;s rotating bucket argument (also known as Newton&#x27;s bucket) is a thought experiment that was designed to demonstrate that true rotational motion cannot be defined as the relative rotation of the body with respect to the immediately surrounding bodies. It is one of five arguments from the &quot;properties, causes, and effects&quot; of &quot;true motion and rest&quot; that support his contention that, in general, true motion and rest cannot be defined as special instances of motion or rest relative to other bodies, but instead can be defined only by reference to absolute space. Alternatively, these experiments provide an operational definition of what is meant by &quot;absolute rotation&quot;, and do not pretend to address the question of &quot;rotation relative to &quot;what&quot;?&quot; General relativity dispenses with absolute space and with physics whose cause is external to the system, with the concept of geodesics of spacetime.

==Background==
These arguments, and a discussion of the distinctions between absolute and relative time, space, place and motion, appear in a scholium at the end of Definitions sections in Book I of Newton&#x27;s work, &quot;The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy&quot; (1687) (not to be confused with General Scholium at the end of Book III), which established the foundations of classical mechanics and introduced his law of universal gravitation, which yielded the first quantitatively adequate dynamical explanation of planetary motion.

Despite their embrace of the principle of rectilinear inertia and the recognition of the kinematical relativity of apparent motion (which underlies whether the Ptolemaic or the Copernican system is correct), natural philosophers of the seventeenth century continued to consider true motion and rest as physically separate descriptors of an individual body. The dominant view Newton opposed was devised by René Descartes, and was supported (in part) by Gottfried Leibniz. It held that empty space is a metaphysical impossibility because space is nothing other than the extension of matter, or, in other words, that when one speaks of the space between things one is actually making reference to the relationship that exists between those things and not to some entity that stands between them. Concordant with the above understanding, any assertion about the motion of a body boils down to a description over time in which the body under consideration is at &quot;t&quot;1 found in the vicinity of one group of &quot;landmark&quot; bodies and at some &quot;t&quot;2 is found in the vicinity of some other &quot;landmark&quot; body or bodies.
Descartes recognized that there would be a real difference, however, between a situation in which a body with movable parts and originally at rest with respect to a surrounding ring was itself accelerated to a certain angular velocity with respect to the ring, and another situation in which the surrounding ring were given a contrary acceleration with respect to the central object. With sole regard to the central object and the surrounding ring, the motions would be indistinguishable from each other assuming that both the central object and the surrounding ring were absolutely rigid objects. However, if neither the central object nor the surrounding ring were absolutely rigid then the parts of one or both of them would tend to fly out from the axis of rotation.

For contingent reasons having to do with the Inquisition, Descartes spoke of motion as both absolute and relative.

By the late 19th century, the contention that &quot;all motion is relative&quot; was re-introduced, notably by Ernst Mach (1883).
==The argument==
Newton discusses a bucket () filled with water hung by a cord. If the cord is twisted up tightly on itself and then the bucket is released, it begins to spin rapidly, not only with respect to the experimenter, but also in relation to the water it contains. (This situation would correspond to diagram B above.)

Although the relative motion at this stage is the greatest, the surface of the water remains flat, indicating that the parts of the water have no tendency to recede from the axis of relative motion, despite proximity to the pail. Eventually, as the cord continues to unwind, the surface of the water assumes a concave shape as it acquires the motion of the bucket spinning relative to the experimenter. This concave shape shows that the water is rotating, despite the fact that the water is at rest relative to the pail. In other words, it is not the relative motion of the pail and water that causes concavity of the water, contrary to the idea that motions can only be relative, and that there is no absolute motion. (This situation would correspond to diagram D.) Possibly the concavity of the water shows rotation relative to &quot;something else&quot;: say absolute space? Newton says: &quot;One can find out and measure the true and absolute circular motion of the water&quot;.

In the 1846 Andrew Motte translation of Newton&#x27;s words:
The argument that the motion is absolute, not relative, is incomplete, as it limits the participants relevant to the experiment to only the pail and the water, a limitation that has not been established. In fact, the concavity of the water clearly involves gravitational attraction, and by implication the Earth also is a participant. Here is a critique due to Mach arguing that only relative motion is established:

The degree in which Mach&#x27;s hypothesis is integrated in general relativity is discussed in the article Mach&#x27;s principle; it is generally held that general relativity is not entirely Machian.

All observers agree that the surface of rotating water is curved. However, the explanation of this curvature involves centrifugal force for all observers with the exception of a truly stationary observer, who finds the curvature is consistent with the rate of rotation of the water as they observe it, with no need for an additional centrifugal force. Thus, a stationary frame can be identified, and it is not necessary to ask &quot;Stationary with respect to what?&quot;:
A supplementary thought experiment with the same objective of determining the occurrence of absolute rotation also was proposed by Newton: the example of observing two identical spheres in rotation about their center of gravity and tied together by a string. Occurrence of tension in the string is indicative of absolute rotation; see Rotating spheres.

==Detailed analysis==

The historic interest of the rotating bucket experiment is its usefulness in suggesting one can detect absolute rotation by observation of the shape of the surface of the water. However, one might question just how rotation brings about this change. Below are two approaches to understanding the concavity of the surface of rotating water in a bucket.
===Newton&#x27;s laws of motion===
The shape of the surface of a rotating liquid in a bucket can be determined using Newton&#x27;s laws for the various forces on an element of the surface. For example, see Knudsen and Hjorth. The analysis begins with the free body diagram in the co-rotating frame where the water appears stationary. The height of the water &quot;h&quot; = &quot;h&quot;(&quot;r&quot;) is a function of the radial distance &quot;r&quot; from the axis of rotation Ω, and the aim is to determine this function. An element of water volume on the surface is shown to be subject to three forces: the vertical force due to gravity Fg, the horizontal, radially outward centrifugal force FCfgl, and the force normal to the surface of the water Fn due to the rest of the water surrounding the selected element of surface. The force due to surrounding water is known to be normal to the surface of the water because a liquid in equilibrium cannot support shear stresses. To quote Anthony and Brackett:
 Moreover, because the element of water does not move, the sum of all three forces must be zero. To sum to zero, the force of the water must point oppositely to the sum of the centrifugal and gravity forces, which means the surface of the water must adjust so its normal points in this direction. (A very similar problem is the design of a banked turn, where the slope of the turn is set so a car will not slide off the road. The analogy in the case of rotating bucket is that the element of water surface will &quot;slide&quot; up or down the surface unless the normal to the surface aligns with the vector resultant formed by the vector addition Fg + FCfgl.)

As &quot;r&quot; increases, the centrifugal force increases according to the relation (the equations are written per unit mass):
:formula_1
where &quot;Ω&quot; is the constant rate of rotation of the water. The gravitational force is unchanged at
:formula_2
where &quot;g&quot; is the acceleration due to gravity. These two forces add to make a resultant at an angle &quot;φ&quot; from the vertical given by
:formula_3
which clearly becomes larger as &quot;r&quot; increases. To ensure that this resultant is normal to the surface of the water, and therefore can be effectively nulled by the force of the water beneath, the normal to the surface must have the same angle, that is,
:formula_4
leading to the ordinary differential equation for the shape of the surface:
:formula_5
or, integrating:
:formula_6
where &quot;h&quot;(0) is the height of the water at &quot;r&quot; = 0. In other words, the surface of the water is parabolic in its dependence upon the radius.

===Potential energy===
The shape of the water&#x27;s surface can be found in a different, very intuitive way using the interesting idea of the potential energy associated with the centrifugal force in the co-rotating frame.
In a reference frame uniformly rotating at angular rate Ω, the fictitious centrifugal force is conservative and has a potential energy of the form:
:formula_7

where &quot;r&quot; is the radius from the axis of rotation. This result can be verified by taking the gradient of the potential to obtain the radially outward force:
:formula_8 formula_9
The meaning of the potential energy (stored work) is that movement of a test body from a larger radius to a smaller radius involves doing work against the centrifugal force and thus gaining potential energy. But this test body at the smaller radius where its elevation is lower has now lost equivalent gravitational potential energy.

Potential energy therefore explains the concavity of the water surface in a rotating bucket. Notice that at equilibrium the surface adopts a shape such that an element of volume at any location on its surface has the same potential energy as at any other. That being so, no element of water on the surface has any incentive to move position, because all positions are equivalent in energy. That is, equilibrium is attained. On the other hand, were surface regions with lower energy available, the water occupying surface locations of higher potential energy would move to occupy these positions of lower energy, inasmuch as there is no barrier to lateral movement in an ideal liquid.

We might imagine deliberately upsetting this equilibrium situation by somehow momentarily altering the surface shape of the water to make it different from an equal-energy surface. This change in shape would not be stable, and the water would not stay in our artificially contrived shape, but engage in a transient exploration of many shapes until non-ideal frictional forces introduced by sloshing, either against the sides of the bucket or by the non-ideal nature of the liquid, killed the oscillations and the water settled down to the equilibrium shape.

To see the principle of an equal-energy surface at work, imagine gradually increasing the rate of rotation of the bucket from zero. The water surface is flat at first, and clearly a surface of equal potential energy because all points on the surface are at the same height in the gravitational field acting upon the water. At some small angular rate of rotation, however, an element of surface water can achieve lower potential energy by moving outward under the influence of the centrifugal force; think of an object moving with the force of gravity closer to the Earth&#x27;s center: the object lowers its potential energy by complying with a force. Because water is incompressible and must remain within the confines of the bucket, this outward movement increases the depth of water at the larger radius, increasing the height of the surface at larger radius, and lowering it at smaller radius. The surface of the water becomes slightly concave, with the consequence that the potential energy of the water at the greater radius is increased by the work done against gravity to achieve the greater height. As the height of water increases, movement toward the periphery becomes no longer advantageous, because the reduction in potential energy from working with the centrifugal force is balanced against the increase in energy working against gravity. Thus, at a given angular rate of rotation, a concave surface represents the stable situation, and the more rapid the rotation, the more concave this surface. If rotation is arrested, the energy stored in fashioning the concave surface must be dissipated, for example through friction, before an equilibrium flat surface is restored.

To implement a surface of constant potential energy quantitatively, let the height of the water be formula_10: then the potential energy per unit mass contributed by gravity is formula_11 and the total potential energy per unit mass on the surface is
:formula_12

with formula_13 the background energy level independent of &quot;r&quot;. In a static situation (no motion of the fluid in the rotating frame), this energy is constant independent of position &quot;r&quot;. Requiring the energy to be constant, we obtain the parabolic form:
:formula_14

where &quot;h&quot;(0) is the height at &quot;r&quot; = 0 (the axis). See Figures 1 and 2.

The principle of operation of the centrifuge also can be simply understood in terms of this expression for the potential energy, which shows that it is favorable energetically when the volume far from the axis of rotation is occupied by the heavier substance.

==See also==

*Centrifugal force
*Inertial frame of reference
*Mach&#x27;s principle
*Philosophy of space and time: Absolutism vs. relationalism
*Rotating reference frame
*Rotating spheres
*Rotational gravity
*Sagnac effect
==References==
==Further reading==
* The isotropy of the cosmic microwave background radiation is another indicator that the universe does not rotate. See:
** 

==External links==
*Newton&#x27;s Views on Space, Time, and Motion from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, article by Robert Rynasiewicz. At the end of this article, loss of fine distinctions in the translations as compared to the original Latin text is discussed.
*Life and Philosophy of Leibniz see section on &quot;Space, Time and Indiscernibles&quot; for Leibniz arguing against the idea of space acting as a causal agent.
*Newton&#x27;s Bucket An interactive applet illustrating the water shape, and an attached PDF file with a mathematical derivation of a more complete water-shape model than is given in this article.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="0" end="12" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585683" start="29" end="44" title="Bucket argument" label="bucket argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585683" start="60" end="80" title="Bucket argument" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s bucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="149" end="166" title="rotational motion" label="rotational motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="292" end="300" title="argument" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481895" start="515" end="523" title="Galilean invariance" label="relative"/>
<link wikidata="Q19314" start="589" end="603" title="absolute space" label="absolute space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207416" start="649" end="671" title="operational definition" label="operational definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669833" start="698" end="715" title="absolute rotation" label="absolute rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="820" end="838" title="General relativity" label="General relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533988" start="945" end="954" title="Geodesics in general relativity" label="geodesics"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="958" end="967" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="1195" end="1244" title="The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy" label="The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532171" start="1283" end="1299" title="General Scholium" label="General Scholium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="1362" end="1381" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="1401" end="1429" title="law of universal gravitation" label="law of universal gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="1504" end="1520" title="planetary motion" label="planetary motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q122508" start="1577" end="1584" title="inertia" label="inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="1683" end="1692" title="Geocentric model" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="1700" end="1710" title="Heliocentrism" label="Copernican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="1928" end="1942" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="1975" end="1992" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3481" end="3492" title="Roman Inquisition#Galileo" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q93996" start="3663" end="3673" title="Ernst Mach" label="Ernst Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q47107" start="3718" end="3724" title="bucket" label="bucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="3740" end="3745" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q917909" start="5581" end="5602" title="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="6164" end="6182" title="thought experiment" label="thought experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370299" start="6483" end="6499" title="Rotating spheres" label="Rotating spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="7839" end="7851" title="shear stress" label="shear stress"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8226" end="8237" title="Centripetal force#Example: The banked turn" label="banked turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="8518" end="8533" title="vector addition" label="vector addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q30006" start="8833" end="8860" title="Gravitational acceleration" label="acceleration due to gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="9660" end="9676" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q822938" start="9836" end="9848" title="conservative force" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q42213" start="10227" end="10231" title="Mechanical work" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="Q716915" start="10532" end="10543" title="Mechanical equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="13878" end="13887" title="Parabola" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191134" start="14033" end="14043" title="centrifuge" label="centrifuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q178733" start="14275" end="14292" title="Centrifugal force" label="Centrifugal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q192735" start="14294" end="14321" title="Inertial frame of reference" label="Inertial frame of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q917909" start="14323" end="14344" title="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14346" end="14404" title="Philosophy of space and time#Absolutism and relationalism" label="Philosophy of space and time: Absolutism vs. relationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310692" start="14406" end="14430" title="Rotating reference frame" label="Rotating reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370299" start="14432" end="14448" title="Rotating spheres" label="Rotating spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332690" start="14450" end="14468" title="Rotational gravity" label="Rotational gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q582007" start="14470" end="14483" title="Sagnac effect" label="Sagnac effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="14541" end="14578" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4865" wikidata="Q19894488" url="?curid=4865" title="Roman Breviary">
<text>The Roman Breviary (Latin: &quot;Breviarium Romanum&quot;) is a breviary of the Roman Rite in the Catholic Church. A liturgical book, it contains public or canonical prayers, hymns, the Psalms, readings, and notations for everyday use, especially by bishops, priests, and deacons in the Divine Office (i.e., at the canonical hours, the Christians&#x27; daily prayer).

The volume containing the daily hours of Catholic prayer was published as the &quot;Breviarium Romanum&quot; (Roman Breviary) from its &quot;editio princeps&quot; in 1568 under Pope Pius V until the reforms of Paul VI (1974), when replaced by the Liturgy of the Hours.

In the course of the Catholic Counter-Reformation, Pope Pius V (r. 1566–1572) imposed the use of the Roman Breviary, mainly based on the &quot;Breviarium secundum usum Romanae Curiae&quot;, on the Latin Church of the Catholic Church. Exceptions are the Benedictines and Dominicans, who have breviaries of their own, and
two surviving local use breviaries:
*the Mozarabic Breviary, once in use throughout all Spain, but now confined to a single foundation at Toledo; it is remarkable for the number and length of its hymns, and for the fact that the majority of its collects are addressed to God the Son;
*the Ambrosian Breviary, now confined to Milan, where it owes its retention to the attachment of the clergy and people to their traditionary usages, which they derive from St Ambrose.

==Origin of name==
The Latin word &quot;breviarium&quot; generally signifies &quot;abridgement, compendium&quot;. This wider sense has often been used by Christian authors, e.g. &quot;Breviarium fidei, Breviarium in psalmos, Breviarium canonum, Breviarium regularum&quot;.

In liturgical language specifically, &quot;breviary&quot; (&quot;breviarium&quot;) has a special meaning, indicating a book furnishing the regulations for the celebration of Mass or the canonical Office, and may be met with under the titles &quot;Breviarium Ecclesiastici Ordinis&quot;, or &quot;Breviarium Ecclesiæ Romanæ&quot;. In the 9th century, Alcuin uses the word to designate an office abridged or simplified for the use of the laity. Prudentius of Troyes, about the same period, composed a &quot;Breviarium Psalterii&quot;. In an ancient inventory occurs &quot;Breviarium Antiphonarii&quot;, meaning &quot;Extracts from the Antiphonary&quot;. In the &quot;Vita Aldrici&quot; occurs &quot;sicut in plenariis et breviariis Ecclesiæ ejusdem continentur&quot;. Again, in the inventories in the catalogues, such notes as these may be met with: &quot;Sunt et duo cursinarii et tres benedictionales Libri; ex his unus habet obsequium mortuorum et unus Breviarius&quot;, or, &quot;Præter Breviarium quoddam quod usque ad festivitatem S. Joannis Baptistæ retinebunt&quot;, etc. Monte Cassino in c. 1100 obtained a book titled &quot;Incipit Breviarium sive Ordo Officiorum per totam anni decursionem&quot;.

From such references, and from others of a like nature, Quesnel gathers that by the word &quot;Breviarium&quot; was at first designated a book furnishing the rubrics, a sort of Ordo. The usage of &quot;breviary&quot; to mean a book containing the entire canonical office appears to date from the 11th century.

Pope Gregory VII (r. 1073–1085) having abridged the order of prayers, and having simplified the Liturgy as performed at the Roman Court, this abridgment received the name of Breviary, which was suitable, since, according to the etymology of the word, it was an abridgment. The name has been extended to books which contain in one volume, or at least in one work, liturgical books of different kinds, such as the Psalter, the Antiphonary, the Responsoriary, the Lectionary, etc. In this connection it may be pointed out that in this sense the word, as it is used nowadays, is illogical; it should be named a Plenarium rather than a Breviarium, since, liturgically speaking, the word Plenarium exactly designates such books as contain several different compilations united under one cover.

==History==
===Early history===
The canonical hours of the Breviary owe their remote origin to the Old Covenant when God commanded the Aaronic priests to offer morning and evening sacrifices. Other inspiration may have come from David&#x27;s words in the Psalms &quot;Seven times a day I praise you&quot; (Ps. 119:164), as well as, &quot;the just man meditates on the law day and night&quot; (Ps. 1:2). Regarding Daniel &quot;Three times daily he was kneeling and offering prayers and thanks to his God&quot; (Dan. 6:10).

In the early days of Christian worship the Sacred Scriptures furnished all that was thought necessary, containing as it did the books from which the lessons were read and the psalms that were recited. The first step in the evolution of the Breviary was the separation of the Psalter into a choir-book. At first the president of the local church (bishop) or the leader of the choir chose a particular psalm as he thought appropriate. From about the 4th century certain psalms began to be grouped together, a process that was furthered by the monastic practice of daily reciting the 150 psalms. This took so much time that the monks began to spread it over a week, dividing each day into hours, and allotting to each hour its portion of the Psalter. St Benedict in the 6th century drew up such an arrangement, probably, though not certainly, on the basis of an older Roman division which, though not so skilful, is the one in general use. Gradually there were added to these psalter choir-books additions in the form of antiphons, responses, collects or short prayers, for the use of those not skilful at improvisation and metrical compositions. Jean Beleth, a 12th-century liturgical author, gives the following list of books necessary for the right conduct of the canonical office: the Antiphonarium, the Old and New Testaments, the &quot;Passionarius (liber)&quot; and the &quot;Legendarius&quot; (dealing respectively with martyrs and saints), the &quot;Homiliarius&quot; (homilies on the Gospels), the &quot;Sermologus&quot; (collection of sermons) and the works of the Fathers, besides the &quot;Psalterium&quot; and the &quot;Collectarium&quot;. To overcome the inconvenience of using such a library the Breviary came into existence and use. Already in the 9th century Prudentius, bishop of Troyes, had in a &quot;Breviarium Psalterii&quot; made an abridgment of the Psalter for the laity, giving a few psalms for each day, and Alcuin had rendered a similar service by including a prayer for each day and some other prayers, but no lessons or homilies.

===Medieval breviaries===
The Breviary proper only dates from the 11th century; the earliest manuscript containing the whole canonical office is of the year 1099, and is in the Mazarin library. Gregory VII (pope 1073–1085), too, simplified the liturgy as performed at the Roman court, and gave his abridgment the name of Breviary, which thus came to denote a work which from another point of view might be called a Plenary, involving as it did the collection of several works into one. There are several extant specimens of 12th-century Breviaries, all Benedictine, but under Innocent III (pope 1198–1216) their use was extended, especially by the newly founded and active Franciscan order. These preaching friars, with the authorization of Gregory IX, adopted (with some modifications, e.g. the substitution of the &quot;Gallican&quot; for the &quot;Roman&quot; version of the Psalter) the Breviary hitherto used exclusively by the Roman court, and with it gradually swept out of Europe all the earlier partial books (Legendaries, Responsories), etc., and to some extent the local Breviaries, like that of Sarum. Finally, Nicholas III (pope 1277–1280) adopted this version both for the curia and for the basilicas of Rome, and thus made its position secure.

Before the rise of the mendicant orders (wandering friars) in the 13th century, the daily services were usually contained in a number of large volumes. The first occurrence of a single manuscript of the daily office was written by the Benedictine order at Monte Cassino in Italy in 1099. The Benedictines were not a mendicant order, but a stable, monastery-based order, and single-volume breviaries are rare from this early period.

The arrangement of the Psalms in the Rule of St. Benedict had a profound impact upon the breviaries used by secular and monastic clergy alike, until 1911 when Pope Pius X introduced his reform of the Roman Breviary. In many places, every diocese, order or ecclesiastical province maintained its own edition of the breviary.

However, mendicant friars travelled frequently and needed a shortened, or abbreviated, daily office contained in one portable book, and single-volume breviaries flourished from the thirteenth century onwards. These abbreviated volumes soon became very popular and eventually supplanted the Catholic Church&#x27;s Curia office, previously said by non-monastic clergy.

===Early printed editions===

Before the advent of printing, breviaries were written by hand and were often richly decorated with initials and miniature illustrations telling stories in the lives of Christ or the saints, or stories from the Bible. Later printed breviaries usually have woodcut illustrations, interesting in their own right but with poor relation to the beautifully illuminated breviaries.

The beauty and value of many of the Latin Breviaries were brought to the notice of English churchmen by one of the numbers of the Oxford &quot;Tracts for the Times&quot;, since which time they have been much more studied, both for their own sake and for the light they throw upon the English Prayer-Book.

Early printed Breviaries were locally distributed and quickly worn out by daily use. As a result, surviving copies are rare; of those editions which survive at all, many are known only by a single copy.

In Scotland the only one which has survived the convulsions of the 16th century is &quot;Aberdeen Breviary&quot;, a Scottish form of the Sarum Office (the Sarum Rite was much favoured in Scotland as a kind of protest against the jurisdiction claimed by the diocese of York), revised by William Elphinstone (bishop 1483–1514), and printed at Edinburgh by Walter Chapman and Androw Myllar in 1509–1510. Four copies have been preserved of it, of which only one is complete; but it was reprinted in facsimile in 1854 for the Bannatyne Club by the munificence of the Duke of Buccleuch. It is particularly valuable for the trustworthy notices of the early history of Scotland which are embedded in the lives of the national saints. Though enjoined by royal mandate in 1501 for general use within the realm of Scotland, it was probably never widely adopted. The new Scottish &quot;Proprium&quot; sanctioned for the Catholic province of St Andrews in 1903 contains many of the old Aberdeen collects and antiphons.

The Sarum or Salisbury Breviary itself was very widely used. The first edition was printed at Venice in 1483 by Raynald de Novimagio in folio; the latest at Paris, 1556, 1557. While modern Breviaries are nearly always printed in four volumes, one for each season of the year, the editions of the Sarum never exceeded two parts.

===Early modern reforms===
Until the Council of Trent (1545–1563) and the Catholic Counter-Reformation, every bishop had full power to regulate the Breviary of his own diocese; and this was acted upon almost everywhere. Each monastic community, also, had one of its own. Pope Pius V (r. 1566–1572), however, while sanctioning those which could show at least 200 years of existence, made the Roman obligatory in all other places. But the influence of the Roman rite has gradually gone much beyond this, and has superseded almost all the local uses. The Roman has thus become nearly universal, with the allowance only of additional offices for saints specially venerated in each particular diocese. The Roman Breviary has undergone several revisions: The most remarkable of these is that by Francis Quignonez, cardinal of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme (1536), which, though not accepted by Rome (it was approved by Clement VII and Paul III, and permitted as a substitute for the unrevised Breviary, until Pius V in 1568 excluded it as too short and too modern, and issued a reformed edition of the old Breviary, the &quot;Breviarium Pianum&quot; or &quot;Pian Breviary&quot;), formed the model for the still more thorough reform made in 1549 by the Church of England, whose daily morning and evening services are but a condensation and simplification of the Breviary offices. Some parts of the prefaces at the beginning of the English Prayer-Book are free translations of those of Quignonez. The Pian Breviary was again altered by Sixtus V in 1588, who introduced the revised Vulgate, in 1602 by Clement VIII (through Baronius and Bellarmine), especially as concerns the rubrics, and by Urban VIII (1623–1644), a purist who altered the text of certain hymns.

In the 17th and 18th centuries a movement of revision took place in France, and succeeded in modifying about half the Breviaries of that country. Historically, this proceeded from the labours of Jean de Launoy (1603–1678), &quot;le dénicheur des saints&quot;, and Louis Sébastien le Nain de Tillemont, who had shown the falsity of numerous lives of the saints; theologically it was produced by the Port Royal school, which led men to dwell more on communion with God as contrasted with the invocation of the saints. This was mainly carried out by the adoption of a rule that all antiphons and responses should be in the exact words of Scripture, which cut out the whole class of appeals to created beings. The services were at the same time simplified and shortened, and the use of the whole Psalter every week (which had become a mere theory in the Roman Breviary, owing to its frequent supersession by saints&#x27; day services) was made a reality. These reformed French Breviaries—e.g. the Paris Breviary of 1680 by Archbishop François de Harlay (1625–1695) and that of 1736 by Archbishop Charles-Gaspard-Guillaume de Vintimille du Luc (1655–1746)—show a deep knowledge of Holy Scripture, and much careful adaptation of different texts.

===Later modern reforms===
During the pontificate of Pius IX, a strong Ultramontane movement arose against the French breviaries of 1680 and 1736. This was inaugurated by Montalembert, but its literary advocates were chiefly Prosper Guéranger, abbot of the Benedictine monastery Solesmes, and Louis Veuillot (1813–1883) of the &quot;Univers&quot;. The movement succeeded in suppressing the breviaries, the last diocese to surrender being Orleans in 1875. The Jansenist and Gallican influence was also strongly felt in Italy and in Germany, where breviaries based on the French models were published at Cologne, Münster, Mainz and other towns. Meanwhile, under the direction of Benedict XIV (pope 1740–1758), a special congregation collected much material for an official revision, but nothing was published. In 1902, under Leo XIII, a commission under the presidency of Louis Duchesne was appointed to consider the breviary, the missal, the Roman Pontifical and the Roman Ritual.

Significant changes came in 1910 with the reform of the Roman Breviary by Pope Pius X. This revision modified the traditional psalm scheme so that, while all 150 psalms were used in the course of the week, these were said without repetition. Those assigned to the Sunday office underwent the least revision, although noticeably fewer psalms are recited at Matins, and both Lauds and Compline are slightly shorter due to psalms (or in the case of Compline the first few verses of a psalm) being removed. Pius X was probably influenced by earlier attempts to eliminate repetition in the psalter, most notably the liturgy of the Benedictine congregation of St. Maur. However, since Cardinal Quignonez&#x27;s attempt to reform the Breviary employed this principle—albeit with no regard to the traditional scheme—such notions had floated around in the western Church, and can particularly be seen in the Paris Breviary.

Pope Pius XII introduced optional use of a new translation of the Psalms from the Hebrew to a more classical Latin. Most breviaries published in the late 1950s and early 1960s used this &quot;Pian Psalter&quot;.

Pope John XXIII also revised the Breviary in 1960, introducing changes drawn up by his predecessor Pope Pius XII. The most notable alteration is the shortening of most feasts from nine to three lessons at Matins, keeping only the Scripture readings (the former lesson i, then lessons ii and iii together), followed by either the first part of the patristic reading (lesson vii) or, for most feasts, a condensed version of the former second Nocturn, which was formerly used when a feast was reduced in rank and commemorated.

=== Abrogation ===
The Second Vatican Council, in his Constitution &quot;Sacrosanctum Concilium&quot;, asked the Pope for a comprehensive reform of the Hours. As a result, in 1970 the Breviary was replaced by the &quot;Liturgy of the Hours&quot;, which is divided into six different volumes: Advent, Christmas, Lent and Easter and two for the Ordinary Time; the new Hours were promulgated by Pope Paul VI in his apostolic constitution &quot;Laudis canticum&quot;.

In his apostolic letter &quot;Summorum Pontificum&quot;, Pope Benedict XVI allowed clerics to fulfill their obligation of prayer using the 1962 edition of the Roman Breviary in lieu of the Liturgy of the Hours. Such permit was rescinded by Pope Francis through his apostolic letter &quot;Traditionis custodes&quot;.

== Contents of the Roman Breviary==
At the beginning stands the usual introductory matter, such as the tables for determining the date of Easter, the calendar, and the general rubrics. The Breviary itself is divided into four seasonal parts—winter, spring, summer, autumn—and comprises under each part:
# the Psalter;
# &quot;Proprium de Tempore&quot; (the special office of the season);
# &quot;Proprium Sanctorum&quot; (special offices of saints);
# &quot;Commune Sanctorum&quot; (general offices for saints);
# Extra Services.

These parts are often published separately.

=== The Psalter ===

This psalm book is the very backbone of the Breviary, the groundwork of the Catholic prayer-book; out of it have grown the antiphons, responsories and versicles. Until the 1911 reform, the psalms were arranged according to a disposition dating from the 8th century, as follows: Psalms 1–108, with some omissions, were recited at Matins, twelve each day from Monday to Saturday, and eighteen on Sunday. The omissions were said at Lauds, Prime and Compline. Psalms 109-147 (except 117, 118, and 142) were said at Vespers, five each day. Psalms 148-150 were always used at Lauds, and give that hour its name. The text of this Psalter is that commonly known as the Gallican. The name is misleading, for it is simply the second revision (A.D. 392) made by Jerome of the old &quot;Itala&quot; version originally used in Rome. Jerome&#x27;s first revision of the &quot;Itala&quot; (A.D. 383), known as the Roman, is still used at St Peter&#x27;s in Rome, but the &quot;Gallican&quot;, thanks especially to St Gregory of Tours, who introduced it into Gaul in the 6th century, has ousted it everywhere else. The Antiphonary of Bangor proves that Ireland accepted the Gallican version in the 7th century, and the English Church did so in the 10th.

Following the 1911 reform, Matins was reduced to nine Psalms every day, with the other psalms redistributed throughout Prime, Terce, Sext, and Compline. For Sundays and special feasts Lauds and Vespers largely remained the same, Psalm 118 remained distributed at the Little Hours and Psalms 4, 90, and 130 were kept at Compline.

=== The &quot;Proprium de Tempore&quot; ===
This contains the office of the seasons of the Christian year (Advent to Trinity), a conception that only gradually grew up. There is here given the whole service for every Sunday and weekday, the proper antiphons, responsories, hymns, and especially the course of daily Scripture reading, averaging about twenty verses a day, and (roughly) arranged thus:
* Advent: Isaiah
* Epiphany to Septuagesima: Pauline Epistles
* Lent: patristic homilies (Genesis on Sundays)
* Passiontide: Jeremiah
* Easter to Pentecost: Acts, Catholic epistles and Revelation
* Pentecost to August: Samuel and Kings
* August to Advent: Wisdom books, Maccabees, Prophets

=== The &quot;Proprium Sanctorum&quot; ===
This contains the lessons, psalms and liturgical formularies for saints&#x27; festivals, and depends on the days of the secular month. The readings of the second Nocturn are mainly hagiological biography, with homilies or papal documents for certain major feasts, particularly those of Jesus and Mary. Some of this material has been revised by Leo XIII, in view of archaeological and other discoveries. The third Nocturn consists of a homily on the Gospel which is read at that day&#x27;s Mass. Covering a great stretch of time and space, they do for the worshipper in the field of church history what the Scripture readings do in that of biblical history.

=== The &quot;Commune Sanctorum&quot; ===
This comprises psalms, antiphons, lessons, &amp;c., for feasts of various groups or classes (twelve in all); e.g. apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins, and the Blessed Virgin Mary. These offices are of very ancient date, and many of them were probably in origin proper to individual saints. They contain passages of great literary beauty. The lessons read at the third nocturn are patristic homilies on the Gospels, and together form a rough summary of theological instruction.

=== Extra services ===
Here are found the Little Office of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Office for the Dead (obligatory on All Souls&#x27; Day), and offices peculiar to each diocese.

== Elements of the Hours ==
It has already been indicated, by reference to Matins, Lauds, &amp;c., that not only each day, but each part of the day, has its own office, the day being divided into liturgical &quot;hours.&quot; A detailed account of these will be found in the article Canonical Hours. Each of the hours of the office is composed of the same elements, and something must be said now of the nature of these constituent parts, of which mention has here and there been already made. They are: psalms (including canticles), antiphons, responsories, hymns, lessons, little chapters, versicles and collects.

=== Psalms ===
Before the 1911 reform, the multiplication of saints&#x27; festivals, with practically the same festal psalms, tended to repeat the about one-third of the Psalter, with a correspondingly rare recital of the remaining two-thirds. Following this reform, the entire Psalter is again generally recited each week, with the festal psalms restricted to only the highest-ranking feasts. As in the Greek usage and in the Benedictine, certain canticles like the Song of Moses (Exodus xv.), the Song of Hannah (1 Sam. ii.), the prayer of Habakkuk (iii.), the prayer of Hezekiah (Isaiah xxxviii.) and other similar Old Testament passages, and, from the New Testament, the Magnificat, the Benedictus and the Nunc dimittis, are admitted as psalms.

=== Antiphons ===
The antiphons are short liturgical forms, sometimes of biblical, sometimes of patristic origin, used to introduce a psalm. The term originally signified a chant by alternate choirs, but has quite lost this meaning in the Breviary.

=== Responsories ===
The responsories are similar in form to the antiphons, but come at the end of the psalm, being originally the reply of the choir or congregation to the precentor who recited the psalm.

=== Hymns ===
The hymns are short poems going back in part to the days of Prudentius, Synesius, Gregory of Nazianzus and Ambrose (4th and 5th centuries), but mainly the work of medieval authors.

=== Lessons ===
The lessons, as has been seen, are drawn variously from the Bible, the Acts of the Saints and the Fathers of the Church. In the primitive church, books afterwards excluded from the canon were often read, e.g. the letters of Clement of Rome and the Shepherd of Hermas. In later days the churches of Africa, having rich memorials of martyrdom, used them to supplement the reading of Scripture. Monastic influence accounts for the practice of adding to the reading of a biblical passage some patristic commentary or exposition. Books of homilies were compiled from the writings of SS. Augustine, Hilary, Athanasius, Isidore, Gregory the Great and others, and formed part of the library of which the Breviary was the ultimate compendium. In the lessons, as in the psalms, the order for special days breaks in upon the normal order of ferial offices and dislocates the scheme for consecutive reading. The lessons are read at Matins (which is subdivided into three nocturns).

=== Little chapters ===
The little chapters are very short lessons read at the other &quot;hours.&quot;

=== Versicles ===
The versicles are short responsories used after the little chapters in the minor hours. They appear after the hymns in Lauds and Vespers.

=== Collects ===
The collects come at the close of the office and are short prayers summing up the supplications of the congregation. They arise out of a primitive practice on the part of the bishop (local president), examples of which are found in the Didachē (Teaching of the Apostles) and in the letters of Clement of Rome and Cyprian. With the crystallization of church order, improvisation in prayer largely gave place to set forms, and collections of prayers were made which later developed into Sacramentaries and Orationals. The collects of the Breviary are largely drawn from the Gelasian and other Sacramentaries, and they are used to sum up the dominant idea of the festival in connection with which they happen to be used.

==Celebration==
Before 1910, the difficulty of harmonizing the &quot;Proprium de Tempore&quot; and the &quot;Proprium Sanctorum&quot;, to which reference has been made, was only partly met in the thirty-seven chapters of general rubrics. Additional help was given by a kind of Catholic Churchman&#x27;s Almanack, called the &quot;Ordo Recitandi Divini Officii&quot;, published in different countries and dioceses, and giving, under every day, minute directions for proper reading. In 1960, John XXIII simplified the rubrics governing the Breviary in order to make it easier to use.

Every cleric in Holy Orders, and many other members of religious orders, must publicly join in or privately read aloud (i.e. using the lips as well as the eyes—it takes about two hours in this way) the whole of the Breviary services allotted for each day. In large churches where they were celebrated the services were usually grouped; e.g. Matins and Lauds (about 7.30 A.M.); Prime, Terce (High Mass), Sext, and None (about 10 A.M.); Vespers and Compline (4 P.M.); and from four to eight hours (depending on the amount of music and the number of high masses) are thus spent in choir.

Lay use of the Breviary has varied throughout the Church&#x27;s history. In some periods laymen did not use the Breviary as a manual of devotion to any great extent. The late Medieval period saw the recitation of certain hours of the Little Office of the Blessed Virgin, which was based on the Breviary in form and content, becoming popular among those who could read, and Bishop Challoner did much to popularise the hours of Sunday Vespers and Compline (albeit in English translation) in his &quot;Garden of the Soul&quot; in the eighteenth century. The Liturgical Movement in the twentieth century saw renewed interest in the Offices of the Breviary and several popular editions were produced, containing the vernacular as well as the Latin.

The complete pre-Pius X Roman Breviary was translated into English (by the Marquess of Bute in 1879; new ed. with a trans, of the Martyrology, 1908), French and German. Bute&#x27;s version is noteworthy for its inclusion of the skilful renderings of the ancient hymns by J.H. Newman, J.M. Neale and others. Several editions of the Pius X Breviary were produced during the twentieth century, including a notable edition prepared with the assistance of the sisters of Stanbrook Abbey in the 1950s. Two editions in English and Latin were produced in the following decade, which conformed to the rubrics of 1960, published by Liturgical Press and Benziger in the United States. These used the Pius XII psalter. Baronius Press&#x27;s revised edition of the Liturgical Press edition uses the older Gallican psalter of St. Jerome. This edition was published and released in 2012 for pre-orders only. In 2013, the publication has resumed printing and is available on Baronius&#x27; website.

Under Pope Benedict XVI&#x27;s motu proprio Summorum Pontificum, Catholic bishops, priests, and deacons are again permitted to use the 1961 edition of the Roman Breviary, promulgated by Pope John XXIII to satisfy their obligation to recite the Divine Office every day.

=== Online resources ===
In 2008, a website containing the Divine Office (both Ordinary and Extraordinary) in various languages, &quot;i-breviary&quot;, was launched, which combines the modern and ancient breviaries with the latest computer technology.

==Editions==
*1482. &quot;Breviarium Romanum&quot;. Albi, Johann Neumeister.
*1494. &quot;Breviarium Romanum&quot;, Lyon, Perrinus Lathomi, Bonifacius Johannis &amp; Johannes de Villa Veteri.
*1502, &quot;Breviarium secundum comunem usus Romanum&quot;, Paris, Thielman Kerver.
*1508. &quot;Breviarium secundum consuetudinem Romanam&quot;. Paris, Jean Philippe Jean Botcholdic, Gherard Berneuelt.
*1509. &quot;Brevarium secundum ritum sacronsancte Romane ecclesie&quot;, Lyon, Ettienne Baland, Martin Boillon
*1534. &quot;Breviarium Romanum&quot;, Paris, Yolande Bonhomme.
*1535. Quignonius Breviary
*:1535. &quot; Breviarium Romanum Ex Decreto Sancrosancti Concilii Tridentini Restitutum ... editum et recognitum iuxta editionem venetiis&quot;
*:1536. &quot;Breviarium Romanum, nuper reformatum, in quo sacræ Scripturæ libri, probatæque Sanctorum historiæ eleganter beneque dispositæ leguntur; studio &amp; labore Francisci Quignonii, Card. de licentia &amp; facultate Pauli III. Pont. Max.&quot;, Paris: Galliot du Pré, Jean Kerbriant, Jean Petit
*:1537. &quot;Breviarium Romanum nuper reformatum&quot;, Paris, Yolande Bonhomme.
*::The second recension of the Quignon breviary (ed. 1908)
*1570. Pian Breviary (Pius V, Council of Trent)
*:1570. &quot;Breviarium Romanum, ex decreto sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum, Pii V pontificis maximi jussu editum&quot; Rome, Paulus Manutius; Antwerp, Christophe Plantin.
*1629. Urban VIII
*:1698. &quot;Breviarium Romanum, ex decreto sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum, et Clementis VIII et Urbani VIII auctoritate recognitum, cum officiis sanctorum, novissime per Summos Pontifices usque ad hanc diem concessis; in quatuor Anni Tempora divisum.&quot;
*::pars Autumnalis (1697)(1698)
*::pars Autumnalis (1719).
*1740.&quot;Breviarium Romanum cum Psalterium, proprio,&amp; Officiis Sanctorum ad usum cleri Basilicae Vaticanae&quot;
*:pars Autumnalis (1740)
*:pars Aestiva (1740)
*1757. &quot;Breviarium Romanum, ex decreto sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum, et Clementis VIII et Urbani VIII auctoritate recognitum, novis Officiis ex Indulto Apostolico huc usque concessis auctum&quot;
*:pars Aestivus (1757)
*1799. &quot;Breviarium Romanum, ex decreto sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum, et Clementis VIII et Urbani VIII auctoritate recognitum, com officiis sanctorum, novissime per Summos Pontifices usque ad hanc diem concessis, in quatuor Anni Tempora divisum&quot;
*:pars Verna
*:pars Autumnalis
*:pars Hiemalis
*1828.
*:pars Autumnalis (1828)
*:pars Aestiva (1828)
*1861.
*:pars Autumnalis (1861)
*1888. 
*:pars Verna (1888)
*1908: Reform of the Roman Breviary by Pope Pius X
*:The 1908 Roman Breviary in English (Pre-Pius X Psalter), Winter (part 1)
*:The 1908 Roman Breviary in English (Pre-Pius X Psalter), Spring (part 2)
*:The 1908 Roman Breviary in English (Pre-Pius X Psalter), Summer (part 3)
*:The 1908 Roman Breviary in English (Pre-Pius X Psalter), Autumn/Fall (part 4)
*:Canonical Hours according to the 1911 Breviarium Romanum without the festal propers of Common of the Saints (traditio.com)
*1960 (Vatican II).
*:&quot;The Roman Breviary in English and Latin: A Bilingual Edition of the Breviarium Romanum with Rubrics in English Only&quot;, Baronius Press (2011), 3 vols.
*:divinumofficinum.com
*1974: 
*:Universalis Online Breviary

==See also==

* Book of Hours
* Canonical Hours
* Horologion
* Latin psalters
* Little Office of Our Lady
* Liturgical books of the Roman Rite
* Liturgy of the Hours
==References==
==External links==
*Psalter Schemas (Catholic), from 1900-Present
*14th century breviary made in Paris for Marie de Saint Pol, Countess of Pembroke, Cambridge University Library
*14th century breviary written in Gothic Textualis script, Center for Digital Initiatives, University of Vermont Libraries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19894488" start="4" end="18" title="Roman Breviary" label="Roman Breviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247932" start="20" end="25" title="Ecclesiastical Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q225672" start="64" end="72" title="breviary" label="breviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="80" end="90" title="Roman Rite" label="Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="98" end="113" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831847" start="117" end="132" title="liturgical book" label="liturgical book"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406098" start="166" end="172" title="Catholic prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="175" end="179" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="186" end="192" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q946731" start="315" end="330" title="canonical hours" label="canonical hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249682" start="510" end="525" title="editio princeps" label="editio princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="546" end="557" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="579" end="586" title="Paul VI" label="Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q45774" start="616" end="636" title="Liturgy of the Hours" label="Liturgy of the Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="669" end="688" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="836" end="848" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="892" end="904" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictines"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="909" end="919" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q540405" start="1000" end="1009" title="Mozarabic Rite" label="Mozarabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="1097" end="1103" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144201" start="1204" end="1212" title="collects" label="collects"/>
<link wikidata="Q459494" start="1248" end="1257" title="Ambrosian Rite" label="Ambrosian"/>
<link wikidata="Q154332" start="2052" end="2058" title="Alcuin" label="Alcuin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578734" start="2145" end="2165" title="Prudentius of Troyes" label="Prudentius of Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q154372" start="2780" end="2793" title="Monte Cassino" label="Monte Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227639" start="3086" end="3090" title="Directorium" label="Ordo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="3220" end="3236" title="Pope Gregory VII" label="Pope Gregory VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915332" start="4108" end="4120" title="Old Covenant" label="Old Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4575" end="4592" title="Bible" label="Sacred Scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170679" start="5676" end="5687" title="Jean Beleth" label="Jean Beleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578734" start="6306" end="6334" title="Prudentius, bishop of Troyes" label="Prudentius, bishop of Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170859" start="7714" end="7726" title="Pope Nicholas III" label="Nicholas III"/>
<link wikidata="Q28653" start="7874" end="7890" title="Mendicant Orders" label="mendicant orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="7902" end="7907" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q946731" start="8054" end="8066" title="Canonical hours" label="daily office"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="8086" end="8097" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154372" start="8107" end="8120" title="Monte Cassino" label="Monte Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8124" end="8129" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="8198" end="8207" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="8307" end="8313" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q852724" start="8321" end="8341" title="Rule of St. Benedict" label="Rule of St. Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="8448" end="8454" title="Pius X" label="Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8899" end="8914" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q835567" start="8922" end="8927" title="Curia" label="Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="8968" end="8974" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="9028" end="9036" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="9176" end="9182" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="9190" end="9195" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="9218" end="9223" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="9263" end="9270" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="9359" end="9370" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831654" start="9527" end="9547" title="Tracts for the Times" label="Tracts for the Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4054692" start="9983" end="10000" title="Aberdeen Breviary" label="Aberdeen Breviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731741" start="10049" end="10059" title="Sarum Rite" label="Sarum Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008579" start="10180" end="10199" title="William Elphinstone" label="William Elphinstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964541" start="10248" end="10262" title="Walter Chepman" label="Walter Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759550" start="10267" end="10280" title="Androw Myllar" label="Androw Myllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702418" start="10456" end="10473" title="Walter Montagu Douglas Scott, 5th Duke of Buccleuch" label="Duke of Buccleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="11267" end="11283" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="11313" end="11332" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="11501" end="11512" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="11684" end="11694" title="Roman rite" label="Roman rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518217" start="12019" end="12036" title="Francisco de Quiñones" label="Francis Quignonez"/>
<link wikidata="Q685940" start="12050" end="12076" title="Santa Croce in Gerusalemme" label="Santa Croce in Gerusalemme"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="12474" end="12491" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="12756" end="12764" title="Sixtus V" label="Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="12801" end="12808" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q317900" start="12843" end="12851" title="Baronius" label="Baronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="12912" end="12922" title="Urban VIII" label="Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171754" start="13180" end="13194" title="Jean de Launoy" label="Jean de Launoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361139" start="13249" end="13285" title="Louis Sébastien le Nain de Tillemont" label="Louis Sébastien le Nain de Tillemont"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14015" end="14033" title="François de Harlay" label="François de Harlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180333" start="14077" end="14123" title="Charles-Gaspard-Guillaume de Vintimille du Luc" label="Charles-Gaspard-Guillaume de Vintimille du Luc"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="14279" end="14286" title="Pius IX" label="Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q577504" start="14397" end="14409" title="Charles Forbes René de Montalembert" label="Montalembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q729024" start="14451" end="14468" title="Prosper Guéranger" label="Prosper Guéranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224596" start="14505" end="14513" title="Solesmes, Sarthe" label="Solesmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404639" start="14519" end="14533" title="Louis Veuillot" label="Louis Veuillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q695178" start="15096" end="15110" title="Louis Duchesne" label="Louis Duchesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q263790" start="15167" end="15183" title="Roman Pontifical" label="Roman Pontifical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184819" start="15192" end="15204" title="Roman Ritual" label="Roman Ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307435" start="15249" end="15292" title="reform of the Roman Breviary by Pope Pius X" label="reform of the Roman Breviary by Pope Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="16123" end="16136" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="16205" end="16211" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16232" end="16237" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="16336" end="16351" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="16884" end="16906" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q776946" start="16934" end="16956" title="Sacrosanctum Concilium" label="Sacrosanctum Concilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q45774" start="17080" end="17100" title="Liturgy of the Hours" label="Liturgy of the Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="17153" end="17159" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="17161" end="17170" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="17172" end="17176" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="17181" end="17187" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153387" start="17204" end="17217" title="Ordinary Time" label="Ordinary Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="17253" end="17265" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q594673" start="17356" end="17375" title="Summorum Pontificum" label="Summorum Pontificum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="17383" end="17400" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="17409" end="17416" title="Clergy in the Catholic Church" label="clerics"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="17566" end="17578" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107550411" start="17614" end="17634" title="Traditionis custodes" label="Traditionis custodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="20887" end="20895" title="Leo XIII" label="Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q946731" start="22191" end="22206" title="Canonical Hours" label="Canonical Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561125" start="23024" end="23038" title="Song of Hannah" label="Song of Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q200809" start="23200" end="23210" title="Magnificat" label="Magnificat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916296" start="23216" end="23226" title="Benedictus (Song of Zechariah)" label="Benedictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q725548" start="23235" end="23248" title="Nunc dimittis" label="Nunc dimittis"/>
<link wikidata="Q347250" start="23806" end="23816" title="Prudentius" label="Prudentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q357027" start="23818" end="23826" title="Synesius" label="Synesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44011" start="23828" end="23848" title="Gregory of Nazianzus" label="Gregory of Nazianzus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43689" start="23853" end="23860" title="Ambrose of Milan" label="Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q343190" start="24015" end="24033" title="Acts of the Saints" label="Acts of the Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="24042" end="24063" title="Fathers of the Church" label="Fathers of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887" start="24168" end="24183" title="Clement of Rome" label="Clement of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q898808" start="24192" end="24210" title="Shepherd of Hermas" label="Shepherd of Hermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="24526" end="24535" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44344" start="24537" end="24543" title="Hilary of Poitiers" label="Hilary"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="24545" end="24555" title="Athanasius" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q166876" start="24557" end="24564" title="Isidore of Seville" label="Isidore"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="24566" end="24583" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Gregory the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q210752" start="25430" end="25437" title="Didache" label="Didachē"/>
<link wikidata="Q586744" start="25679" end="25693" title="Sacramentary" label="Sacramentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10948642" start="27455" end="27471" title="Bishop Challoner" label="Bishop Challoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q324028" start="27902" end="27918" title="John Crichton-Stuart, 3rd Marquess of Bute" label="Marquess of Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598014" start="28293" end="28308" title="Stanbrook Abbey" label="Stanbrook Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862985" start="28534" end="28548" title="Baronius Press" label="Baronius Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="28822" end="28834" title="Benedict XVI" label="Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643" start="28842" end="28854" title="motu proprio" label="motu proprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q594673" start="28855" end="28874" title="Summorum Pontificum" label="Summorum Pontificum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="28997" end="29012" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q45774" start="29055" end="29068" title="Liturgy of the Hours" label="Divine Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q57393267" start="29889" end="29905" title="Yolande Bonhomme" label="Yolande Bonhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967027" start="30340" end="30354" title="Galliot du Pré" label="Galliot du Pré"/>
<link wikidata="Q18385253" start="30372" end="30382" title="Jean Petit (printer)" label="Jean Petit"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="30546" end="30552" title="Pius V" label="Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="30554" end="30570" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="30763" end="30773" title="Urban VIII" label="Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307435" start="31946" end="31989" title="Reform of the Roman Breviary by Pope Pius X" label="Reform of the Roman Breviary by Pope Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="32427" end="32437" title="Vatican II" label="Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q727715" start="32680" end="32693" title="Book of Hours" label="Book of Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q946731" start="32696" end="32711" title="Canonical Hours" label="Canonical Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174765" start="32714" end="32724" title="Horologion" label="Horologion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496459" start="32727" end="32741" title="Latin psalters" label="Latin psalters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306773" start="32744" end="32769" title="Little Office of Our Lady" label="Little Office of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q21818614" start="32772" end="32806" title="Liturgical books of the Roman Rite" label="Liturgical books of the Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q45774" start="32809" end="32829" title="Liturgy of the Hours" label="Liturgy of the Hours"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4866" wikidata="Q249981" url="?curid=4866" title="Boomer (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[boomer]], or baby boomer, is a child born between 1946 and 1964.

Boomer may refer to:
== People ==
* Boomers (Oklahoma settlers), two groups of settlers
* Boomer (surname)
* Boomer (nickname)

== Places ==
* Boomer Township, Pottawattamie County, Iowa
* Boomer Township, Wilkes County, North Carolina
* Boomer, Missouri
* Boomer, West Virginia, a census-designated place
* Boomer Lake, an artificial reservoir in Stillwater, Oklahoma
* Boomer Island (Tasmania), Australia

== Animals ==
* An adult male kangaroo, nicknamed &quot;boomer&quot; in Australia
* An alternate name for the mountain beaver
* A colloquial name for the American red squirrel
* The greater prairie chicken, a type of grouse native to North America
* Marc Maron&#x27;s cat

==Characters==

=== Comics ===
* Owen Mercer, the current Captain Boomerang in the DC Comics universe, nicknamed &quot;Boomer&quot;
* Rotor Walrus, a character from &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot;, nicknamed &quot;Boomer&quot; in early issues
* Tabitha Smith, a Marvel Comics comic book superhero, formerly called Boomer
* Boomer, a canine character, Poncho&#x27;s best friend, in &quot;Pooch Café&quot;

===Video games===
* Boomers, a faction of xenophobic people in &quot;&quot;
* The Boomer, a recurring Special Infected in the &quot;Left 4 Dead&quot; series
* Boomers, heavily armored soldiers of the locust horde in the &quot;Gears of War&quot; series
* Boomer, a character in the &quot;Skylanders&quot; video game, known for wielding explosives enthusiastically
*Boomer, a playable clown character in the &quot;Ballz&quot; fighting game
*Boomer, a character that appeared in &quot;Super Mario RPG&quot;
*Boomer, a pixl in the game &quot;Super Paper Mario&quot;
*Boomer, a canine side-kick in &quot;Far Cry 5&quot;
*Boomer, a Bot in &quot;Rocket League&quot;

=== Television ===
* Lieutenant Boomer, a character in the 1978 television series &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;
* Sharon Valerii, a character in the 2004 television series &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;, call-sign &quot;Boomer&quot;
* Dr. Jack &quot;Boomer&quot; Morrison, a character on the U.S. television show &quot;St. Elsewhere&quot;
* Boomer, an anthropomorphic tug boat from the 1989 TV series, &quot;Tugs&quot;
* Boomer (&quot;Bubblegum Crisis&quot;), a fictional synthetic life form in the anime series &quot;Bubblegum Crisis&quot;
* Boomer, the blond member of the Rowdyruff Boys, a trio of villains in the animated series &quot;The Powerpuff Girls&quot;
* Boomer Bledsoe, a member of Roger Klotz&#x27; gang in the animated series &quot;Doug&quot;
* Boomer, the title character, a dog, in the 1980 TV series &quot;Here&#x27;s Boomer&quot;
* Boomer Parker, one of the twin protagonists of the American sitcom &quot;Pair of Kings&quot;
* Boomer, one of the main protagonists in the TV series &quot;&quot;
* Sue &quot;Boomer&quot; Jenkins, a character in the Australian drama series &quot;Wentworth&quot;
* &quot;Boomers&quot; (TV series), a 2014 BBC One television comedy series

=== Others ===
* Boomer, a woodpecker in the 1981 animated Disney film &quot;The Fox and the Hound&quot;
* Captain Boomer, a British whaling ship captain who appears briefly in Herman Melville&#x27;s &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;
* Boomer, the redhead tomboy in Burger King Kids Club advertising
* Boomer, a monument statue by western artist Harold T. Holden, located in Enid, Oklahoma, dedicated in 1987
* &quot;Boomers&quot;, a tentative title for the role-playing game &quot;Rifts&quot;
* Coach Boomer, aka Sonic Boom; the coach in the 2005 film &quot;Sky High&quot;
* Boomer Badger, character from the National Wildlife Federation&#x27;s &quot;Ranger Rick&quot; magazine
* A main character from Wonder Park

== Sports ==

=== Teams ===
* Australia men&#x27;s national basketball team, officially nicknamed &quot;Australian Boomers&quot;
* Bulleen Boomers, a basketball club based in Bulleen, a north-eastern suburb of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
* Calgary Boomers, a former professional soccer team in Canada
* Melbourne Boomers, an Australian women&#x27;s basketball club
* Schaumburg Boomers, a Frontier League baseball team based in Schaumburg, Illinois

=== Mascots ===
* Boomer (mascot), the mascot of the NBA&#x27;s Indiana Pacers
* Boomer, mascot of the Missouri State University Bears
* Boomer, mascot of the Port Vale F.C., an association football (soccer) club
* Boomer Baller, mascot of the Kannapolis Cannon Ballers minor league baseball team 
* Boomer the Bear, mascot of the Western Hockey League&#x27;s Spokane Chiefs
* Boomer the Bulldog, mascot for Dean College&#x27;s sports teams
* Boomer and Sooner, mascots for the University of Oklahoma&#x27;s sports teams
* Buzz and Boomer, mascots of the Canadian Football League&#x27;s Winnipeg Blue Bombers

== In the military ==
* A ballistic missile submarine in American naval slang
* VT-27, a US Navy training squadron nicknamed the &quot;Boomers&quot;

==Other uses==
* The Boomers (band), a Canadian rock band from Ontario
* Boomers! Parks, a theme park / family entertainment center chain
* Boomer, a freeware pharmacokinetic modeling software

== See also ==
* Boom (disambiguation)
* Boom Boom (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q249981" start="2" end="12" title="Boomer (disambiguation)" label="[[boomer]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q249981" start="70" end="76" title="Boomer (disambiguation)" label="Boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943518" start="106" end="133" title="Boomers (Oklahoma settlers)" label="Boomers (Oklahoma settlers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860232" start="160" end="176" title="Boomer (surname)" label="Boomer (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860230" start="179" end="196" title="Boomer (nickname)" label="Boomer (nickname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10740768" start="213" end="256" title="Boomer Township, Pottawattamie County, Iowa" label="Boomer Township, Pottawattamie County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943478" start="259" end="305" title="Boomer Township, Wilkes County, North Carolina" label="Boomer Township, Wilkes County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q27985755" start="308" end="324" title="Boomer, Missouri" label="Boomer, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406671" start="327" end="348" title="Boomer, West Virginia" label="Boomer, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943472" start="378" end="389" title="Boomer Lake" label="Boomer Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871472" start="441" end="465" title="Boomer Island (Tasmania)" label="Boomer Island (Tasmania)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="508" end="516" title="kangaroo" label="kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q503813" start="588" end="603" title="mountain beaver" label="mountain beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q326976" start="632" end="653" title="American red squirrel" label="American red squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19630" start="660" end="683" title="greater prairie chicken" label="greater prairie chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288246" start="728" end="738" title="Marc Maron" label="Marc Maron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568066" start="784" end="795" title="Owen Mercer" label="Owen Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597358" start="922" end="940" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (comics)" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q748726" start="995" end="1008" title="Tabitha Smith" label="Tabitha Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228494" start="1137" end="1147" title="Pooch Café" label="Pooch Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q323981" start="1287" end="1298" title="Left 4 Dead" label="Left 4 Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100030" start="1381" end="1393" title="Gears of War" label="Gears of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537794" start="1442" end="1452" title="Skylanders" label="Skylanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881443" start="1567" end="1572" title="Ballz" label="Ballz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063119" start="1637" end="1652" title="Super Mario RPG" label="Super Mario RPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q522508" start="1693" end="1710" title="Super Paper Mario" label="Super Paper Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q30015130" start="1754" end="1763" title="Far Cry 5" label="Far Cry 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q20031743" start="1794" end="1807" title="Rocket League" label="Rocket League"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060883" start="1836" end="1853" title="Lieutenant Boomer" label="Lieutenant Boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050931" start="1932" end="1946" title="Sharon Valerii" label="Sharon Valerii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2095" end="2158" title="List of St. Elsewhere characters#Dr. Jack &amp;quot;Boomer&amp;quot; Morrison" label="character on the U.S. television show &amp;quot;St. Elsewhere&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2188" end="2238" title="list of minor Tugs characters#Boomer" label="tug boat from the 1989 TV series, &amp;quot;Tugs&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565124" start="2241" end="2278" title="Boomer (Bubblegum Crisis)" label="Boomer (&amp;quot;Bubblegum Crisis&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036929" start="2395" end="2409" title="Rowdyruff Boys" label="Rowdyruff Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354893" start="2567" end="2571" title="List of Doug characters" label="Doug"/>
<link wikidata="Q446428" start="2644" end="2662" title="Here&amp;#x27;s Boomer" label="Here&amp;#x27;s Boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18904" start="2744" end="2757" title="Pair of Kings" label="Pair of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983000" start="2916" end="2925" title="Wentworth (TV series)" label="Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993375" start="2934" end="2965" title="Boomers (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Boomers&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40302" start="3085" end="3106" title="The Fox and the Hound" label="The Fox and the Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="3214" end="3223" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3262" end="3283" title="Burger King advertising#Kids Club" label="Burger King Kids Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q984361" start="3371" end="3385" title="Enid, Oklahoma" label="Enid, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336480" start="3478" end="3483" title="Rifts (role-playing game)" label="Rifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q858508" start="3555" end="3563" title="Sky High (2005 film)" label="Sky High"/>
<link wikidata="Q178231" start="3606" end="3634" title="National Wildlife Federation" label="National Wildlife Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292780" start="3648" end="3659" title="Ranger Rick" label="Ranger Rick"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869533" start="3699" end="3710" title="Wonder Park" label="Wonder Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q782856" start="3742" end="3787" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q923030" start="3843" end="3858" title="Bulleen Boomers" label="Bulleen Boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568677" start="3955" end="3970" title="Calgary Boomers" label="Calgary Boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q923030" start="4018" end="4035" title="Melbourne Boomers" label="Melbourne Boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431000" start="4082" end="4100" title="Schaumburg Boomers" label="Schaumburg Boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943469" start="4183" end="4198" title="Boomer (mascot)" label="Boomer (mascot)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679994" start="4268" end="4299" title="Missouri State Bears and Lady Bears" label="Missouri State University Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q48948" start="4324" end="4338" title="Port Vale F.C." label="Port Vale F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6363988" start="4409" end="4434" title="Kannapolis Cannon Ballers" label="Kannapolis Cannon Ballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q269750" start="4525" end="4539" title="Spokane Chiefs" label="Spokane Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246081" start="4573" end="4585" title="Dean College" label="Dean College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943482" start="4608" end="4625" title="Boomer and Sooner" label="Boomer and Sooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003558" start="4688" end="4703" title="Buzz and Boomer" label="Buzz and Boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="4801" end="4828" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907592" start="4855" end="4860" title="VT-27" label="VT-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719363" start="4942" end="4960" title="The Boomers (band)" label="The Boomers (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910494" start="4998" end="5012" title="Boomers! Parks" label="Boomers! Parks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5084" end="5099" title="Pharmacokinetics#Software" label="pharmacokinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q257255" start="5136" end="5157" title="Boom (disambiguation)" label="Boom (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q399123" start="5160" end="5186" title="Boom Boom (disambiguation)" label="Boom Boom (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4868" wikidata="Q213195" url="?curid=4868" title="B. F. Skinner">
<text>Burrhus Frederic Skinner (March 20, 1904 – August 18, 1990) was an American psychologist, behaviorist, inventor, and social philosopher. He was the Edgar Pierce Professor of Psychology at Harvard University from 1958 until his retirement in 1974.

Skinner developed behavior analysis, especially the philosophy of radical behaviorism, and founded the experimental analysis of behavior, a school of experimental research psychology. He also used operant conditioning to strengthen behavior, considering the rate of response to be the most effective measure of response strength. To study operant conditioning, he invented the operant conditioning chamber (aka the Skinner box), and to measure rate he invented the cumulative recorder. Using these tools, he and Charles Ferster produced Skinner&#x27;s most influential experimental work, outlined in their 1957 book &quot;Schedules of Reinforcement&quot;.

Skinner was a prolific author, publishing 21 books and 180 articles. He imagined the application of his ideas to the design of a human community in his 1948 utopian novel, &quot;Walden Two&quot;, while his analysis of human behavior culminated in his 1958 work, &quot;Verbal Behavior&quot;.

Skinner, John B. Watson and Ivan Pavlov, are considered to be the pioneers of modern behaviorism. Accordingly, a June 2002 survey listed Skinner as the most influential psychologist of the 20th century.

== Biography ==
Skinner was born in Susquehanna, Pennsylvania, to Grace and William Skinner, the latter of whom was a lawyer. Skinner became an atheist after a Christian teacher tried to assuage his fear of the hell that his grandmother described. His brother Edward, two and a half years younger, died at age 16 of a cerebral hemorrhage.

Skinner&#x27;s closest friend as a young boy was Raphael Miller, whom he called Doc because his father was a doctor. Doc and Skinner became friends due to their parents&#x27; religiousness and both had an interest in contraptions and gadgets. They had set up a telegraph line between their houses to send messages to each other, although they had to call each other on the telephone due to the confusing messages sent back and forth. During one summer, Doc and Skinner started an elderberry business to gather berries and sell them door to door. They found that when they picked the ripe berries, the unripe ones came off the branches too, so they built a device that was able to separate them. The device was a bent piece of metal to form a trough. They would pour water down the trough into a bucket, and the ripe berries would sink into the bucket and the unripe ones would be pushed over the edge to be thrown away.

=== Education ===
Skinner attended Hamilton College in Clinton, New York, with the intention of becoming a writer. He found himself at a social disadvantage at the college because of his intellectual attitude. He was a member of Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity.

He wrote for the school paper, but, as an atheist, he was critical of the traditional mores of his college. After receiving his Bachelor of Arts in English literature in 1926, he attended Harvard University, where he would later research and teach. While attending Harvard, a fellow student, Fred S. Keller, convinced Skinner that he could make an experimental science of the study of behavior. This led Skinner to invent a prototype for the Skinner box and to join Keller in the creation of other tools for small experiments.

After graduation, Skinner unsuccessfully tried to write a novel while he lived with his parents, a period that he later called the &quot;Dark Years&quot;. He became disillusioned with his literary skills despite encouragement from the poet Robert Frost, concluding that he had little world experience and no strong personal perspective from which to write. His encounter with John B. Watson&#x27;s &quot;behaviorism&quot; led him into graduate study in psychology and to the development of his own version of behaviorism.

=== Later life ===

Skinner received a PhD from Harvard in 1931, and remained there as a researcher for some years. In 1936, he went to the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis to teach. In 1945, he moved to Indiana University, where he was chair of the psychology department from 1946 to 1947, before returning to Harvard as a tenured professor in 1948. He remained at Harvard for the rest of his life. In 1973, Skinner was one of the signers of the &quot;Humanist Manifesto II&quot;.

In 1936, Skinner married Yvonne &quot;Eve&quot; Blue. The couple had two daughters, Julie (later Vargas) and Deborah (later Buzan; married Barry Buzan). Yvonne died in 1997, and is buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Skinner&#x27;s public exposure had increased in the 1970s, he remained active even after his retirement in 1974, until his death. In 1989, Skinner was diagnosed with leukemia and died on August 18, 1990, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Ten days before his death, he was given the lifetime achievement award by the American Psychological Association and gave a talk concerning his work.

== Contributions to psychology ==

===Behaviorism===

Skinner referred to his approach to the study of behavior as &quot;radical behaviorism&quot;, which originated in the early 1900s as a reaction to depth psychology and other traditional forms of psychology, which often had difficulty making predictions that could be tested experimentally. This philosophy of behavioral science assumes that behavior is a consequence of environmental histories of reinforcement (see applied behavior analysis). In his words:
===Foundations of Skinner&#x27;s behaviorism===
Skinner&#x27;s ideas about behaviorism were largely set forth in his first book, &quot;The Behavior of Organisms&quot; (1938). Here, he gives a systematic description of the manner in which environmental variables control behavior. He distinguished two sorts of behavior which are controlled in different ways:

* Respondent behaviors are elicited by stimuli, and may be modified through respondent conditioning, often called classical (or pavlovian) conditioning, in which a neutral stimulus is paired with an eliciting stimulus. Such behaviors may be measured by their latency or strength.
* &quot;Operant&quot; behaviors are &#x27;emitted&#x27;, meaning that initially they are not induced by any particular stimulus. They are strengthened through operant conditioning (aka &quot;instrumental&quot; conditioning), in which the occurrence of a response yields a reinforcer. Such behaviors may be measured by their rate.

Both of these sorts of behavior had already been studied experimentally, most notably: respondents, by Ivan Pavlov; and operants, by Edward Thorndike. Skinner&#x27;s account differed in some ways from earlier ones, and was one of the first accounts to bring them under one roof.

The idea that behavior is strengthened or weakened by its consequences raises several questions. Among the most commonly asked are these:

# Operant responses are strengthened by reinforcement, but where do they come from in the first place?
# Once it is in the organism&#x27;s repertoire, how is a response directed or controlled?
# How can very complex and seemingly novel behaviors be explained?

====1. Origin of operant behavior====
Skinner&#x27;s answer to the first question was very much like Darwin&#x27;s answer to the question of the origin of a &#x27;new&#x27; bodily structure, namely, variation and selection. Similarly, the behavior of an individual varies from moment to moment; a variation that is followed by reinforcement is strengthened and becomes prominent in that individual&#x27;s behavioral repertoire. &quot;Shaping&quot; was Skinner&#x27;s term for the gradual modification of behavior by the reinforcement of desired variations. Skinner believed that &#x27;superstitious&#x27; behavior can arise when a response happens to be followed by reinforcement to which it is actually unrelated.

====2. Control of operant behavior====
The second question, &quot;how is operant behavior controlled?&quot; arises because, to begin with, the behavior is &quot;emitted&quot; without reference to any particular stimulus. Skinner answered this question by saying that a stimulus comes to control an operant if it is present when the response is reinforced and absent when it is not. For example, if lever-pressing only brings food when a light is on, a rat, or a child, will learn to press the lever only when the light is on. Skinner summarized this relationship by saying that a discriminative stimulus (e.g. light or sound) sets the occasion for the reinforcement (food) of the operant (lever-press). This three-term contingency (stimulus-response-reinforcer) is one of Skinner&#x27;s most important concepts, and sets his theory apart from theories that use only pair-wise associations.

====3. Explaining complex behavior====
Most behavior of humans cannot easily be described in terms of individual responses reinforced one by one, and Skinner devoted a great deal of effort to the problem of behavioral complexity. Some complex behavior can be seen as a sequence of relatively simple responses, and here Skinner invoked the idea of &quot;chaining&quot;. Chaining is based on the fact, experimentally demonstrated, that a discriminative stimulus not only sets the occasion for subsequent behavior, but it can also reinforce a behavior that precedes it. That is, a discriminative stimulus is also a &quot;conditioned reinforcer&quot;. For example, the light that sets the occasion for lever pressing may also be used to reinforce &quot;turning around&quot; in the presence of a noise. This results in the sequence &quot;noise – turn-around – light – press lever – food.&quot; Much longer chains can be built by adding more stimuli and responses.

However, Skinner recognized that a great deal of behavior, especially human behavior, cannot be accounted for by gradual shaping or the construction of response sequences. Complex behavior often appears suddenly in its final form, as when a person first finds his way to the elevator by following instructions given at the front desk. To account for such behavior, Skinner introduced the concept of rule-governed behavior. First, relatively simple behaviors come under the control of verbal stimuli: the child learns to &quot;jump,&quot; &quot;open the book,&quot; and so on. After a large number of responses come under such verbal control, a sequence of verbal stimuli can evoke an almost unlimited variety of complex responses.

===Reinforcement===

Reinforcement, a key concept of behaviorism, is the primary process that shapes and controls behavior, and occurs in two ways: &quot;positive&quot; and &quot;negative&quot;. In &quot;The Behavior of Organisms&quot; (1938), Skinner defines &quot;negative reinforcement&quot; to be synonymous with &quot;punishment&quot;, i.e. the presentation of an aversive stimulus. This definition would subsequently be re-defined in &quot;Science and Human Behavior&quot; (1953).

In what has now become the standard set of definitions, &quot;positive&quot; reinforcement is the strengthening of behavior by the occurrence of some event (e.g., praise after some behavior is performed), whereas &quot;negative&quot; reinforcement is the strengthening of behavior by the removal or avoidance of some aversive event (e.g., opening and raising an umbrella over your head on a rainy day is reinforced by the cessation of rain falling on you).

Both types of reinforcement strengthen behavior, or increase the probability of a behavior reoccurring; the difference being in whether the reinforcing event is something applied (positive reinforcement) or something removed or avoided (negative reinforcement). Punishment can be the &quot;application&quot; of an aversive stimulus/event (positive punishment or punishment by contingent stimulation) or the &quot;removal&quot; of a desirable stimulus (negative punishment or punishment by contingent withdrawal). Though punishment is often used to suppress behavior, Skinner argued that this suppression is temporary and has a number of other, often unwanted, consequences. Extinction is the absence of a rewarding stimulus, which weakens behavior.

Writing in 1981, Skinner pointed out that Darwinian natural selection is, like reinforced behavior, &quot;selection by consequences&quot;. Though, as he said, natural selection has now &quot;made its case,&quot; he regretted that essentially the same process, &quot;reinforcement&quot;, was less widely accepted as underlying human behavior.

==== Schedules of reinforcement ====

Skinner recognized that behavior is typically reinforced more than once, and, together with Charles Ferster, he did an extensive analysis of the various ways in which reinforcements could be arranged over time, calling it the &quot;schedules of reinforcement&quot;.

The most notable schedules of reinforcement studied by Skinner were continuous, interval (fixed or variable), and ratio (fixed or variable). All are methods used in operant conditioning.

* Continuous reinforcement (CRF): each time a specific action is performed the subject receives a reinforcement. This method is effective when teaching a new behavior because it quickly establishes an association between the target behavior and the reinforcer.
* Interval schedule: based on the time intervals between reinforcements.
**Fixed interval schedule (FI): A procedure in which reinforcements are presented at fixed time periods, provided that the appropriate response is made. This schedule yields a response rate that is low just after reinforcement and becomes rapid just before the next reinforcement is scheduled.
**Variable interval schedule (VI): A procedure in which behavior is reinforced after scheduled but unpredictable time durations following the previous reinforcement. This schedule yields the most stable rate of responding, with the average frequency of reinforcement determining the frequency of response.
*Ratio schedules: based on the ratio of responses to reinforcements.
**Fixed ratio schedule (FR): A procedure in which reinforcement is delivered after a specific number of responses have been made.
**Variable ratio schedule (VR): A procedure in which reinforcement comes after a number of responses that is randomized from one reinforcement to the next (e.g. slot machines). The lower the number of responses required, the higher the response rate tends to be. Variable ratio schedules tend to produce very rapid and steady responding rates in contrast with fixed ratio schedules where the frequency of response usually drops after the reinforcement occurs.

==== Token economy ====
&quot;Skinnerian&quot; principles have been used to create token economies in a number of institutions, such as psychiatric hospitals. When participants behave in desirable ways, their behavior is reinforced with tokens that can be changed for such items as candy, cigarettes, coffee, or the exclusive use of a radio or television set.

===&quot;Verbal Behavior&quot;===

Challenged by Alfred North Whitehead during a casual discussion while at Harvard to provide an account of a randomly provided piece of verbal behavior, Skinner set about attempting to extend his then-new functional, inductive approach to the complexity of human verbal behavior. Developed over two decades, his work appeared in the book &quot;Verbal Behavior&quot;. Although Noam Chomsky was highly critical of &quot;Verbal Behavior&quot;, he conceded that Skinner&#x27;s &quot;S-R psychology&quot; was worth a review. Behavior analysts reject Chomsky&#x27;s appraisal of Skinner&#x27;s work as merely &quot;stimulus-response psychology,&quot; and some have argued that this mischaracterization highlights a poor understanding of Skinner&#x27;s work and the field of behavior analysis as a whole. 

&quot;Verbal Behavior&quot; had an uncharacteristically cool reception, partly as a result of Chomsky&#x27;s review, partly because of Skinner&#x27;s failure to address or rebut any of Chomsky&#x27;s criticisms. Skinner&#x27;s peers may have been slow to adopt the ideas presented in &quot;Verbal Behavior&quot; because of the absence of experimental evidence—unlike the empirical density that marked Skinner&#x27;s experimental work.

==Scientific inventions==

=== Operant conditioning chamber ===

An operant conditioning chamber (also known as a &quot;Skinner box&quot;) is a laboratory apparatus used in the experimental analysis of animal behavior. It was invented by Skinner while he was a graduate student at Harvard University. As used by Skinner, the box had a lever (for rats), or a disk in one wall (for pigeons). A press on this &quot;manipulandum&quot; could deliver food to the animal through an opening in the wall, and responses reinforced in this way increased in frequency. By controlling this reinforcement together with discriminative stimuli such as lights and tones, or punishments such as electric shocks, experimenters have used the operant box to study a wide variety of topics, including schedules of reinforcement, discriminative control, delayed response (&quot;memory&quot;), punishment, and so on. By channeling research in these directions, the operant conditioning chamber has had a huge influence on course of research in animal learning and its applications. It enabled great progress on problems that could be studied by measuring the rate, probability, or force of a simple, repeatable response. However, it discouraged the study of behavioral processes not easily conceptualized in such terms—spatial learning, in particular, which is now studied in quite different ways, for example, by the use of the water maze.

=== Cumulative recorder ===

The cumulative recorder makes a pen-and-ink record of simple repeated responses. Skinner designed it for use with the operant chamber as a convenient way to record and view the rate of responses such as a lever press or a key peck. In this device, a sheet of paper gradually unrolls over a cylinder. Each response steps a small pen across the paper, starting at one edge; when the pen reaches the other edge, it quickly resets to the initial side. The slope of the resulting ink line graphically displays the rate of the response; for example, rapid responses yield a steeply sloping line on the paper, slow responding yields a line of low slope. The cumulative recorder was a key tool used by Skinner in his analysis of behavior, and it was very widely adopted by other experimenters, gradually falling out of use with the advent of the laboratory computer and use of line graphs. Skinner&#x27;s major experimental exploration of response rates, presented in his book with Charles Ferster, &quot;Schedules of Reinforcement&quot;, is full of cumulative records produced by this device.

=== Air crib ===
The air crib is an easily cleaned, temperature- and humidity-controlled box-bed intended to replace the standard infant crib. After raising one baby, Skinner felt that he could simplify the process for parents and improve the experience for children. He primarily thought of the idea to help his wife cope with the day-to-day tasks of child rearing. Skinner had some specific concerns about raising a baby in the rough environment where he lived in Minnesota. Keeping the child warm was a central priority (Faye, 2010). Though this was the main goal, it also was designed to reduce laundry, diaper rash, and cradle cap, while still allowing the baby to be more mobile and comfortable. Reportedly it had some success in these goals as it was advertised commercially with an estimate of 300 children who were raised in the air crib. &quot;Psychology Today&quot; tracked down 50 children and ran a short piece on the effects of the air crib. The reports came back positive and that these children and parents enjoyed using the crib (Epstein, 2005). One of these air cribs resides in the gallery at the Center for the History of Psychology in Akron, Ohio (Faye, 2010).

The air crib was designed with three solid walls and a safety-glass panel at the front which could be lowered to move the baby in and out of the crib. The floor was stretched canvas. Sheets were intended to be used over the canvas and were easily rolled off when soiled. Addressing Skinners&#x27; concern for temperature, a control box on top of the crib regulated temperature and humidity. Filtered air flowed through the crib from below. This crib was higher than most standard cribs, allowing easier access to the child without the need to bend over (Faye, 2010).

The air crib was a controversial invention. It was popularly characterized as a cruel pen, and it was often compared to Skinner&#x27;s operant conditioning chamber (or &quot;Skinner box&quot;). Skinner&#x27;s article in &quot;Ladies Home Journal&quot;, titled &quot;Baby in a Box&quot;, caught the eye of many and contributed to skepticism about the device (Bjork, 1997). A picture published with the article showed the Skinners&#x27; daughter, Deborah, peering out of the crib with her hands and face pressed upon the glass. Skinner also used the term &quot;experiment&quot; when describing the crib, and this association with laboratory animal experimentation discouraged the crib&#x27;s commercial success, although several companies attempted to produce and sell it.

In 2004, therapist Lauren Slater repeated a claim that Skinner may have used his baby daughter in some of his experiments. His outraged daughter publicly accused Slater of not making a good-faith effort to check her facts before publishing. Debora was quoted by the Guardian saying &quot;According to &quot;Opening Skinner&#x27;s Box: Great Psychological Experiments of the Twentieth Century&quot;, my father, who was a psychologist based at Harvard from the 1950s to the 90s, &quot;used his infant daughter, Deborah, to prove his theories by putting her for a few hours a day in a laboratory box . . . in which all her needs were controlled and shaped&quot;. But it&#x27;s not true. My father did nothing of the sort.&quot;

=== Teaching machine ===
The teaching machine was a mechanical device whose purpose was to administer a curriculum of programmed learning. The machine embodies key elements of Skinner&#x27;s theory of learning and had important implications for education in general and classroom instruction in particular.

In one incarnation, the machine was a box that housed a list of questions that could be viewed one at a time through a small window. (see picture.) There was also a mechanism through which the learner could respond to each question. Upon delivering a correct answer, the learner would be rewarded.

Skinner advocated the use of teaching machines for a broad range of students (e.g., preschool aged to adult) and instructional purposes (e.g., reading and music). For example, one machine that he envisioned could teach rhythm. He wrote:The instructional potential of the teaching machine stemmed from several factors: it provided automatic, immediate and regular reinforcement without the use of aversive control; the material presented was coherent, yet varied and novel; the pace of learning could be adjusted to suit the individual. As a result, students were interested, attentive, and learned efficiently by producing the desired behavior, &quot;learning by doing.&quot;

Teaching machines, though perhaps rudimentary, were not rigid instruments of instruction. They could be adjusted and improved based upon the students&#x27; performance. For example, if a student made many incorrect responses, the machine could be reprogrammed to provide less advanced prompts or questions—the idea being that students acquire behaviors most efficiently if they make few errors. Multiple-choice formats were not well-suited for teaching machines because they tended to increase student mistakes, and the contingencies of reinforcement were relatively uncontrolled.

Not only useful in teaching explicit skills, machines could also promote the development of a repertoire of behaviors that Skinner called self-management. Effective self-management means attending to stimuli appropriate to a task, avoiding distractions, reducing the opportunity of reward for competing behaviors, and so on. For example, machines encourage students to pay attention before receiving a reward. Skinner contrasted this with the common classroom practice of initially capturing students&#x27; attention (e.g., with a lively video) and delivering a reward (e.g., entertainment) before the students have actually performed any relevant behavior. This practice fails to reinforce correct behavior and actually counters the development of self-management.

Skinner pioneered the use of teaching machines in the classroom, especially at the primary level. Today computers run software that performs similar teaching tasks, and there has been a resurgence of interest in the topic related to the development of adaptive learning systems.

=== Pigeon-guided missile ===

During World War II, the US Navy required a weapon effective against surface ships, such as the German &quot;Bismarck&quot; class battleships. Although missile and TV technology existed, the size of the primitive guidance systems available rendered automatic guidance impractical. To solve this problem, Skinner initiated Project Pigeon, which was intended to provide a simple and effective guidance system. Skinner trained pigeons through operant conditioning to peck a camera obscura screen showing incoming targets on individual screens (Schultz-Figueroa, 2019). This system divided the nose cone of a missile into three compartments, with a pigeon placed in each. Within the ship, the three lenses projected an image of distant objects onto a screen in front of each bird. Thus, when the missile was launched from an aircraft within sight of an enemy ship, an image of the ship would appear on the screen. The screen was hinged, which connected the screens to the bomb&#x27;s guidance system. This was done through four small rubber pneumatic tubes that were attached to each side of the frame, which directed a constant airflow to a pneumatic pickup system that controlled the thrusters of the bomb. Resulting in the missile being guided towards the targeted ship, through just the peck coming from the pigeon (Schultz-Figueroa, 2019).

Despite an effective demonstration, the project was abandoned, and eventually more conventional solutions, such as those based on radar, became available. Skinner complained that &quot;our problem was no one would take us seriously.&quot; Before the project was completely abandoned it was tested extensively in the laboratory. After the United States Army ultimately denied it the United States Naval Research Laboratory picked up Skinner&#x27;s Research and renamed it Project ORCON, which was a contraction of &quot;organic&quot; and &quot;control&quot;. Skinner worked closely with the US Naval Research Laboratory continuously testing the pigeon&#x27;s tracking capacity for guiding missiles to their intended targets. In the end, the pigeons&#x27; performance and accuracy relied on so many uncontrollable factors that Project ORCON, like Project Pigeon before it, was again discontinued. It was never used in the field.

=== Verbal summator ===

Early in his career Skinner became interested in &quot;latent speech&quot; and experimented with a device he called the &quot;verbal summator&quot;. This device can be thought of as an auditory version of the Rorschach inkblots. When using the device, human participants listened to incomprehensible auditory &quot;garbage&quot; but often read meaning into what they heard. Thus, as with the Rorschach blots, the device was intended to yield overt behavior that projected subconscious thoughts. Skinner&#x27;s interest in projective testing was brief, but he later used observations with the summator in creating his theory of verbal behavior. The device also led other researchers to invent new tests such as the tautophone test, the auditory apperception test, and the Azzageddi test.

== Influence on teaching ==
Along with psychology, education has also been influenced by Skinner&#x27;s views, which are extensively presented in his book &quot;The Technology of Teaching&quot;, as well as reflected in Fred S. Keller&#x27;s &quot;Personalized System of Instruction&quot; and Ogden R. Lindsley&#x27;s &quot;Precision Teaching&quot;.

Skinner argued that education has two major purposes:

# to teach repertoires of both verbal and nonverbal behavior; and
# to interest students in learning.

He recommended bringing students&#x27; behavior under appropriate control by providing reinforcement only in the presence of stimuli relevant to the learning task. Because he believed that human behavior can be affected by small consequences, something as simple as &quot;the opportunity to move forward after completing one stage of an activity&quot; can be an effective reinforcer. Skinner was convinced that, to learn, a student must engage in behavior, and not just passively receive information.

Skinner believed that effective teaching must be based on positive reinforcement which is, he argued, more effective at changing and establishing behavior than punishment. He suggested that the main thing people learn from being punished is how to avoid punishment. For example, if a child is forced to practice playing an instrument, the child comes to associate practicing with punishment and thus develops feelings of dreadfulness and wishes to avoid practicing the instrument. This view had obvious implications for the then widespread practice of rote learning and punitive discipline in education. The use of educational activities as punishment may induce rebellious behavior such as vandalism or absence.

Because teachers are primarily responsible for modifying student behavior, Skinner argued that teachers must learn effective ways of teaching. In &quot;The Technology of Teaching&quot; (1968), Skinner has a chapter on why teachers fail: He says that teachers have not been given an in-depth understanding of teaching and learning. Without knowing the science underpinning teaching, teachers fall back on procedures that work poorly or not at all, such as:

*using aversive techniques (which produce escape and avoidance and undesirable emotional effects);
* relying on telling and explaining (&quot;Unfortunately, a student does not learn simply when he is shown or told.&quot;);
* failing to adapt learning tasks to the student&#x27;s current level; and
* failing to provide positive reinforcement frequently enough.

Skinner suggests that any age-appropriate skill can be taught. The steps are
#Clearly specify the action or performance the student is to learn.
#Break down the task into small achievable steps, going from simple to complex.
#Let the student perform each step, reinforcing correct actions.
#Adjust so that the student is always successful until finally the goal is reached.
#Shift to intermittent reinforcement to maintain the student&#x27;s performance.

== Contributions to social theory ==
Skinner is popularly known mainly for his books &quot;Walden Two&quot; (1948) and &quot;Beyond Freedom and Dignity,&quot; (for which he made the cover of &quot;Time&quot; magazine). The former describes a fictional &quot;experimental community&quot; in 1940s United States. The productivity and happiness of citizens in this community is far greater than in the outside world because the residents practice scientific social planning and use operant conditioning in raising their children.

&quot;Walden Two&quot;, like Thoreau&#x27;s &quot;Walden&quot;, champions a lifestyle that does not support war, or foster competition and social strife. It encourages a lifestyle of minimal consumption, rich social relationships, personal happiness, satisfying work, and leisure. In 1967, Kat Kinkade and others founded the Twin Oaks Community, using&quot; Walden Two&quot; as a blueprint. The community still exists and continues to use the Planner-Manager system and other aspects of the community described in Skinner&#x27;s book, though behavior modification is not a community practice.

In &quot;Beyond Freedom and Dignity&quot;, Skinner suggests that a technology of behavior could help to make a better society. We would, however, have to accept that an autonomous agent is not the driving force of our actions. Skinner offers alternatives to punishment, and challenges his readers to use science and modern technology to construct a better society.

== Political views ==
Skinner&#x27;s political writings emphasized his hopes that an effective and human science of behavioral control – a technology of human behavior – could help with problems as yet unsolved and often aggravated by advances in technology such as the atomic bomb. Indeed, one of Skinner&#x27;s goals was to prevent humanity from destroying itself. He saw political activity as the use of aversive or non-aversive means to control a population. Skinner favored the use of positive reinforcement as a means of control, citing Jean-Jacques Rousseau&#x27;s novel &quot;&quot; as an example of literature that &quot;did not fear the power of positive reinforcement.&quot;

Skinner&#x27;s book, &quot;Walden Two&quot;, presents a vision of a decentralized, localized society, which applies a practical, scientific approach and behavioral expertise to deal peacefully with social problems. (For example, his views led him to oppose corporal punishment in schools, and he wrote a letter to the California Senate that helped lead it to a ban on spanking.) Skinner&#x27;s utopia is both a thought experiment and a rhetorical piece. In &quot;Walden Two&quot;, Skinner answers the problem that exists in many utopian novels – &quot;What is the Good Life?&quot; The book&#x27;s answer is a life of friendship, health, art, a healthy balance between work and leisure, a minimum of unpleasantness, and a feeling that one has made worthwhile contributions to a society in which resources are ensured, in part, by minimizing consumption. 

Skinner described his novel as &quot;my New Atlantis&quot;, in reference to Bacon&#x27;s utopia. 

== Superstition&#x27; in the Pigeon&quot; experiment ==
One of Skinner&#x27;s experiments examined the formation of superstition in one of his favorite experimental animals, the pigeon. Skinner placed a series of hungry pigeons in a cage attached to an automatic mechanism that delivered food to the pigeon &quot;at regular intervals with no reference whatsoever to the bird&#x27;s behavior.&quot; He discovered that the pigeons associated the delivery of the food with whatever chance actions they had been performing as it was delivered, and that they subsequently continued to perform these same actions.Skinner suggested that the pigeons behaved as if they were influencing the automatic mechanism with their &quot;rituals&quot;, and that this experiment shed light on human behavior:Modern behavioral psychologists have disputed Skinner&#x27;s &quot;superstition&quot; explanation for the behaviors he recorded. Subsequent research (e.g. Staddon and Simmelhag, 1971), while finding similar behavior, failed to find support for Skinner&#x27;s &quot;adventitious reinforcement&quot; explanation for it. By looking at the timing of different behaviors within the interval, Staddon and Simmelhag were able to distinguish two classes of behavior: the &quot;terminal response&quot;, which occurred in anticipation of food, and &quot;interim responses&quot;, that occurred earlier in the interfood interval and were rarely contiguous with food. Terminal responses seem to reflect classical (as opposed to operant) conditioning, rather than adventitious reinforcement, guided by a process like that observed in 1968 by Brown and Jenkins in their &quot;autoshaping&quot; procedures. The causation of interim activities (such as the schedule-induced polydipsia seen in a similar situation with rats) also cannot be traced to adventitious reinforcement and its details are still obscure (Staddon, 1977).

== Criticism ==

=== Noam Chomsky ===
American linguist Noam Chomsky published a review of Skinner&#x27;s &quot;Verbal Behavior&quot; in the linguistics journal &quot;Language&quot; in 1959. Chomsky argued that Skinner&#x27;s attempt to use behaviorism to explain human language amounted to little more than word games. Conditioned responses could not account for a child&#x27;s ability to create or understand an infinite variety of novel sentences. Chomsky&#x27;s review has been credited with launching the cognitive revolution in psychology and other disciplines. Skinner, who rarely responded directly to critics, never formally replied to Chomsky&#x27;s critique, but endorsed Kenneth MacCorquodale&#x27;s 1972 reply.

Many academics in the 1960s believed that Skinner&#x27;s silence on the question meant Chomsky&#x27;s criticism had been justified. But MacCorquodale wrote that Chomsky&#x27;s criticism did not focus on Skinner&#x27;s &quot;Verbal Behavior&quot;, but rather attacked a confusion of ideas from behavioral psychology. MacCorquodale also regretted Chomsky&#x27;s aggressive tone. Furthermore, Chomsky had aimed at delivering a definitive refutation of Skinner by citing dozens of animal instinct and animal learning studies. On the one hand, he argued that the studies on animal instinct proved that animal behavior is innate, and therefore Skinner was mistaken. On the other, Chomsky&#x27;s opinion of the studies on learning was that one cannot draw an analogy from animal studies to human behavior—or, that research on animal instinct refutes research on animal learning.

Chomsky also reviewed Skinner&#x27;s &quot;Beyond Freedom and Dignity&quot;, using the same basic motives as his &quot;Verbal Behavior&quot; review. Among Chomsky&#x27;s criticisms were that Skinner&#x27;s laboratory work could not be extended to humans, that when it was extended to humans it represented &quot;scientistic&quot; behavior attempting to emulate science but which was not scientific, that Skinner was not a scientist because he rejected the hypothetico-deductive model of theory testing, and that Skinner had no science of behavior.

=== Psychodynamic psychology ===
Skinner has been repeatedly criticized for his supposed animosity towards Sigmund Freud, psychoanalysis, and psychodynamic psychology. Some have argued, however, that Skinner shared several of Freud&#x27;s assumptions, and that he was influenced by Freudian points of view in more than one field, among them the analysis of defense mechanisms, such as repression. To study such phenomena, Skinner even designed his own projective test, the &quot;verbal summator&quot; described above.

=== J. E. R. Staddon ===
As understood by Skinner, ascribing &quot;dignity&quot; to individuals involves giving them credit for their actions. To say &quot;Skinner is brilliant&quot; means that Skinner is an originating force. If Skinner&#x27;s determinist theory is right, he is merely the focus of his environment. He is not an originating force and he had no choice in saying the things he said or doing the things he did. Skinner&#x27;s environment and genetics both allowed and compelled him to write his book. Similarly, the environment and genetic potentials of the advocates of freedom and dignity cause them to resist the reality that their own activities are deterministically grounded. J. E. R. Staddon has argued the compatibilist position; Skinner&#x27;s determinism is not in any way contradictory to traditional notions of reward and punishment, as he believed.

== Professional career ==

=== Roles ===

*1936–1937 Instructor, University of Minnesota
*1937–1939 Assistant Professor, University of Minnesota
*1939–1945 Associate Professor, University of Minnesota
*1945–1948 Professor and chair, Indiana University
*1947–1948 William James Lecturer, Harvard University
*1948–1958 Professor, Harvard University
*1958–1974 Professor of Psychology, Harvard University
*1949–1950 President, Midwestern Psychological Association
*1954–1955 President, Eastern Psychological Association
*1966–1967 President, Pavlovian Society of North America
*1974–1990 Professor of Psychology and Social Relations Emeritus, Harvard University

=== Awards ===

*1926 AB, Hamilton College
*1930 MA, Harvard University
*1930–1931 Thayer Fellowship
*1931 PhD, Harvard University
*1931–1932 Walker Fellowship
*1931–1933 National Research Council Fellowship
*1933–1936 Junior Fellowship, Harvard Society of Fellows
*1942 Guggenheim Fellowship (postponed until 1944–1945)
*1942 Howard Crosby Warren Medal, Society of Experimental Psychologists
*1958 Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award, American Psychological Association
*1958–1974 Edgar Pierce Professor of Psychology, Harvard University
*1964–1974 Career Award, National Institute of Mental Health
*1966 Edward Lee Thorndike Award, American Psychological Association
*1968 National Medal of Science, National Science Foundation
*1969 Overseas Fellow in Churchill College, Cambridge
*1971 Gold Medal Award, American Psychological Foundation
*1971 Joseph P. Kennedy Jr., Foundation for Mental Retardation International award
*1972 Humanist of the Year, American Humanist Association
*1972 Creative Leadership in Education Award, New York University
*1972 Career Contribution Award, Massachusetts Psychological Association
*1978 Distinguished Contributions to Educational Research Award and Development, American Educational Research Association
*1978 National Association for Retarded Citizens Award
*1985 Award for Excellence in Psychiatry, Albert Einstein School of Medicine
*1985 President&#x27;s Award, New York Academy of Science
*1990 William James Fellow Award, American Psychological Society
*1990 Lifetime Achievement Award, American Psychological Association
*1991 Outstanding Member and Distinguished Professional Achievement Award, Society for Performance Improvement
*1997 Scholar Hall of Fame Award, Academy of Resource and Development
*2011 Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Pantheon of Skeptics—Inducted
*2024 Ig Nobel Peace Prize for his work on the pigeon-guided bomb project.

=== Honorary degrees ===
Skinner received honorary degrees from:
*Alfred University
*Ball State University 
*Dickinson College
*Hamilton College
*Harvard University
*Hobart and William Smith Colleges
*Johns Hopkins University
*Keio University
*Long Island University C. W. Post Campus
*McGill University
*North Carolina State University
*Ohio Wesleyan University
*Ripon College
*Rockford College
*Tufts University
*University of Chicago
*University of Exeter
*University of Missouri
*University of North Texas
*Western Michigan University
*University of Maryland, Baltimore County.

=== Honorary societies ===
Skinner was inducted to the following honorary societies:
* PSI CHI International Honor Society in Psychology
* American Philosophical Society
* American Academy of Arts and Sciences
* United States National Academy of Sciences

== Bibliography ==
*1938. &quot;The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis&quot;, 1938. 
*1948. &quot;Walden Two&quot;. (revised 1976 ed.).
*1953. &quot;Science and Human Behavior&quot;. 
*1957. &quot;Schedules of Reinforcement&quot;, with C. B. Ferster. 
*1957. &quot;Verbal Behavior&quot;. 
*1961. &quot;The Analysis of Behavior: A Program for Self Instruction&quot;, with James G. Holland. 
*1968.&quot;The Technology of Teaching&quot;. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
*1969. &quot;Contingencies of Reinforcement: A Theoretical Analysis&quot;. 
*1971. &quot;Beyond Freedom and Dignity&quot;. 
*1974. &quot;About Behaviorism&quot;. 
*1976. &quot;Particulars of My Life: Part One of an Autobiography&quot;. 
*1978. &quot;Reflections on Behaviorism and Society&quot;. 
*1979. &quot;The Shaping of a Behaviorist: Part Two of an Autobiography&quot;. 
*1980. &quot;Notebooks&quot;, edited by Robert Epstein. 
*1982. &quot;Skinner for the Classroom&quot;, edited by R. Epstein. 
*1983. &quot;Enjoy Old Age: A Program of Self-Management&quot;, with M. E. Vaughan. 
*1983. &quot;A Matter of Consequences: Part Three of an Autobiography&quot;. 
*1987. &quot;Upon Further Reflection&quot;. 
*1989. &quot;Recent Issues in the Analysis of Behavior&quot;. 
*&quot;Cumulative Record: A Selection of Papers&quot;, 1959, 1961, 1972 and 1999 as &quot;Cumulative Record: Definitive Edition&quot;. 
**Includes reprint: Skinner, B. F. 1945. &quot;Baby in a Box.&quot; &quot;Ladies&#x27; Home Journal&quot;. — Skinner&#x27;s original, personal account of the much-misrepresented &quot;Baby in a box&quot; device.

== See also ==
* Applied behavior analysis
* &quot;Back to Freedom and Dignity&quot;

== References ==

=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
== Further reading ==
* Chiesa, M. (2004). &quot;Radical Behaviorism: The Philosophy and the Science&quot;.
*Epstein, Robert (1997). &quot;Skinner as self-manager.&quot; &quot;Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis&quot; 30:545–69. Retrieved 2 June 2005 – via ENVMED.rochester.edu
* Sundberg, M. L. (2008) &quot;The VB-MAPP: The Verbal Behavior Milestones Assessment and Placement Program&quot;
* Basil-Curzon, L. (2004) &quot;Teaching in Further Education: A outline of Principles and Practice&quot;
* Hardin, C.J. (2004) &quot;Effective Classroom Management&quot;
* Kaufhold, J. A. (2002) &quot;The Psychology of Learning and the Art of Teaching&quot;
* Bjork, D. W. (1993) &quot;B. F. Skinner: A Life&quot;
* Dews, P. B., ed. (1970) &quot;Festschrift For B. F. Skinner.&quot;New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
* Evans, R. I. (1968) &quot;B. F. Skinner: the man and his ideas&quot;
* Nye, Robert D. (1979) &quot;What Is B. F. Skinner Really Saying?&quot; Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
* Rutherford, A. (2009) &quot;Beyond the box: B. F. Skinner&#x27;s technology of behavior from laboratory to life, 1950s–1970s.&quot;. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
* Sagal, P. T. (1981) &quot;Skinner&#x27;s Philosophy&quot;. Washington, DC: University Press of America.
* Smith, D. L. (2002). On Prediction and Control. B. F. Skinner and the Technological Ideal of Science. In W. E. Pickren &amp; D. A. Dewsbury, (Eds.), &quot;Evolving Perspectives on the History of Psychology&quot;, Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
* Swirski, Peter (2011) &quot;How I Stopped Worrying and Loved Engineering or Communal Life, Adaptations, and B.F. Skinner&#x27;s &quot;Walden Two&quot;&quot;. &quot;American Utopia and Social Engineering in Literature, Social Thought, and Political History&quot;. New York, Routledge.
* Wiener, D. N. (1996) &quot;B. F. Skinner: benign anarchist&quot;
* Wolfgang, C.H. and Glickman, Carl D. (1986) &quot;Solving Discipline Problems&quot; Allyn and Bacon, Inc

== External links ==

*B. F. Skinner Foundation homepage
*National Academy of Sciences biography
* 
*I was not a lab rat, response by Skinner&#x27;s daughter about the &quot;baby box&quot;
*Audio Recordings Society for Experimental Analysis of Behavior
*Reprint of &quot;the Minotaur of the Behaviorist Maze: Surviving Stanford&#x27;s Learning House in the 1970s: &quot;Journal of Humanistic Psychology&quot;, Vol. 51, Number 3, July 2011. 266–272.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213195" start="0" end="24" title="B. F. Skinner" label="Burrhus Frederic Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="90" end="101" title="behaviorist" label="behaviorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q180592" start="117" end="135" title="Social philosophy" label="social philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="188" end="206" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q621607" start="266" end="283" title="Applied behavior analysis" label="behavior analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622161" start="314" end="333" title="radical behaviorism" label="radical behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q373473" start="351" end="384" title="experimental analysis of behavior" label="experimental analysis of behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q847079" start="445" end="465" title="operant conditioning" label="operant conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295541" start="506" end="522" title="rate of response" label="rate of response"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519248" start="625" end="653" title="operant conditioning chamber" label="operant conditioning chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077640" start="760" end="775" title="Charles Ferster" label="Charles Ferster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289889" start="1083" end="1093" title="Walden Two" label="Walden Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461168" start="1173" end="1188" title="Verbal Behavior" label="Verbal Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q217477" start="1206" end="1220" title="John B. Watson" label="John B. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42985" start="1225" end="1236" title="Ivan Pavlov" label="Ivan Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="1282" end="1293" title="behaviorism" label="behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185617" start="1437" end="1462" title="Susquehanna, Pennsylvania" label="Susquehanna, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="1545" end="1552" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="1719" end="1738" title="cerebral hemorrhage" label="cerebral hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q131448" start="2221" end="2231" title="elderberry" label="elderberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113011" start="2697" end="2713" title="Hamilton College" label="Hamilton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="2849" end="2861" title="intellectual" label="intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481107" start="2891" end="2907" title="Lambda Chi Alpha" label="Lambda Chi Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="3049" end="3065" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="3069" end="3087" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3109" end="3127" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496207" start="3213" end="3227" title="Fred S. Keller" label="Fred S. Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="3269" end="3289" title="Experiment" label="experimental science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519248" start="3363" end="3374" title="Operant conditioning chamber" label="Skinner box"/>
<link wikidata="Q168728" start="3689" end="3701" title="Robert Frost" label="Robert Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q217477" start="3825" end="3839" title="John B. Watson" label="John B. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="4011" end="4014" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="4112" end="4135" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="4182" end="4200" title="Indiana University (Bloomington)" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154390" start="4302" end="4319" title="Academic tenure" label="tenured professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128145" start="4431" end="4452" title="Humanist Manifesto II" label="Humanist Manifesto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308563" start="4545" end="4550" title="Julie Vargas" label="Julie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634998" start="4600" end="4611" title="Barry Buzan" label="Barry Buzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950363" start="4652" end="4673" title="Mount Auburn Cemetery" label="Mount Auburn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="4675" end="4699" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="4868" end="4876" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="5013" end="5047" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622161" start="5207" end="5226" title="radical behaviorism" label="radical behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q621607" start="5556" end="5581" title="applied behavior analysis" label="applied behavior analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716359" start="5733" end="5758" title="The Behavior of Organisms" label="The Behavior of Organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="6072" end="6109" title="classical conditioning" label="classical (or pavlovian) conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003027" start="6122" end="6138" title="neutral stimulus" label="neutral stimulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859031" start="6157" end="6175" title="Stimulus (physiology)" label="eliciting stimulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q847079" start="6397" end="6417" title="operant conditioning" label="operant conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q42985" start="6672" end="6683" title="Ivan Pavlov" label="Ivan Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q309765" start="6702" end="6718" title="Edward Thorndike" label="Edward Thorndike"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080119" start="8673" end="8695" title="three-term contingency" label="three-term contingency"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="10601" end="10612" title="behaviorism" label="behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186361" start="10871" end="10881" title="punishment" label="punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544090" start="11756" end="11766" title="Punishment (psychology)" label="Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="12296" end="12313" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077640" start="12717" end="12732" title="Charles Ferster" label="Charles Ferster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321905" start="12857" end="12883" title="schedules of reinforcement" label="schedules of reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q847079" start="13057" end="13077" title="operant conditioning" label="operant conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932004" start="14757" end="14772" title="Token economy" label="token economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="15084" end="15106" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Alfred North Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461168" start="15413" end="15428" title="Verbal Behavior" label="Verbal Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="15445" end="15457" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519248" start="16373" end="16401" title="operant conditioning chamber" label="operant conditioning chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="16586" end="16604" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973543" start="17710" end="17720" title="Water maze (neuroscience)" label="water maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519248" start="17870" end="17885" title="Operant conditioning chamber" label="operant chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077640" start="18726" end="18741" title="Charles Ferster" label="Charles Ferster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378930" start="18928" end="18935" title="box-bed" label="box-bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q412770" start="18976" end="18980" title="Infant bed" label="crib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519248" start="20725" end="20753" title="operant conditioning chamber" label="operant conditioning chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367928" start="21381" end="21394" title="Lauren Slater" label="Lauren Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q16135865" start="22117" end="22133" title="teaching machine" label="teaching machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="22140" end="22157" title="mechanical device" label="mechanical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649174" start="22206" end="22225" title="programmed learning" label="programmed learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="25057" end="25064" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q707045" start="25135" end="25161" title="Bismarck-class battleship" label="&amp;quot;Bismarck&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="25184" end="25191" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909303" start="25196" end="25198" title="Television guidance" label="TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q898068" start="25354" end="25368" title="Project Pigeon" label="Project Pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="28166" end="28175" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496207" start="28334" end="28348" title="Fred S. Keller" label="Fred S. Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385686" start="28362" end="28396" title="Personalized System of Instruction" label="Personalized System of Instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079925" start="28407" end="28424" title="Ogden Lindsley" label="Ogden R. Lindsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11996198" start="28438" end="28456" title="Precision teaching" label="Precision Teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q784221" start="29677" end="29690" title="rote learning" label="rote learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q18171" start="29695" end="29714" title="school discipline" label="punitive discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q352842" start="30147" end="30155" title="teaching" label="teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="30160" end="30168" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289889" start="31205" end="31215" title="Walden Two" label="Walden Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703451" start="31239" end="31265" title="Beyond Freedom and Dignity" label="Beyond Freedom and Dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="31311" end="31315" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="31671" end="31678" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q863534" start="31692" end="31698" title="Walden" label="Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374961" start="31932" end="31943" title="Kat Kinkade" label="Kat Kinkade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542544" start="31967" end="31986" title="Twin Oaks Community" label="Twin Oaks Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883473" start="32184" end="32205" title="behavior modification" label="behavior modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826847" start="32405" end="32421" title="autonomous agent" label="autonomous agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="32872" end="32883" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321905" start="33092" end="33114" title="positive reinforcement" label="positive reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="33145" end="33166" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="33683" end="33689" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="33725" end="33733" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="34220" end="34225" title="Francis Bacon (philosopher)" label="Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233830" start="34233" end="34239" title="New Atlantis" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="34359" end="34371" title="superstition" label="superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="34421" end="34427" title="pigeon" label="pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q635195" start="35988" end="35998" title="polydipsia" label="polydipsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="36198" end="36210" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36223" end="36229" title="Verbal Behavior#Chomsky&amp;#x27;s review" label="review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461168" start="36254" end="36269" title="Verbal Behavior" label="Verbal Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486629" start="36309" end="36317" title="Language (journal)" label="Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756506" start="36652" end="36672" title="cognitive revolution" label="cognitive revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390406" start="36825" end="36846" title="Kenneth MacCorquodale" label="Kenneth MacCorquodale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703451" start="37783" end="37809" title="Beyond Freedom and Dignity" label="Beyond Freedom and Dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193626" start="38052" end="38063" title="Scientism" label="scientistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143445" start="38196" end="38223" title="hypothetico-deductive model" label="hypothetico-deductive model"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="38396" end="38409" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="38411" end="38425" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279219" start="38431" end="38455" title="psychodynamic psychology" label="psychodynamic psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866472" start="38646" end="38664" title="defense mechanisms" label="defense mechanisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q941796" start="38674" end="38684" title="Psychological repression" label="repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501864" start="38741" end="38756" title="projective test" label="projective test"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="39053" end="39064" title="determinism" label="determinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15503394" start="39505" end="39521" title="J. E. R. Staddon" label="J. E. R. Staddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551125" start="39537" end="39559" title="Compatibilism" label="compatibilist position"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="39751" end="39774" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="39919" end="39937" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013470" start="39949" end="39971" title="William James Lectures" label="William James Lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769382" start="40169" end="40202" title="Eastern Psychological Association" label="Eastern Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768759" start="40225" end="40259" title="Pavlovian Society of North America" label="Pavlovian Society of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113011" start="40372" end="40388" title="Hamilton College" label="Hamilton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="40395" end="40397" title="Master of Arts" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="40399" end="40417" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="40453" end="40456" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="40517" end="40542" title="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine" label="National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676568" start="40584" end="40610" title="Harvard Society of Fellows" label="Harvard Society of Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="40617" end="40638" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552471" start="40701" end="40738" title="Society of Experimental Psychologists" label="Society of Experimental Psychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="40790" end="40824" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967405" start="40918" end="40953" title="National Institute of Mental Health" label="National Institute of Mental Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322016" start="40960" end="40986" title="E. L. Thorndike Award" label="Edward Lee Thorndike Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="41029" end="41054" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="41056" end="41083" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q714740" start="41109" end="41137" title="Churchill College, Cambridge" label="Churchill College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089781" start="41162" end="41195" title="American Psychological Foundation" label="American Psychological Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286013" start="41202" end="41272" title="Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. Foundation" label="Joseph P. Kennedy Jr., Foundation for Mental Retardation International"/>
<link wikidata="Q465035" start="41307" end="41336" title="American Humanist Association" label="American Humanist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="41383" end="41402" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q464069" start="41557" end="41598" title="American Educational Research Association" label="American Educational Research Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785033" start="41605" end="41647" title="Arc of the United States" label="National Association for Retarded Citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069131" start="41761" end="41788" title="New York Academy of Sciences" label="New York Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q15253460" start="41795" end="41821" title="William James Fellow Award" label="William James Fellow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534543" start="41860" end="41886" title="APA Award for Lifetime Contributions to Psychology" label="Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115728" start="42110" end="42141" title="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry" label="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184253" start="42178" end="42198" title="Ig_Nobel_Prize" label="Ig Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446091" start="42314" end="42331" title="Alfred University" label="Alfred University"/>
<link wikidata="Q805122" start="42333" end="42354" title="Ball State University" label="Ball State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210045" start="42357" end="42374" title="Dickinson College" label="Dickinson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113011" start="42376" end="42392" title="Hamilton College" label="Hamilton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="42394" end="42412" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119316" start="42414" end="42447" title="Hobart and William Smith Colleges" label="Hobart and William Smith Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="42449" end="42473" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q815432" start="42475" end="42490" title="Keio University" label="Keio University"/>
<link wikidata="Q543394" start="42492" end="42532" title="Long Island University C. W. Post Campus" label="Long Island University C. W. Post Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="42534" end="42551" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="42553" end="42584" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q194266" start="42586" end="42610" title="Ohio Wesleyan University" label="Ohio Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335662" start="42612" end="42625" title="Ripon College (Wisconsin)" label="Ripon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355238" start="42627" end="42643" title="Rockford College" label="Rockford College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49120" start="42645" end="42661" title="Tufts University" label="Tufts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="42663" end="42684" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="42686" end="42706" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="42708" end="42730" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q860527" start="42732" end="42757" title="University of North Texas" label="University of North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546191" start="42759" end="42786" title="Western Michigan University" label="Western Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q735049" start="42788" end="42828" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore County" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="42970" end="43000" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="43003" end="43040" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="43057" end="43085" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716359" start="43119" end="43170" title="The Behavior of Organisms" label="The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289889" start="43198" end="43208" title="Walden Two" label="Walden Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077640" start="43336" end="43349" title="Charles Ferster" label="C. B. Ferster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461168" start="43365" end="43380" title="Verbal Behavior" label="Verbal Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703451" start="43661" end="43687" title="Beyond Freedom and Dignity" label="Beyond Freedom and Dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344102" start="43989" end="44003" title="Robert Epstein" label="Robert Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394235" start="44556" end="44581" title="Ladies&amp;#x27; Home Journal" label="Ladies&amp;#x27; Home Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q621607" start="44712" end="44737" title="Applied behavior analysis" label="Applied behavior analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839404" start="44746" end="44773" title="Back to Freedom and Dignity" label="Back to Freedom and Dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344102" start="44940" end="44955" title="Robert Epstein" label="Epstein, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294768" start="45007" end="45043" title="Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis" label="Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152732" start="45158" end="45217" title="Verbal Behavior Milestones Assessment and Placement Program" label="Verbal Behavior Milestones Assessment and Placement Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733449" start="46810" end="46825" title="Allyn and Bacon" label="Allyn and Bacon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4869" wikidata="Q257022" url="?curid=4869" title="Bill">
<text>Bill(s) may refer to:

==Common meanings==
* Banknote, paper cash (especially in the United States)
* Bill (law), a proposed law put before a legislature
* Invoice, commercial document issued by a seller to a buyer
* Bill, a bird or animal&#x27;s beak

==Places==
* Bill, Wyoming, an unincorporated community, United States

==People and fictional characters==
* Bill (given name), a list of people and fictional characters
* Bill (surname)
* Bill (footballer, born 1953), Brazilian football forward Oswaldo Faria
* Bill (footballer, born 1978), Togolese football forward Alessandro Faria
* Bill (footballer, born 1984), Brazilian football forward Rosimar Amâncio 
* Bill (footballer, born 1999), Brazilian forward Fabricio Rodrigues da Silva Ferreira

==Arts, media, and entertainment==
===Characters===
* Bill, the villain of the &quot;Kill Bill&quot; films
* Bill, one of the protagonists of the &quot;Bill &amp; Ted&quot; films
* A lizard in Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;
* A locomotive in &quot;The Railway Series&quot; and &quot;Thomas &amp; Friends&quot;
* A candy store owner in the 1971 film, &quot;Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory&quot;
* Bill the Cat, a &quot;Bloom County&quot; character
* Bill Cipher, a demon in &quot;Gravity Falls&quot;
* Bill the Pony and his previous owner Bill Ferny in the novel &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;
* Bill Potts (&quot;Doctor Who&quot;), a female companion of the twelfth Doctor in &quot;Doctor Who&quot;
* Bill Sikes, the antagonist from &quot;Oliver Twist&quot;
* Mr. Bill, a claymation character on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;
* Sour Bill, in &quot;Wreck-It Ralph&quot;
* Bill Kerman, in the computer game &quot;Kerbal Space Program&quot;

===Films===
* &quot;Bill&quot; (1981 film), a 1981 TV film starring Mickey Rooney
** &quot;&quot;, 1983 sequel to the 1981 film
* &quot;Bill&quot; (2015 film), an adventure-comedy film about Shakespeare from the cast of &quot;Horrible Histories&quot;
* &quot;Bill, the Galactic Hero&quot; (film), 2014 science student fiction film based on the 1965 Harry Harrison novel
* &quot;Meet Bill&quot;, a 2007 comedy film formerly known as &quot;Bill&quot;
* &quot;The Bill&quot;, a long-running British police TV drama series

===Music===
====Albums====
* &quot;Bill&quot; (Bill Cosby album), 1973
* &quot;Bill&quot; (Bill Anderson album), 1973
* &quot;Bill&quot; (Tripping Daisy album), 1992
* &quot;Bill&quot;, 2021 album by William Shatner

====Songs====
* &quot;Bill&quot; (song), a song from the 1927 musical &quot;Show Boat&quot;
* &quot;Bill&quot;, a 1996 song by Peggy Scott-Adams

===Printed media===
* &quot;Bill, the Galactic Hero&quot;, a 1965 science fiction novel by American writer Harry Harrison
* &quot;Bill, the Galactic Hero on the Planet of Bottled Brains&quot;, a 1990 novel by Harry Harrison and Robert Sheckley
* &quot;Bill, the Ventriloquial Rooster&quot;, an 1898 sketch story by Australian writer Henry Lawson
* &quot;The Bill&quot; (short story), a 2013 short story by Hungarian writer László Krasznahorkai

===Television===
* &quot;The Bill,&quot; a British police procedural television series
* The Bill (&quot;Inside No. 9&quot;), an episode of the British television series &quot;Inside No. 9.&quot;

==Weapons==
* Bill (weapon), a weapon similar to a halberd
* BILL Anti-tank guided weapon, a Swedish anti-tank weapon
** BILL 2 Anti-tank guided weapon, a Swedish anti-tank weapon

==Other uses==
* Bill (United States Congress)
* Bill the Goat, the mascot of the US Naval Academy
* The Bill (band)
* Tropical Storm Bill, a list of storms

==See also==
* Bills (disambiguation)
* Little Bill (disambiguation)
* Bil (disambiguation)
* Bill of rights</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257022" start="0" end="7" title="Bill" label="Bill(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="45" end="53" title="Banknote" label="Banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="102" end="112" title="Bill (law)" label="Bill (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q190581" start="156" end="163" title="Invoice" label="Invoice"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="247" end="251" title="beak" label="beak"/>
<link wikidata="Q10996991" start="266" end="279" title="Bill, Wyoming" label="Bill, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q66709548" start="363" end="380" title="Bill (given name)" label="Bill (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14830074" start="426" end="440" title="Bill (surname)" label="Bill (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21290051" start="443" end="471" title="Bill (footballer, born 1953)" label="Bill (footballer, born 1953)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610010" start="516" end="544" title="Bill (footballer, born 1978)" label="Bill (footballer, born 1978)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718763" start="591" end="619" title="Bill (footballer, born 1984)" label="Bill (footballer, born 1984)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747198" start="667" end="695" title="Bill (footballer, born 1999)" label="Bill (footballer, born 1999)"/>
<link wikidata="Q165325" start="838" end="847" title="Kill Bill" label="Kill Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907852" start="899" end="925" title="Bill &amp;amp; Ted (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Bill &amp;amp; Ted&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="973" end="1010" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348667" start="1041" end="1059" title="The Railway Series" label="The Railway Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q501663" start="1076" end="1096" title="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends" label="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q936327" start="1149" end="1188" title="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory" label="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911513" start="1197" end="1209" title="Bill the Cat" label="Bill the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878549" start="1250" end="1261" title="Bill Cipher" label="Bill Cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q731638" start="1339" end="1349" title="Bill Ferny" label="Bill Ferny"/>
<link wikidata="Q23908728" start="1399" end="1434" title="Bill Potts (Doctor Who)" label="Bill Potts (&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639999" start="1505" end="1515" title="Bill Sikes" label="Bill Sikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928441" start="1564" end="1572" title="Mr. Bill" label="Mr. Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q28891" start="1654" end="1668" title="Wreck-It Ralph" label="Wreck-It Ralph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471545" start="1717" end="1737" title="Kerbal Space Program" label="Kerbal Space Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639948" start="1759" end="1787" title="Bill (1981 film)" label="&amp;quot;Bill&amp;quot; (1981 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844806" start="1875" end="1903" title="Bill (2015 film)" label="&amp;quot;Bill&amp;quot; (2015 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605442" start="1998" end="2040" title="Bill, the Galactic Hero (film)" label="&amp;quot;Bill, the Galactic Hero&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q861919" start="2123" end="2132" title="Meet Bill" label="Meet Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q929589" start="2202" end="2210" title="The Bill" label="The Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907853" start="2294" end="2329" title="Bill (Bill Cosby album)" label="&amp;quot;Bill&amp;quot; (Bill Cosby album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373557" start="2338" end="2376" title="Bill (Bill Anderson album)" label="&amp;quot;Bill&amp;quot; (Bill Anderson album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907854" start="2385" end="2424" title="Bill (Tripping Daisy album)" label="&amp;quot;Bill&amp;quot; (Tripping Daisy album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2465" end="2480" title="William Shatner#Discography" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907855" start="2498" end="2521" title="Bill (song)" label="&amp;quot;Bill&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067418" start="2609" end="2626" title="Peggy Scott-Adams" label="Peggy Scott-Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086723" start="2656" end="2679" title="Bill, the Galactic Hero" label="Bill, the Galactic Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q29016949" start="2758" end="2813" title="Bill, the Galactic Hero on the Planet of Bottled Brains" label="Bill, the Galactic Hero on the Planet of Bottled Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907827" start="2880" end="2911" title="Bill, the Ventriloquial Rooster" label="Bill, the Ventriloquial Rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48965611" start="2976" end="3010" title="The Bill (short story)" label="&amp;quot;The Bill&amp;quot; (short story)"/>
<link wikidata="Q929589" start="3098" end="3106" title="The Bill" label="The Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q29577287" start="3162" end="3197" title="The Bill (Inside No. 9)" label="The Bill (&amp;quot;Inside No. 9&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619960" start="3284" end="3297" title="Bill (weapon)" label="Bill (weapon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q795979" start="3331" end="3359" title="BILL Anti-tank guided weapon" label="BILL Anti-tank guided weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018598" start="3391" end="3421" title="BILL 2 Anti-tank guided weapon" label="BILL 2 Anti-tank guided weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457660" start="3468" end="3497" title="Bill (United States Congress)" label="Bill (United States Congress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q467273" start="3500" end="3513" title="Bill the Goat" label="Bill the Goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717952" start="3552" end="3567" title="The Bill (band)" label="The Bill (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182107" start="3570" end="3589" title="Tropical Storm Bill" label="Tropical Storm Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q29436563" start="3624" end="3646" title="Bills (disambiguation)" label="Bills (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18230335" start="3649" end="3677" title="Little Bill (disambiguation)" label="Little Bill (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q360347" start="3680" end="3700" title="Bil (disambiguation)" label="Bil (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q191296" start="3703" end="3717" title="Bill of rights" label="Bill of rights"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4870" wikidata="Q247064" url="?curid=4870" title="Bill Macy">
<text>Wolf Martin Garber (May 18, 1922 – October 17, 2019), known professionally as Bill Macy, was an American television, film and stage actor known for his role in the CBS television series &quot;Maude&quot; (1972–1978).

== Early life ==
Bill Macy was born Wolf Martin Garber on May 18, 1922, in Revere, Massachusetts, the son of Mollie (née Friedopfer; 1889–1986) and Michael Garber (1884–1974), a manufacturer. 

He was raised Jewish in the East Flatbush section of New York, New York. After graduating from Samuel J. Tilden High School he served in the United States Army from 1942 to 1946 with the 594th Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment, stationed in the Philippines, New Guinea and Japan. 

He worked as a cab driver for a decade before being cast as Walter Matthau&#x27;s understudy in &quot;Once More, with Feeling&quot; on Broadway in 1958. He portrayed a cab driver on the soap opera &quot;The Edge of Night&quot; in 1966.

Macy was an original cast member of the 1969–1972 Off-Broadway sensation &quot;Oh! Calcutta!&quot;, performing in the show from 1969 to 1971. He later appeared in the 1972 movie version of the musical. Of appearing fully nude with the rest of the cast in the stage show, he said, &quot;The nudity didn&#x27;t bother me. I&#x27;m from Brooklyn.&quot;

Macy performed on the P. D. Q. Bach album &quot;The Stoned Guest&quot; (1970).

== Television ==
Appreciating Macy&#x27;s comedic skills off Broadway, Norman Lear brought him to Hollywood, where he first got a small part as a police officer in &quot;All in the Family.&quot; He was cast in the role of Walter Findlay, the husband of the title character on the 1970s television sitcom &quot;Maude&quot;, starring Bea Arthur. The show ran for six seasons from 1972 to 1978.

Strangers on the street often called him &quot;Mr. Maude&quot;, consoling him for having such a difficult wife. &quot;I used to tell them that people like that really existed,&quot; Macy explained.

In 1975, Macy and Samantha Harper Macy appeared on the game show &quot;Tattletales&quot;.

In 1986, Macy was a guest on the fourth episode of &quot;L.A. Law&quot;, playing an older man whose young wife wants a music career. Also that year he guest starred in an episode of Highway to Heaven, called Cindy. Macy appeared in the television movie &quot;Perry Mason: The Case of the Murdered Madam&quot; (1987) as banker Richard Wilson. He appeared on &quot;The Facts of Life&quot; in a 1988 episode. He occasionally appeared on &quot;Seinfeld&quot; as one of the residents of the Florida retirement community where Jerry Seinfeld&#x27;s parents lived. Macy made a guest appearance as a patient on &quot;Chicago Hope&quot; and as an aging gambler on the series &quot;Las Vegas&quot;. Macy&#x27;s last television role occurred in a 2010 episode of Jada Pinkett Smith&#x27;s series &quot;Hawthorne&quot;.

== Film ==
Macy appeared as the jury foreman in &quot;The Producers&quot; in 1967, with the memorable sole line &quot;We find the defendants incredibly guilty&quot;. Other memorable roles include the co-inventor of the &quot;Opti-Grab&quot; in the 1979 Steve Martin comedy &quot;The Jerk&quot; and as the head television writer in &quot;My Favourite Year&quot; (1982).

Other film credits included roles in &quot;Death at Love House&quot; (1976), &quot;The Late Show&quot; (1977), &quot;Serial&quot; (1980), &quot;Movers &amp; Shakers&quot; (1985), &quot;Bad Medicine&quot; (1985), &quot;Tales from the Darkside&quot; (1985 - &quot;Lifebomb&quot; episode), &quot;Sibling Rivalry&quot; (1990), &quot;The Doctor&quot; (1991), &quot;Me Myself &amp; I&quot; (1992), &quot;Analyze This&quot; (1999), &quot;Surviving Christmas&quot; (2004), &quot;The Holiday&quot; (2006), and &quot;Mr. Woodcock&quot; (2007).

== Personal life ==
Macy met his future wife, Samantha Harper, on the set of &quot;Oh! Calcutta!&quot; in 1969. They married in 1975.

Macy died on October 17, 2019, at the age of 97; no cause was given.

== Filmography ==
== References ==
== External links ==
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q247064" start="0" end="18" title="Bill Macy" label="Wolf Martin Garber"/>
<link wikidata="Q247064" start="78" end="87" title="Bill Macy" label="Bill Macy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="164" end="167" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247562" start="192" end="197" title="Maude (TV series)" label="Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q54154" start="293" end="314" title="Revere, Massachusetts" label="Revere, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328357" start="440" end="453" title="East Flatbush, Brooklyn" label="East Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="465" end="483" title="New York, New York" label="New York, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411815" start="507" end="535" title="Samuel J. Tilden High School" label="Samuel J. Tilden High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303247" start="599" end="637" title="594th Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment" label="594th Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q202172" start="753" end="767" title="Walter Matthau" label="Walter Matthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247581" start="896" end="913" title="The Edge of Night" label="The Edge of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="980" end="992" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396725" start="1009" end="1022" title="Oh! Calcutta!" label="Oh! Calcutta!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190508" start="1303" end="1316" title="P. D. Q. Bach" label="P. D. Q. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766631" start="1329" end="1345" title="The Stoned Guest (album)" label="The Stoned Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270283" start="1432" end="1443" title="Norman Lear" label="Norman Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048856" start="1531" end="1548" title="All in the Family" label="All in the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247562" start="1671" end="1676" title="Maude (TV series)" label="Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q138576" start="1693" end="1703" title="Bea Arthur" label="Bea Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688427" start="2024" end="2035" title="Tattletales" label="Tattletales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247212" start="2101" end="2109" title="L.A. Law" label="L.A. Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798748" start="2303" end="2346" title="Perry Mason (TV film series)" label="Perry Mason: The Case of the Murdered Madam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517403" start="2407" end="2424" title="The Facts of Life (TV series)" label="The Facts of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="2484" end="2492" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797473" start="2565" end="2579" title="Jerry Seinfeld (character)" label="Jerry Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071958" start="2653" end="2665" title="Chicago Hope" label="Chicago Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q752234" start="2716" end="2725" title="Las Vegas (TV series)" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q228787" start="2796" end="2814" title="Jada Pinkett Smith" label="Jada Pinkett Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591785" start="2835" end="2844" title="Hawthorne (TV series)" label="Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q315732" start="2907" end="2920" title="The Producers (1967 film)" label="The Producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="3106" end="3118" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808437" start="3132" end="3140" title="The Jerk" label="The Jerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304397" start="3190" end="3207" title="My Favourite Year" label="My Favourite Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247295" start="3266" end="3285" title="Death at Love House" label="Death at Love House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364650" start="3306" end="3319" title="The Late Show (film)" label="The Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365523" start="3340" end="3346" title="Serial (1980 film)" label="Serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028067" start="3367" end="3387" title="Movers &amp;amp; Shakers (film)" label="Movers &amp;amp; Shakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738246" start="3408" end="3420" title="Bad Medicine (film)" label="Bad Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759140" start="3441" end="3464" title="Tales from the Darkside" label="Tales from the Darkside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306730" start="3516" end="3531" title="Sibling Rivalry (film)" label="Sibling Rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624506" start="3552" end="3562" title="The Doctor (1991 film)" label="The Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802884" start="3583" end="3600" title="Me Myself &amp;amp; I (film)" label="Me Myself &amp;amp; I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141746" start="3621" end="3633" title="Analyze This" label="Analyze This"/>
<link wikidata="Q543163" start="3654" end="3673" title="Surviving Christmas" label="Surviving Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q478748" start="3694" end="3705" title="The Holiday" label="The Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632915" start="3730" end="3742" title="Mr. Woodcock" label="Mr. Woodcock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4871" wikidata="Q888594" url="?curid=4871" title="Bob Knight">
<text>Robert Montgomery &quot;Bobby&quot; Knight (October 25, 1940 – November 1, 2023) was an American men&#x27;s college basketball coach. Nicknamed &quot;the General&quot;, he won 902 NCAA Division I men&#x27;s basketball games, a record at the time of his retirement and sixth all-time record at the time of his death.

Knight was the head coach of the Army Black Knights (1965–1971), the Indiana Hoosiers (1971–2000), and the Texas Tech Red Raiders (2001–2008). While at Army, he led the Black Knights to four post-season tournament appearances in six seasons, winning two-thirds of his games along the way. After taking the job at Indiana, his teams won three NCAA championships, one National Invitation Tournament (NIT) championship, and 11 Big Ten Conference championships. His 1975–76 team won the 1976 NCAA tournament, and is the last men&#x27;s team in Division I college basketball to go undefeated during an entire season (32–0). They remain, as of the end of the 2023–24 season, the last team to be undefeated national champions. In the seven full seasons that he coached at Texas Tech, his teams qualified for a post-season tournament five times. He retired partway through the 2007–08 season and was replaced by his son Pat Knight at Texas Tech. He later worked as a men&#x27;s college basketball studio analyst at ESPN.

Knight sparked controversy with his outspoken nature and his volatility. He once threw a chair across the court during a game and was once arrested following a physical confrontation with a police officer. He was accused of choking an Indiana player during practice in an incident that was recorded on video, prompting the university to institute a &quot;zero tolerance&quot; policy for him. Following a subsequent run-in with a student, he was fired by Indiana University in the fall of 2000.

Knight was one of college basketball&#x27;s most successful and innovative coaches, having popularized the motion offense. He received national coach of the year honors four times and Big Ten Coach of the Year honors eight times. He was also successful on the international stage, winning gold medals at both the 1979 Pan American Games and the 1984 Summer Olympics with the U.S. men&#x27;s national team. He is one of only three basketball coaches to win an NCAA title, an NIT title, and an Olympic gold medal. He was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1991.

==Early life and college career==
Knight was born on October 25, 1940, in the town of Massillon, Ohio, and grew up in Orrville, Ohio. His father Pat worked for the railroad and his mother Hazel was a school teacher. He began playing organized basketball at Orrville High School.

Knight continued at Ohio State in 1958 when he played for Basketball Hall of Fame coach Fred Taylor. Despite being a star player in high school, he played a reserve role as a forward on the 1960 Ohio State Buckeyes team that won the NCAA championship and featured future Hall of Fame players John Havlicek and Jerry Lucas. Knight was also a member of the 1961 and 1962 Buckeyes teams that lost in the finals to the Cincinnati Bearcats.

Due in part to the star power of those Ohio State teams, Knight usually received scant playing time, but that did not prevent him from making an impact. In the 1961 NCAA championship game, Knight came off the bench with 1:41 on the clock and Cincinnati leading Ohio State, 61–59. In the words of then–Ohio State assistant coach Frank Truitt:

Knight got the ball in the left front court and faked a drive into the middle. Then [he] crossed over like he worked on it all his life and drove right in and laid it up. That tied the game for us, and Knight ran clear across the floor like a 100-yard dash sprinter and ran right at me and said, &quot;See there, coach, I should have been in that game a long time ago!&quot;

To which Truitt replied, &quot;Sit down, you hot dog. You&#x27;re lucky you&#x27;re even on the floor.&quot;

In addition to lettering in basketball at Ohio State, it has been claimed that Knight also lettered in football and baseball; however, the official list of Ohio State football letter earners does not include Knight. Knight graduated with a degree in history and government in 1962.

After graduating from Ohio State University in 1962, he coached junior varsity basketball at Cuyahoga Falls High School in Ohio for one year. Knight then enlisted in the U.S. Army and served on active duty from June 1963 to June 1965 and in the U.S. Army Reserves from June 1965 to May 1969. He conducted initial training at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri and was transferred to West Point, New York, in September 1963. He became a private first class.

==Coaching career==

===Army===

While in the army, he accepted an assistant coaching position with the Army Black Knights in 1963, where, two years later, he was named head coach at the relatively young age of 24. In six seasons as a head coach at West Point, Knight won 102 games, with his first coming against Worcester Polytechnic Institute. He led Army to four NITs, advancing to the semifinals three times. One of his players was Mike Krzyzewski, who later served as his assistant before becoming a Hall of Fame head coach at Duke. Mike Silliman was another of Knight&#x27;s players at Army, and Knight was quoted as saying that Silliman was the best player that he had coached.

During his tenure at Army, Knight gained a reputation for having an explosive temper. After Army&#x27;s 66–60 loss to BYU and Hall of Fame coach Stan Watts in the semifinals of the 1966 NIT, Knight completely lost control, kicking lockers and verbally blasting the officials. Embarrassed, he later went to Watts&#x27; hotel room and apologized. Watts forgave him, and is quoted as saying, &quot;I want you to know that you&#x27;re going to be one of the bright young coaches in the country, and it&#x27;s just a matter of time before you win a national championship.&quot;

Knight was one of seven candidates vying to fill the Wisconsin men&#x27;s basketball head coaching vacancy after John Erickson resigned to become the Milwaukee Bucks&#x27; first-ever general manager on April 3, 1968. Knight was offered the position but requested more time to think it over. By the time he had returned to West Point, news that he was to become the Badgers&#x27; new coach was prematurely leaked to the local media. After consulting with Bo Schembechler, who had also had a negative experience as a Wisconsin football coaching candidate the previous year, Knight withdrew his candidacy and continued to coach at Army for three more seasons. Erickson&#x27;s assistant coach John Powless was promoted instead.

===Indiana===
In 1971, Indiana University Bloomington hired Knight as head coach. During his 29 years at the school, the Hoosiers won 662 games, including 22 seasons of 20 or more wins, while losing 239, a .735 winning percentage. In 24 NCAA tournament appearances at Indiana, Hoosier teams under Knight won 42 of 63 games (.667), winning titles in 1976, 1981, and 1987, while losing in the semifinals in 1973 and 1992.

====1970s====
In 1972–73, Knight&#x27;s second year as coach, Indiana won the Big Ten championship and reached the Final Four, losing to UCLA, which was on its way to its seventh consecutive national title. The following season, in 1973–74, Indiana once again captured a Big Ten title.

In the two following seasons, 1974–75 and 1975–76, the Hoosiers were undefeated in the regular season and won 37 consecutive Big Ten games, including two more Big Ten championships. In 1974–75, the Hoosiers swept the entire Big Ten by an average of 22.8 points per game. However, in an 83–82 win against Purdue they lost consensus All-American forward Scott May to a broken left arm. With May&#x27;s injury limiting him to seven minutes of play, the No. 1 Hoosiers lost to Kentucky 92–90 in the Mideast Regional. Despite the loss, the Hoosiers were so dominant that four starters—Scott May, Steve Green, Kent Benson, and Quinn Buckner—would make the five-man All-Big Ten team.

The following season, in 1975–76, the Hoosiers went the entire season and 1976 NCAA tournament without a single loss, defeating Michigan 86–68 in the title game. Immediately after the game, Knight lamented that &quot;it should have been two.&quot; The 1976 Hoosiers remain the last undefeated NCAA Division I men&#x27;s basketball team. Through these two seasons, Knight&#x27;s teams were undefeated in the regular season, including a perfect 37–0 record in Big Ten games on their way to their third and fourth conference titles in a row. Behind the play of Mike Woodson, Indiana won the 1979 NIT championship.

Throughout the 1970s, however, Knight was beginning to be involved in several controversies. 1960 Olympic gold medalist Douglas Blubaugh was head wrestling coach at IU from 1973 to 1984. Early in his tenure while he jogged in the practice facility during basketball practice, Knight yelled at him to leave, using more than one expletive. Blubaugh pinned Knight to a wall, and told him never to repeat the performance, and Knight never did.

On December 7, 1974, Indiana defeated Kentucky 98–74. Near the end of the game, Knight went to the Kentucky bench where the official was standing to complain about a call. Before he left, Knight hit Kentucky coach Joe B. Hall in the back of the head. Kentucky assistant coach Lynn Nance, a former FBI agent, had to be restrained by Hall from hitting Knight. Hall later said, &quot;It publicly humiliated me.&quot; Knight blamed the furor on Hall, stating, &quot;If it was meant to be malicious, I&#x27;d have blasted the fucker into the seats.&quot;

Years after the incident, it was reported that Knight choked and punched Indiana University&#x27;s longtime sports information director, Kit Klingelhoffer, over a news release that upset the coach. In 1976, Knight grabbed IU basketball player Jim Wisman and jerked him into his seat.

====1980s====

The 1979–80 Hoosiers, led by Mike Woodson and Isiah Thomas, won the Big Ten championship and advanced to the 1980 Sweet Sixteen. The following season, in 1980–81, Thomas and the Hoosiers once again won a conference title and won the 1981 NCAA tournament, Knight&#x27;s second national title.

In 1982–83, with the strong play of Uwe Blab and All-Americans Ted Kitchel and Randy Wittman, the No. 1 ranked Hoosiers were favorites to win another national championship. However, with an injury to Kitchel mid-season, the Hoosiers lost to Kentucky in the 1983 Sweet Sixteen.

In the 1985–86 season, the Hoosiers were profiled in a bestselling book &quot;A Season on the Brink&quot;. To write it, Knight granted author John Feinstein almost unprecedented access to the Indiana basketball program, as well as insights into Knight&#x27;s private life. The following season, in 1986–87, the Hoosiers were led by All-American Steve Alford and captured a share of the Big Ten title. The team won Knight&#x27;s third national championship (the school&#x27;s fifth) against Syracuse in the 1987 NCAA tournament with a game-winning jump shot by Keith Smart with five seconds remaining in the championship game.

In the 1988–89 season, the Hoosiers were led by All-American Jay Edwards and won a Big Ten championship.

Knight was involved in several controversies in the 1980s as well. In a game between Indiana and Purdue in Bloomington on January 31, 1981, Isiah Thomas allegedly hit Purdue guard Roosevelt Barnes in what some critics described as a &quot;sucker punch&quot;. Video replay later shown by Knight showed Barnes had thrown the first punch, and that Thomas was merely reacting to this.

When the two schools played their second game of the season at Purdue on February 7, 1981, Knight claimed a number of derisive chants were directed at him, his wife, and Indiana University. In response, Knight invited Purdue athletic director George King on his weekly television show to discuss the matter, but King declined. Therefore, in place of King, Knight brought onto the show a &quot;jackass&quot; (male donkey) wearing a Purdue hat as a representative of Purdue.

On February 23, 1985, during a Purdue–Indiana game in Bloomington, five minutes into the game a scramble for a loose ball resulted in a foul call on Indiana&#x27;s Marty Simmons. Immediately after the resumption of play, a foul was called on Indiana&#x27;s Daryl Thomas. Knight, irate, insisted the first of the two calls should have been for a jump ball and ultimately received a technical foul. Purdue&#x27;s Steve Reid stepped to the free throw line to shoot the resulting free throws, but before he could, Knight grabbed a red plastic chair from Indiana&#x27;s bench and threw it across the floor toward the basket in front of Reid. Knight was charged with a second and third technical foul and was ejected from the game.

He apologized for his actions the next day and was given a one-game suspension and two years&#x27; probation from the Big Ten. In later years, Knight would occasionally joke about the chair-throwing incident by saying that he saw an old lady standing on the opposite sideline and threw her the chair so she could sit down.

Former Indiana basketball player Todd Jadlow has written a book alleging that from 1985 to 1989, Knight punched him in the face, broke a clipboard over the top of his head, and squeezed his testicles and the testicles of other Hoosiers, among other abuses.

In an April 1988 interview with Connie Chung, when discussing an Indiana basketball game in which he felt the referees were making poor calls against the Hoosiers, Knight said, &quot;I think that if rape is inevitable, relax and enjoy it.&quot; In response, women&#x27;s groups nationwide were outraged by Knight&#x27;s comments.

==== 1990–2000 ====
From 1990–91 through 1992–93, the Hoosiers posted 87 victories, the most by any Big Ten team in a three-year span, breaking the mark of 86 set by Knight&#x27;s Indiana teams of 1974–76. They captured two Big Ten crowns in 1990–91 and 1992–93, and during the 1991–92 season reached the Final Four. During the 1992–93 season, the 31–4 Hoosiers finished the season at the top of the AP Poll, but were defeated by Kansas in the Elite Eight. Players from the team in this era included Greg Graham, Pat Knight, All-Americans Damon Bailey and Alan Henderson, Brian Evans, and National Player of the Year Calbert Cheaney.

Throughout the mid and late 1990s Knight continued to experience success with continual NCAA tournament appearances and a minimum of 19 wins each season. However, 1993 would be Knight&#x27;s last conference championship and 1994 would be his last trip to the Sweet Sixteen.

Throughout the 1990s Knight was yet again involved in several controversies:
* At a practice leading up to an Indiana–Purdue game in West Lafayette in 1991, Knight yelled expletives and threats that were designed to motivate his Indiana team. In one portion he exclaimed he was &quot;fucking tired of losing to Purdue.&quot; The speech was secretly taped and has since gone viral, receiving over 1.84 million views on YouTube alone. Although it is still not known who taped the speech, many former players suspect it was team manager Lawrence Frank. Players who were present were unable to remember the specific speech because such expletive-filled outbursts by Knight were so frequent.
* In March 1992 prior to the NCAA regional finals, controversy erupted after Knight playfully mock whipped Indiana players Calbert Cheaney and Pat Graham during practice. The bullwhip had been given to Knight as a gift from his team. Several black leaders complained at the racial connotations of the act, given that Cheaney was a black student.
* In January 1993, Knight mentioned the recruiting of Ivan Renko, a fictitious Yugoslavian player he had created. Knight created Renko in an attempt to expose disreputable basketball recruiting experts. Even though Renko was completely fictitious, several recruiting services started listing him as a prospect with in-depth descriptions of his potential and game style. Some of the more reputable recruiting gurus claimed to have never heard of Renko, whereas some other &quot;experts&quot; even claimed to possess or to see film of him actually playing basketball.
* Knight was recorded berating an NCAA volunteer at a March 1995 post-game press conference following a 65–60 loss to Missouri in the first round of the NCAA tournament held in Boise, Idaho. The volunteer informed the press that Knight would not be attending the press conference, when Knight was actually running a few minutes late and had planned on attending per NCAA rules.
* Neil Reed and former Indiana player Richard Mandeville alleged in a CNN interview that Knight once showed players his own feces. According to Mandeville, Knight said, &quot;This is how you guys are playing.&quot;
* On February 19, 2000, Clarence Doninger, Knight&#x27;s boss, alleged that he had been physically threatened by Knight during a confrontation after a game. 
* An Indiana investigation inquired about an allegation in which Knight berated and physically intimidated a university secretary, once throwing a potted plant in anger, showering her with glass and debris. The university later asked Knight to issue an apology to the secretary.
* It was alleged that Knight attacked assistant coach Ron Felling, throwing him out of a chair after overhearing him criticizing the basketball program in a phone conversation.

====Dismissal from Indiana====
On March 14, 2000, (just before Indiana was to begin play in the NCAA tournament), the CNN Sports Illustrated network ran a piece on Robert Abbott&#x27;s investigation of Knight in which former player Neil Reed claimed he had been choked by Knight during a practice in 1997. Knight denied the claims in the story. However, less than a month later, the network aired a tape of an Indiana practice from 1997 that appeared to show Knight placing his hand on the neck of Reed.

In response, Indiana University president Myles Brand announced that he had adopted a &quot;zero tolerance&quot; policy with regard to Knight&#x27;s behavior. Later in the year, in September 2000, Indiana freshman Kent Harvey (not a basketball player) reportedly said, &quot;Hey, Knight, what&#x27;s up?&quot; to Knight. According to Harvey, Knight then grabbed him by the arm and lectured him for not showing him respect, insisting that Harvey address him as either &quot;Mr. Knight&quot; or &quot;Coach Knight&quot; instead of simply &quot;Knight.&quot; Brand stated that this incident was only one of numerous complaints that occurred after the zero-tolerance policy had been put into place. Brand asked Knight to resign on September 10, and when Knight refused, Brand relieved him of his coaching duties effective immediately. Knight&#x27;s dismissal was met with outrage from students. That night, thousands of Indiana students marched from Indiana University&#x27;s Assembly Hall to Brand&#x27;s home, burning Brand in effigy.

Harvey was supported by some and vilified by many who claim he had intentionally set up Knight. Kent Harvey&#x27;s stepfather, Mark Shaw, was a former Bloomington-area radio talk show host and Knight critic. On September 13, Knight said goodbye to a crowd of some 6,000 supporters in Dunn Meadow at Indiana University. He asked that they not hold a grudge against Harvey and that they continue to support the basketball team. Knight&#x27;s firing made national headlines, including the cover of &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; and around-the-clock coverage on ESPN, as well as mentions on CNN and CBS.

Two days after Knight was fired from Indiana University, Jeremy Schaap of ESPN interviewed him and discussed his time at Indiana. Towards the end of the interview, Knight talked about his son, Pat, who had also been dismissed by the university, wanting an opportunity to be a head coach. Schaap, thinking that Knight was finished, attempted to move on to another subject, but Knight insisted on continuing about his son. Schaap repeatedly tried to ask another question when Knight shifted the conversation to Schaap&#x27;s style of interviewing, notably chastising him about interruptions. Knight then commented (referring to Schaap&#x27;s father, Dick Schaap), &quot;You&#x27;ve got a long way to go to be as good as your dad.&quot;

In a March 2017 interview on &quot;The Dan Patrick Show&quot;, Knight stated that he had no interest in ever returning to Indiana. When host Dan Patrick commented that most of the administration that had fired Knight seventeen years earlier were no longer there, Knight said, &quot;I hope they&#x27;re all dead.&quot;

Knight ultimately returned to Assembly Hall at halftime of Indiana&#x27;s game against Purdue on February 8, 2020, and received a rousing standing ovation. It was the first Indiana game attended by Knight since his dismissal by the school 20 years prior.

===Texas Tech===
Following his dismissal from Indiana, Knight took a season off while on the lookout for coaching vacancies. He accepted the head coaching position at Texas Tech University, although his hiring was opposed by a faculty group led by Walter Schaller, associate professor of philosophy. When he was introduced at the press conference, Knight quipped, &quot;This is without question the most comfortable red sweater I&#x27;ve had on in six years.&quot;

Knight quickly improved the program, which had not been to an NCAA tournament since 1996. He led the Red Raiders to postseason appearances in each of his first four years at the school (three NCAA Championship tournaments and one NIT). After a rough 2006 season, the team improved in 2007, finishing 21–13 and again making it to the NCAA tournament, where it lost to Boston College in the first round. The best performance by the Red Raiders under Knight came in 2005 when they advanced as far as the Sweet Sixteen. In both 2006 and 2007 under Knight, Texas Tech defeated two Top 10-ranked teams in consecutive weeks. During Knight&#x27;s first six years at Texas Tech, the Red Raiders won 126 games.

During Knight&#x27;s coaching at Texas Tech, Knight was also involved in several controversies. In March 2006, a student&#x27;s heckling at Baylor University resulted in Knight having to be restrained by a police officer. The incident was not severe enough to warrant any action from the Big 12 Conference.

On November 13, 2006, Knight was shown allegedly hitting player Michael Prince under the chin to get him to make eye contact. Although Knight did not comment on the incident afterwards, Prince, his parents, and Texas Tech athletic director Gerald Myers insisted that Knight did nothing wrong and that he merely lifted Prince&#x27;s chin and told him, &quot;Hold your head up and don&#x27;t worry about mistakes. Just play the game.&quot; Prince commented, &quot;He was trying to teach me and I had my head down so he raised my chin up. He was telling me to go out there and don&#x27;t be afraid to make mistakes. He said I was being too hard on myself.&quot; ESPN analyst Fran Fraschilla defended Knight by saying &quot;That&#x27;s coaching!&quot;

On October 21, 2007, James Simpson of Lubbock, Texas, accused Knight of firing a shotgun in his direction after he yelled at Knight and another man for hunting too close to his home. Knight denied the allegations; however, an argument between the two men was recorded via camera phone and aired later on television.

Knight won his 900th game in his coaching career on January 16, 2008, in a 68–58 win against Texas A&amp;M, but not before arguing with referees during the match.

====Retirement====
On February 4, 2008, Knight announced his retirement. His son Pat Knight, the head coach designate since 2005, was immediately named as his successor at Texas Tech. The younger Knight had said that after many years of coaching, his father was exhausted and ready to retire. Just after achieving his 900th win, Knight handed the job over to Pat in the mid-season in part to allow him to get acquainted with coaching the team earlier, instead of having him wait until October, the start of the next season. Knight continued to live in Lubbock after he retired.

===United States national team===
====1979 Pan American Games====
In 1978, Knight was named the head coach of the United States men&#x27;s national team for the 1979 Pan American Games in San Juan, Puerto Rico. The team, which included players such as Isiah Thomas and Ralph Sampson, trained together for more than 50 days and played in a tournament in Italy before arriving in Puerto Rico. During the games, Knight led the United States to a 9–0 record, with an average victory of 21.2 points, and gold medal.

However, his behaviour during the games, where he feuded with referees, officials and made critical comments about Puerto Rico, was heavily criticized, including by the president of the Basketball Federation of Puerto Rico, Arturo C. Gallardo, in a lengthy article in the New York Times. During the first game, with the United States leading by 35 points, he was ejected for arguing with referees and in another incident during a practice session, Knight was accused of assaulting the policeman guarding the gymnasium and was arrested. Both Knight and assistant coach Mike Krzyzewski refuted the policeman&#x27;s version of the incident, with Krzyzewski stating &quot;It&#x27;s really unbelievable, the out-and-out lies that are being told. It&#x27;s like my standing here and saying that my name is not Mike Krzyzewski, that it&#x27;s Fred Taylor.&quot; Knight was later charged with assault and summoned to appear before a judge but left the island before trial was held and refused to return with Indiana officials further rejecting Puerto Rican&#x27;s extradition requests. He was later tried in absentia, found guilty and sentenced to a six-month prison term and a 500 dollar fine. Following a United States Supreme Court ruling in 1987 that overturned a law which gave state governors the power to reject extradition requests and opened up the possibility of his extradition to Puerto Rico, Knight wrote a letter to the Puerto Rico Olympic Committee, Germán Rieckehoff, apologizing for the incident. Rieckehoff &quot;urged the Commonwealth not to consider any further legal action against Knight&quot;.

====1984 Summer Olympics====
Despite the controversies, Knight was selected in 1982 to coach the U.S. national team at the 1984 Summer Olympic Games. He held a 72 player tryout camp in April 1984 before settling on the 12 man roster which included Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing, Chris Mullin and Knight&#x27;s Indiana player and protégé Steve Alford.

Worries that his behavior would again cause embarrassment during the games turned out to be unfounded and, despite rants and raves at officials, Knight was considered to be on his best behavior. He led the United States to victory in all eight games and to a gold medal. Doing so, Knight joined Pete Newell and Dean Smith as the only three coaches to win an NCAA title, NIT title, and Olympic gold.

==Life after coaching==
In 2008, ESPN hired Knight as a studio analyst and occasional color commentator. In November 2012, he called an Indiana men&#x27;s basketball game for the first time, something he had previously refused to do. Then-men&#x27;s basketball coach Tom Crean reached out to Knight in an attempt to get him to visit the school again. On April 2, 2015, ESPN announced that it would not renew its contract with Knight.

On February 27, 2019, Don Fischer, an IU radio announcer since 1974, said during an interview that Knight was in ill health. He continued by saying Knight&#x27;s health &quot;has declined&quot; but did not offer any specifics.

On April 4, 2019, Knight made his first public appearance after Fischer made his comments. He appeared with longtime friend and journalist Bob Hammel and spoke about different aspects of his career. During the presentation, Knight seemed to struggle with his memory: he re-introduced his wife to the audience after doing so only 10 minutes earlier, he mistakenly said that former IU basketball player Landon Turner had died, and, after telling a story about Michael Jordan, he later told the same story, replacing Jordan with former IU basketball player Damon Bailey.

Knight and his wife resided in Lubbock, Texas, even after his retirement. On July 10, 2019, the &quot;Indiana Daily Student&quot;, IU&#x27;s campus newspaper, reported that Knight and his wife had purchased a home in Bloomington for $572,500, suggesting that Knight had decided to return to Bloomington to live.

==Coaching philosophy==
Knight was an innovator of the motion offense, which he perfected and popularized. The system emphasizes post players setting screens and perimeter players passing the ball until a teammate becomes open for an uncontested jump shot or lay-up. This required players to be unselfish, disciplined, and effective in setting and using screens to get open.

Knight&#x27;s motion offense did not take shape until he began coaching at Indiana. Prior to that, at Army, he ran a &quot;reverse action&quot; offense that involved reversing the ball from one side of the floor to the other and screening along with it. According to Knight, it was a &quot;West Coast offense&quot; that Pete Newell used exclusively during his coaching career. After being exposed to the Princeton offense, Knight instilled more cutting with the offense he employed, which evolved into the motion offense that he ran for most of his career. Knight continued to develop the offense, instituting different cuts over the years and putting his players in different scenarios.

Knight was well known for the extreme preparation he put into each game and practice. He was often quoted as saying, &quot;Most people have the will to win, few have the will to prepare to win.&quot; Often during practice, Knight would instruct his players to a certain spot on the floor and give them options of what to do based on how the defense might react. In contrast to set plays, Knight&#x27;s offense was designed to react according to the defense.

The three-point shot was adopted by the NCAA in 1986, which was midway through Knight&#x27;s coaching career. Although he opposed the rule change throughout his life, it did complement his offense well by improving the spacing on the floor. He sardonically said at the time that he supported institution of the three-point shot because if a team&#x27;s offense was functioning efficiently enough to get a layup, the team should be rewarded with three points for that basket. Knight&#x27;s offense also emphasized a two-count. Players in the post are expected to try to post in the paint for two seconds and if they do not receive the ball they go set a screen. Players with the ball are expected to hold the ball for two seconds to see where they are going to take it. Screens are supposed to be held for two seconds, as well.

On defense Knight was known for emphasizing tenacious &quot;man-to-man&quot; defense where defenders contest every pass and every shot, and help teammates when needed. However, Knight also incorporated a zone defense periodically after eschewing it for the first two decades of his coaching career.

Knight&#x27;s coaching also included a firm emphasis on academics. All but four of his four-year players completed their degrees, or nearly 98 percent. Nearly 80 percent of his players graduated; this figure was much higher than the national average of 42 percent for Division 1 schools.

==Legacy==
===Accomplishments===
Knight&#x27;s all time coaching record is 902–371. His 902 wins in NCAA Division I men&#x27;s college basketball games is fourth all-time to Knight&#x27;s former player and former Duke head coach Mike Krzyzewski, Syracuse head coach Jim Boeheim, and North Carolina head Coach Roy Williams. Knight achieved his 880th career win on January 1, 2007, and passed retired North Carolina coach Dean Smith for most career victories, a title he held until his win total was surpassed by Krzyzewski on November 15, 2011. It was later surpassed by Boeheim on January 2, 2013, and by Williams on March 11, 2021. Knight is the youngest coach to reach 200, 300, and 400 wins, as well as among the youngest to reach other milestones of 500, 600, 700, and 800 wins.

Texas Tech&#x27;s participation in the 2007 NCAA tournament gave Knight more NCAA tournament appearances than any other coach. He is the only coach to win the NCAA, the NIT, an Olympic gold medal, and a Pan American Games Gold medal. Knight is also one of only three people, along with Smith and Joe B. Hall, who have both played on and coached an NCAA Tournament championship basketball team.

===Recognition===
Knight received a number of personal honors during and after his coaching career. He was named the National Coach of the Year four times (1975, 1976, 1987, 1989) and Big Ten Coach of the Year eight times (1973, 1975, 1976, 1980, 1981, 1989, 1992, 1993). In 1975 he was a unanimous selection as National Coach of the Year, an honor he was accorded again in 1976 by the Associated Press. In 1987 he was the first person to be honored with the Naismith Coach of the Year Award. In 1989 he garnered National Coach of the Year honors by the AP, UPI, and the United States Basketball Writers Association. Knight was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in 1991.

On November 17, 2006, Knight was recognized for his impact on college basketball as a member of the founding class of the National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame. The following year, he was the recipient of the Naismith Award for Men&#x27;s Outstanding Contribution to Basketball. Knight was also inducted into the Army Sports Hall of Fame (Class of 2008) and the Indiana Hoosiers athletics Hall of Fame (Class of 2009). In August 2003, he was honored as the first inductee in The Vince Lombardi Titletown Legends.

Three banners were hung at Simon Skjodt Assembly Hall as a result of the three national championship wins led by Knight.

===Coaching tree===
A number of Knight&#x27;s assistant coaches, players, and managers have gone on to be coaches. In the college ranks, this includes Hall of Fame Duke coach Mike Krzyzewski, Steve Alford, Murry Bartow, Dan Dakich, Bob Donewald, Marty Simmons, Jim Crews, Chris Beard, and Dusty May. Among NBA coaches, they include Randy Wittman, Mike Woodson, Keith Smart, Isiah Thomas, and Lawrence Frank.

==In the media==

===Books about Knight===
In 1986, author John Feinstein published &quot;A Season on the Brink&quot;, which detailed the 1985–86 season of the Indiana Hoosiers. Granted almost unprecedented access to the Indiana basketball program, as well as insights into Knight&#x27;s private life, the book quickly became a major bestseller and spawned a new genre, as a legion of imitators wrote works covering a single year of a sports franchise. In the book Feinstein depicts a coach who is quick with a violent temper, but also one who never cheats and strictly follows all of the NCAA&#x27;s rules.

Two years later, author Joan Mellen penned the book &quot;Bob Knight: His Own Man&quot; (), in part to rebut Feinstein&#x27;s &quot;A Season on the Brink&quot;. Mellen deals with seemingly all the causes celebres in Knight&#x27;s career and presents the view that he is more sinned against than sinning.

In 1990, Robert P. Sulek wrote &quot;Hoosier Honor: Bob Knight and Academic Success at Indiana University&quot; which discusses the academic side of the basketball program. The book details all of the players that have played for Knight and what degree they earned.

A number of close associates and friends of Knight have also written books about him. Former player and current Nevada Wolf Pack head basketball coach Steve Alford wrote &quot;Playing for Knight: My Six Seasons with Bobby Knight&quot;, published in 1990. Former player Kirk Haston wrote &quot;Days of Knight: How the General Changed My Life,&quot; published in 2016.

Knight&#x27;s autobiography, written with longtime friend and sports journalist Bob Hammel, was titled &quot;Knight: My Story&quot; and published in 2003. Three years later Steve Delsohn and Mark Heisler wrote &quot;Bob Knight: An Unauthorized Biography&quot;.

In 2013, Knight and Bob Hammel published &quot;The Power of Negative Thinking: An Unconventional Approach to Achieving Positive Results&quot;. Knight discussed his approach to preparing for a game by anticipating all of the things that could go wrong and trying to prevent it or having a plan to deal with it. In the book Knight also shared one of his favorite sayings, &quot;Victory favors the team making the fewest mistakes.&quot;

In 2017, sports reporter Terry Hutchens published &quot;Following the General: Why Three Coaches Have Been Unable to Return Indiana Basketball to Greatness&quot; which discussed Knight&#x27;s coaching legacy with Indiana and how none of the coaches following him have been able to reach his level of success.

===Film and television===
Knight appeared or was featured in numerous films and television productions. In 1994 a feature film titled &quot;Blue Chips&quot; featured a character named Pete Bell, a volatile but honest college basketball coach under pressure to win who decides to blatantly violate NCAA rules to field a competitive team after a sub-par season. It starred Nick Nolte as Bell and NBA star Shaquille O&#x27;Neal as Neon Bodeaux, a once-in-a-lifetime player that boosters woo to his school with gifts and other perks. The coach&#x27;s temper and wardrobe were modeled after Knight&#x27;s, though at no time had Knight been known to illegally recruit. Knight himself appears in the film and coaches against Nolte in the film&#x27;s climactic game.

ESPN&#x27;s first feature-length film was &quot;A Season on the Brink&quot;, a 2002 TV adaptation from John Feinstein&#x27;s book. In the film Knight is played by Brian Dennehy. ESPN also featured Knight in a reality show titled &quot;Knight School&quot;, which followed a handful of Texas Tech students as they competed for the right to join the basketball team as a non-scholarship player.

Knight made a cameo appearance as himself in the 2003 film &quot;Anger Management&quot;. In 2008, Knight appeared in a commercial as part of Volkswagen&#x27;s Das Auto series where Max, a 1964 black Beetle, interviews famous people. When Knight talked about Volkswagen winning the best resale value award in 2008, Max replied, &quot;At least one of us is winning a title this year.&quot; This prompted Knight to throw his chair off the stage and walk out saying, &quot;I may not be retired.&quot;

Knight also made an appearance in a TV commercial for &quot;Guitar Hero: Metallica&quot; and &quot;Risky Business&quot; with fellow coaches Mike Krzyzewski, Rick Pitino, and Roy Williams.

In 2009, Knight produced three instructional coaching DVD libraries—on motion offense, man-to-man defense, and instilling mental toughness—with Championship Productions.

==Personal life and death==
Knight married the former Nancy Falk on April 17, 1963. They had two sons, Tim and Pat. The couple divorced in 1985. Pat played at Indiana from 1991 to 1995 and was head coach at Lamar from the time of his father&#x27;s retirement until he was dismissed in 2014. Pat Knight coached Texas Tech after his father&#x27;s retirement before he moved to Lamar. In 1988, Knight married his second wife, Karen Vieth Edgar, a former Oklahoma high school basketball coach.

Knight had a high regard for education and made generous donations to the schools he was a part of, particularly libraries. At Indiana University Knight endowed two chairs, one in history and one in law. He also raised nearly $5 million for the Indiana University library system by championing a library fund to support the library&#x27;s activities. The fund was ultimately named in his honor.

When Knight came to Texas Tech in 2001, he gave $10,000 to the library, while his wife gave $25,000, donations which included the first gifts to the Coach Knight Library Fund which has now collected over $300,000. Later, in 2005, Knight donated an additional $40,000 to the library. On November 29, 2007, the Texas Tech library honored this with &quot;A Legacy of Giving: The Bob Knight Exhibit&quot;.

On April 18, 2011, video surfaced showing Knight responding to a question concerning John Calipari and Kentucky&#x27;s men&#x27;s basketball team by stating that in the previous season, Kentucky made an Elite Eight appearance with &quot;five players who had not attended a single class that semester.&quot; These claims were later disproven by the university and the players in question, including Patrick Patterson, who graduated in three years, and John Wall, who finished the semester with a 3.5 GPA. Knight later apologized for his comments stating, &quot;My overall point is that &#x27;one-and-dones&#x27; are not healthy for college basketball. I should not have made it personal to Kentucky and its players and I apologize.&quot;

Knight supported Donald Trump&#x27;s 2016 presidential campaign, and later made an appearance at his rally in Indianapolis for the 2018 midterms. At the rally, Knight called Trump &quot;a great defender of the United States of America&quot;.

Knight died in Bloomington, Indiana, on November 1, 2023, at age 83.

== Career playing statistics ==
===College===
==Head coaching record==


















==See also==
* List of college men&#x27;s basketball career coaching wins leaders
* List of NCAA Division I Men&#x27;s Final Four appearances by coach

==References==
==External links==
* Texas Tech profile
* Indiana profile
* 
* BobKnight.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q888594" start="0" end="42" title="Bob Knight" label="Robert Montgomery &amp;quot;Bobby&amp;quot; Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="108" end="126" title="college basketball" label="college basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137571" start="127" end="132" title="coach (basketball)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q888594" start="150" end="161" title="Bob Knight" label="the General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="180" end="195" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794097" start="350" end="368" title="Army Black Knights men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Army Black Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023245" start="386" end="402" title="Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Indiana Hoosiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708117" start="424" end="446" title="Texas Tech Red Raiders basketball" label="Texas Tech Red Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="659" end="677" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship" label="NCAA championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q571381" start="683" end="713" title="National Invitation Tournament" label="National Invitation Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="741" end="759" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971742" start="779" end="791" title="1975–76 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1975–76 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994957" start="800" end="820" title="1976 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="1976 NCAA tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143647" start="1229" end="1239" title="Pat Knight" label="Pat Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917789" start="1933" end="1947" title="motion offense" label="motion offense"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747125" start="2010" end="2035" title="Big Ten Conference Men&amp;#x27;s Basketball Coach of the Year" label="Big Ten Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348525" start="2139" end="2162" title="1979 Pan American Games" label="1979 Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="2171" end="2191" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q244847" start="2201" end="2230" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="U.S. men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="2285" end="2289" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="2363" end="2404" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q992289" start="2501" end="2516" title="Massillon, Ohio" label="Massillon, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q935692" start="2533" end="2547" title="Orrville, Ohio" label="Orrville, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104115" start="2672" end="2692" title="Orrville High School" label="Orrville High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080912" start="2715" end="2725" title="Ohio State Buckeyes men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Ohio State"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="2753" end="2776" title="Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452524" start="2783" end="2794" title="Fred R. Taylor" label="Fred Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569841" start="2885" end="2914" title="1959–60 Ohio State Buckeyes men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1960 Ohio State Buckeyes team"/>
<link wikidata="Q71127" start="2987" end="3000" title="John Havlicek" label="John Havlicek"/>
<link wikidata="Q366505" start="3005" end="3016" title="Jerry Lucas" label="Jerry Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120215" start="3110" end="3129" title="Cincinnati Bearcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Cincinnati Bearcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994947" start="3292" end="3319" title="1961 NCAA University Division basketball tournament" label="1961 NCAA championship game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490024" start="3460" end="3472" title="Frank Truitt" label="Frank Truitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533680" start="4052" end="4060" title="Letterman (sports)" label="lettered"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197078" start="4337" end="4363" title="Cuyahoga Falls High School" label="Cuyahoga Falls High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="4414" end="4423" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="4489" end="4507" title="U.S. Army Reserves" label="U.S. Army Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q964399" start="4569" end="4586" title="Fort Leonard Wood" label="Fort Leonard Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="4620" end="4640" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794097" start="4799" end="4817" title="Army Black Knights men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Army Black Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q195046" start="5008" end="5039" title="Worcester Polytechnic Institute" label="Worcester Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q571381" start="5061" end="5065" title="National Invitation Tournament" label="NITs"/>
<link wikidata="Q434909" start="5131" end="5146" title="Mike Krzyzewski" label="Mike Krzyzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171772" start="5227" end="5231" title="Duke Blue Devils men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463671" start="5233" end="5246" title="Mike Silliman" label="Mike Silliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="5499" end="5502" title="BYU" label="BYU"/>
<link wikidata="Q257671" start="5526" end="5536" title="Stan Watts" label="Stan Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572381" start="5562" end="5570" title="1966 National Invitation Tournament" label="1966 NIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027120" start="6008" end="6039" title="Wisconsin Badgers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Wisconsin men&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230722" start="6068" end="6081" title="John E. Erickson (Wisconsin politician)" label="John Erickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q169637" start="6105" end="6120" title="Milwaukee Bucks" label="Milwaukee Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931165" start="6409" end="6424" title="Bo Schembechler" label="Bo Schembechler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027119" start="6470" end="6488" title="Wisconsin Badgers football" label="Wisconsin football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253299" start="6644" end="6656" title="John Powless" label="John Powless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="6703" end="6733" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023245" start="6801" end="6809" title="Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Hoosiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971742" start="7029" end="7033" title="1975–76 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579614" start="7035" end="7039" title="1980–81 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583429" start="7045" end="7049" title="1986–87 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575345" start="7118" end="7125" title="1972–73 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1972–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575405" start="7238" end="7242" title="1972–73 UCLA Bruins men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022878" start="7333" end="7340" title="1973–74 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576423" start="7418" end="7425" title="1974–75 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971742" start="7430" end="7437" title="1975–76 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576423" start="7573" end="7580" title="1974–75 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260972" start="7692" end="7698" title="Purdue Boilermakers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Purdue"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="7719" end="7731" title="All-American" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327114" start="7740" end="7749" title="Scott May" label="Scott May"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243351" start="7861" end="7869" title="1974–75 Kentucky Wildcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994956" start="7883" end="7899" title="1975 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="Mideast Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327114" start="7968" end="7977" title="Scott May" label="Scott May"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973339" start="7979" end="7990" title="Steve Green (basketball)" label="Steve Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274527" start="7992" end="8003" title="Kent Benson" label="Kent Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603466" start="8009" end="8022" title="Quinn Buckner" label="Quinn Buckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971742" start="8091" end="8098" title="1975–76 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994957" start="8140" end="8160" title="1976 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="1976 NCAA tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576984" start="8194" end="8202" title="1975–76 Michigan Wolverines men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504822" start="8624" end="8636" title="Mike Woodson" label="Mike Woodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578777" start="8654" end="8662" title="1979 National Invitation Tournament" label="1979 NIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252049" start="8798" end="8814" title="Douglas Blubaugh" label="Douglas Blubaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208438" start="9333" end="9344" title="Joe B. Hall" label="Joe B. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="9416" end="9425" title="FBI agent" label="FBI agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022881" start="9974" end="9990" title="1979–80 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1979–80 Hoosiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504822" start="9999" end="10011" title="Mike Woodson" label="Mike Woodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q298512" start="10016" end="10028" title="Isiah Thomas" label="Isiah Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994960" start="10079" end="10097" title="1980 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="1980 Sweet Sixteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579614" start="10124" end="10131" title="1980–81 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994961" start="10203" end="10223" title="1981 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="1981 NCAA tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971912" start="10266" end="10273" title="1982–83 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q70698" start="10299" end="10307" title="Uwe Blab" label="Uwe Blab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982511" start="10326" end="10337" title="Ted Kitchel" label="Ted Kitchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332151" start="10342" end="10355" title="Randy Wittman" label="Randy Wittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q949568" start="10520" end="10538" title="1983 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="1983 Sweet Sixteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582740" start="10548" end="10555" title="1985–86 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108933" start="10619" end="10640" title="A Season on the Brink" label="A Season on the Brink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232897" start="10683" end="10697" title="John Feinstein" label="John Feinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583429" start="10839" end="10846" title="1986–87 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589648" start="10886" end="10898" title="Steve Alford" label="Steve Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15718182" start="11031" end="11039" title="Syracuse Orange men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994964" start="11047" end="11067" title="1987 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="1987 NCAA tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734309" start="11101" end="11112" title="Keith Smart" label="Keith Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022886" start="11175" end="11189" title="1988–89 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1988–89 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040740" start="11229" end="11240" title="Jay Edwards (basketball)" label="Jay Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366416" start="11454" end="11470" title="Roosevelt Barnes (American football)" label="Roosevelt Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250119" start="12475" end="12484" title="jump ball" label="jump ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q578998" start="12511" end="12525" title="technical foul" label="technical foul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191341" start="12567" end="12582" title="free throw line" label="free throw line"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="12975" end="12982" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8853333" start="13214" end="13225" title="Todd Jadlow" label="Todd Jadlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q717203" start="13471" end="13483" title="Connie Chung" label="Connie Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022888" start="13795" end="13802" title="1990–91 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588179" start="13811" end="13818" title="1992–93 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587373" start="14048" end="14055" title="1991–92 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994968" start="14075" end="14085" title="1992 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653492" start="14170" end="14177" title="AP Poll" label="AP Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365002" start="14200" end="14206" title="Kansas Jayhawks men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994969" start="14214" end="14225" title="1993 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="Elite Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627361" start="14270" end="14281" title="Greg Graham" label="Greg Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143647" start="14283" end="14293" title="Pat Knight" label="Pat Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652381" start="14309" end="14321" title="Damon Bailey" label="Damon Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324397" start="14326" end="14340" title="Alan Henderson" label="Alan Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628310" start="14387" end="14402" title="Calbert Cheaney" label="Calbert Cheaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352098" start="15214" end="15228" title="Lawrence Frank" label="Lawrence Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628310" start="15490" end="15505" title="Calbert Cheaney" label="Calbert Cheaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q236807" start="15792" end="15803" title="Yugoslavs" label="Yugoslavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303106" start="15896" end="15906" title="Recruiting (college athletics)" label="recruiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989198" start="16659" end="16668" title="Neil Reed" label="Neil Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013152" start="17605" end="17627" title="CNN Sports Illustrated" label="CNN Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q98098850" start="17651" end="17671" title="Robert Abbott (director)" label="Robert Abbott&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989198" start="17719" end="17728" title="Neil Reed" label="Neil Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531013" start="18034" end="18045" title="Myles Brand" label="Myles Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213592" start="18764" end="18776" title="Dismissal (employment)" label="relieved him"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899864" start="19017" end="19023" title="effigy" label="effigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="19177" end="19188" title="Bloomington, Indiana" label="Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="19527" end="19545" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="19585" end="19589" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="19614" end="19617" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="19622" end="19625" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181856" start="19685" end="19698" title="Jeremy Schaap" label="Jeremy Schaap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273343" start="20276" end="20287" title="Dick Schaap" label="Dick Schaap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728797" start="20398" end="20418" title="The Dan Patrick Show" label="The Dan Patrick Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214175" start="20504" end="20515" title="Dan Patrick (sportscaster)" label="Dan Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="20769" end="20775" title="Purdue" label="Purdue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423756" start="21105" end="21126" title="Texas Tech University" label="Texas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708117" start="21505" end="21516" title="Texas Tech Red Raiders basketball" label="Red Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947826" start="21771" end="21785" title="Boston College Eagles men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="21905" end="21918" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship" label="Sweet Sixteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="22246" end="22263" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="22394" end="22411" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549430" start="22654" end="22666" title="Gerald Myers" label="Gerald Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="23201" end="23215" title="Lubbock, Texas" label="Lubbock, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="23573" end="23586" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143647" start="23725" end="23735" title="Pat Knight" label="Pat Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="24196" end="24203" title="Lubbock" label="Lubbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q244847" start="24337" end="24375" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348525" start="24384" end="24407" title="1979 Pan American Games" label="1979 Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="24411" end="24432" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q298512" start="24475" end="24487" title="Isiah Thomas" label="Isiah Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q594137" start="24492" end="24505" title="Ralph Sampson" label="Ralph Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="25007" end="25021" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q434909" start="25303" end="25318" title="Mike Krzyzewski" label="Mike Krzyzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="25934" end="25961" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985553" start="26161" end="26190" title="Puerto Rico Olympic Committee" label="Puerto Rico Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552325" start="26192" end="26209" title="Germán Rieckehoff" label="Germán Rieckehoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581929" start="26442" end="26460" title="1984 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="U.S. national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="26468" end="26493" title="1984 Summer Olympic Games" label="1984 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="26593" end="26607" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q271933" start="26609" end="26622" title="Patrick Ewing" label="Patrick Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q289398" start="26624" end="26636" title="Chris Mullin" label="Chris Mullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589648" start="26682" end="26694" title="Steve Alford" label="Steve Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q915469" start="26992" end="27003" title="Pete Newell" label="Pete Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q202584" start="27008" end="27018" title="Dean Smith" label="Dean Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276037" start="27183" end="27200" title="color commentator" label="color commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815451" start="27364" end="27373" title="Tom Crean (basketball)" label="Tom Crean"/>
<link wikidata="Q96252241" start="28161" end="28174" title="Landon Turner (basketball)" label="Landon Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="28218" end="28232" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652381" start="28314" end="28326" title="Damon Bailey" label="Damon Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023130" start="28431" end="28452" title="Indiana Daily Student" label="Indiana Daily Student"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917789" start="28697" end="28711" title="motion offense" label="motion offense"/>
<link wikidata="Q680499" start="28792" end="28799" title="screen (basketball)" label="screens"/>
<link wikidata="Q838913" start="28888" end="28897" title="Jump shot (basketball)" label="jump shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q72698" start="28901" end="28907" title="lay-up" label="lay-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q915469" start="29338" end="29349" title="Pete Newell" label="Pete Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110417" start="29422" end="29439" title="Princeton offense" label="Princeton offense"/>
<link wikidata="Q746826" start="30170" end="30186" title="Three-point field goal" label="three-point shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q219922" start="31198" end="31210" title="zone defense" label="zone defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="31683" end="31698" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q434909" start="31812" end="31827" title="Mike Krzyzewski" label="Mike Krzyzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q530705" start="31849" end="31860" title="Jim Boeheim" label="Jim Boeheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q321623" start="31892" end="31904" title="Roy Williams (basketball coach)" label="Roy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q202584" start="32003" end="32013" title="Dean Smith" label="Dean Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081786" start="32406" end="32426" title="2007 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2007 NCAA tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q230186" start="32570" end="32588" title="Pan American Games" label="Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208438" start="32663" end="32674" title="Joe B. Hall" label="Joe B. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747125" start="32946" end="32971" title="Big Ten Conference Men&amp;#x27;s Basketball Coach of the Year" label="Big Ten Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="33144" end="33164" title="the Associated Press" label="the Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869984" start="33221" end="33253" title="Naismith College Coach of the Year" label="Naismith Coach of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="33320" end="33323" title="UPI" label="UPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="33408" end="33431" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336862" start="33564" end="33607" title="National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame" label="National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910597" start="33657" end="33671" title="Naismith Award" label="Naismith Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="33761" end="33765" title="United States Military Academy" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140337" start="33810" end="33826" title="Indiana Hoosiers" label="Indiana Hoosiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q553321" start="33927" end="33941" title="Vince Lombardi" label="Vince Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808661" start="33989" end="34015" title="Simon Skjodt Assembly Hall" label="Simon Skjodt Assembly Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q434909" start="34259" end="34274" title="Mike Krzyzewski" label="Mike Krzyzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589648" start="34276" end="34288" title="Steve Alford" label="Steve Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939653" start="34290" end="34302" title="Murry Bartow" label="Murry Bartow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213339" start="34304" end="34314" title="Dan Dakich" label="Dan Dakich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932301" start="34316" end="34328" title="Bob Donewald" label="Bob Donewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777548" start="34330" end="34343" title="Marty Simmons" label="Marty Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194424" start="34345" end="34354" title="Jim Crews" label="Jim Crews"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983075" start="34356" end="34367" title="Chris Beard (basketball)" label="Chris Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q50829158" start="34373" end="34382" title="Dusty May" label="Dusty May"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332151" start="34416" end="34429" title="Randy Wittman" label="Randy Wittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504822" start="34431" end="34443" title="Mike Woodson" label="Mike Woodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734309" start="34445" end="34456" title="Keith Smart" label="Keith Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q298512" start="34458" end="34470" title="Isiah Thomas" label="Isiah Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352098" start="34476" end="34490" title="Lawrence Frank" label="Lawrence Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232897" start="34552" end="34566" title="John Feinstein" label="John Feinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108933" start="34583" end="34604" title="A Season on the Brink" label="A Season on the Brink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582740" start="34631" end="34645" title="1985–86 Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="1985–86 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023245" start="34653" end="34669" title="Indiana Hoosiers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Indiana Hoosiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969645" start="35786" end="35802" title="Nevada Wolf Pack men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Nevada Wolf Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589648" start="35825" end="35837" title="Steve Alford" label="Steve Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620628" start="35943" end="35954" title="Kirk Haston" label="Kirk Haston"/>
<link wikidata="Q885659" start="37189" end="37199" title="Blue Chips" label="Blue Chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q188018" start="37420" end="37430" title="Nick Nolte" label="Nick Nolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="37452" end="37473" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="37809" end="37813" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108933" start="37857" end="37878" title="A Season on the Brink" label="A Season on the Brink"/>
<link wikidata="Q313545" start="37972" end="37985" title="Brian Dennehy" label="Brian Dennehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635209" start="38044" end="38057" title="Knight School (U.S. TV series)" label="Knight School"/>
<link wikidata="Q591556" start="38267" end="38283" title="Anger Management (film)" label="Anger Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="38343" end="38353" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="38401" end="38407" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38760" end="38782" title="Guitar Hero: Metallica" label="Guitar Hero: Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325589" start="38799" end="38813" title="Risky Business" label="Risky Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q434909" start="38840" end="38855" title="Mike Krzyzewski" label="Mike Krzyzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q686052" start="38857" end="38868" title="Rick Pitino" label="Rick Pitino"/>
<link wikidata="Q321623" start="38874" end="38886" title="Roy Williams (basketball coach)" label="Roy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143647" start="39171" end="39174" title="Pat Knight" label="Pat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480840" start="39267" end="39272" title="Lamar Cardinals basketball" label="Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="39678" end="39696" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q629973" start="40435" end="40448" title="John Calipari" label="John Calipari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4615873" start="40515" end="40534" title="2009–10 Kentucky Wildcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="the previous season"/>
<link wikidata="Q964139" start="40748" end="40765" title="Patrick Patterson (basketball)" label="Patrick Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q337370" start="40801" end="40810" title="John Wall" label="John Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360809" start="40941" end="40954" title="one-and-done rule" label="one-and-dones"/>
<link wikidata="Q20121517" start="41105" end="41151" title="Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign" label="Donald Trump&amp;#x27;s 2016 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892468" start="41219" end="41232" title="2018 United States elections" label="2018 midterms"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="41346" end="41366" title="Bloomington, Indiana" label="Bloomington, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191603" start="41505" end="41571" title="List of college men&amp;#x27;s basketball career coaching wins leaders" label="List of college men&amp;#x27;s basketball career coaching wins leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591084" start="41574" end="41640" title="List of NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Final Four appearances by coach" label="List of NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Final Four appearances by coach"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4874" wikidata="Q132438" url="?curid=4874" title="Black metal">
<text>Black metal is an extreme subgenre of heavy metal music. Common traits include fast tempos, a shrieking vocal style, heavily distorted guitars played with tremolo picking, raw (lo-fi) recording, unconventional song structures, and an emphasis on atmosphere. Artists often appear in corpse paint and adopt pseudonyms.

Venom initiated the genre&#x27;s first wave, with their second album &quot;Black Metal&quot; (1982) giving it its name. In the subsequent years, the style was expanded by Bathory, Mercyful Fate, Hellhammer and Celtic Frost. By 1987, this wave had largely declined, however influential works continued to be released by Parabellum, Blasphemy, Sarcófago, Tormentor, Samael and Rotting Christ. A second wave arose in the early 1990s, spearheaded by bands in the early Norwegian black metal scene scene, such as Mayhem, Darkthrone, Burzum, Immortal, Emperor, Satyricon and Gorgoroth. This wave developed other scenes at the same time in Finland (Beherit, Archgoat, Impaled Nazarene); Sweden (Dissection, Abruptum, Marduk, Nifelheim); the United States (Profanatica, Demoncy, Grand Belial&#x27;s Key, Judas Iscariot); France (Mütiilation, Vlad Tepes); as well as leading to the formation of influential bands in other countries including Sigh and Cradle of Filth.

Initially a synonym for &quot;Satanic metal&quot;, black metal has often sparked controversy, due to the actions and ideologies associated with the genre. Some artists express misanthropic views, and others advocate various forms of extreme anti-Christian sentiment, Satanism, or ethnic paganism. In the 1990s, members of the scene were responsible for a spate of church burnings and murders. There is also a neo-Nazi movement within black metal, although it has been shunned by many prominent artists. Generally, black metal strives to remain an underground phenomenon.

== Characteristics ==
Although &quot;contemporary black metal&quot; typically refers to the Norwegian style with shrieking vocals and raw production, the term has traditionally been applied to bands with widely differing sounds, such as Death SS, Mercyful Fate, Mayhem, Blasphemy, and the Greek and Finnish bands that emerged around the same time as the Norwegian scene.

=== Instrumentation and song structure ===

Norwegian-inspired black metal guitarists usually favor high-pitched or trebly guitar tones and heavy distortion. The guitar is usually played with fast, un-muted tremolo picking and power chords. Guitarists often use dissonance—along with specific scales, intervals and chord progressions—to create a sense of dread. The tritone, or flat-fifth, is often used. Guitar solos and low guitar tunings are rare in black metal. The bass guitar is seldom used to play stand-alone melodies. It is common for the bass to be muted against the guitar, or for it to homophonically follow the low-pitched riffs of the guitar. While electronic keyboards are not a standard instrument, some bands, like Dimmu Borgir, use keyboards &quot;in the background&quot; or as &quot;proper instruments&quot; for creating atmosphere. Some newer black metal bands began raising their production quality and introducing additional instruments such as synthesizers and even orchestras.

The drumming is usually fast and relies on double-bass and blast beats to maintain tempos that can sometimes approach 300 beats per minute. These fast tempos require great skill and physical stamina, typified by black metal drummers Frost (Kjetil-Vidar Haraldstad) and Hellhammer (Jan Axel Blomberg). Even still, authenticity is still prioritized over technique. &quot;This professionalism has to go,&quot; insists well-respected drummer and metal historian Fenriz (Gylve Fenris Nagell) of Darkthrone. &quot;I want to &quot;de-learn&quot; playing drums, I want to play primitive and simple, I don&#x27;t want to play like a drum solo all the time and make these complicated riffs&quot;.

Black metal songs often stray from conventional song structure and often lack clear verse-chorus sections. Instead, many black metal songs contain lengthy and repetitive instrumental sections. The Greek style—established by Rotting Christ, Necromantia and Varathron—has more death metal traits than Norwegian black metal.

=== Vocals and lyrics ===

Traditional black metal bands tend to favor raspy, high-pitched vocals which include techniques such as shrieking, screaming, and snarling, a vocal style influenced by Quorthon of Bathory. Death growls, common in the death metal genre, are sometimes used, but less frequently than the characteristic black metal shriek.

Black metal lyrics typically attack Christianity and the other institutional religions, often using apocalyptic language and evoking anti-authoritarianism and anti-establishment messages against religious governments and societies. Satanic lyrics are common, and many see them as essential to black metal. For Satanist black metal artists, &quot;Black metal songs are meant to be like Calvinist sermons; deadly serious attempts to unite the true believers&quot;. Misanthropy, global catastrophe, war, death, destruction and rebirth are also common themes. Another topic often found in black metal lyrics is that of the wild and extreme aspects and phenomena of the natural world, particularly the wilderness, forests, mountains, winter, storms, and blizzards. Black metal also has a fascination with the distant past. Many bands write about the mythology and folklore of their homelands and promote a revival of pre-Christian, pagan traditions. A significant number of bands write lyrics only in their native language and a few (e.g. Arckanum and early Ulver) have lyrics in archaic languages. Some doom metal-influenced artists&#x27; lyrics focus on depression, nihilism, introspection, self-harm and suicide. 

=== Imagery and performances ===

Many bands choose not to play live. Many of those who do play live maintain that their performances &quot;are not for entertainment or spectacle. Sincerity, authenticity and extremity are valued above all else&quot;. Some bands consider their concerts to be rituals and often make use of stage props and theatrics. Bands such as Mayhem, Gorgoroth, and Watain are noted for their controversial shows, which have featured impaled animal heads, mock crucifixions, medieval weaponry and band members doused in animal blood. A few vocalists, such as Dead, Maniac and Kvarforth, are known for cutting themselves while singing onstage.

Black metal artists often appear dressed in black with combat boots, bullet belts, spiked wristbands and inverted crosses and inverted pentagrams to reinforce their anti-Christian or anti-religious stance. However, the most stand-out trait is their use of corpse paint—black and white face paint sometimes mixed with real or fake blood, which is used to create a corpse-like or demonic appearance.

The imagery of black metal reflects its lyrics and ideology. In the early 1990s, most pioneering black metal artists had minimalist album covers featuring xeroxed black-and-white pictures and/or writing. This was partly a reaction against death metal bands, who at that time had begun to use brightly colored album artwork. Many purist black metal artists have continued this style. Black metal album covers are typically dark and tend to be atmospheric or provocative; some feature natural or fantasy landscapes (for example Burzum&#x27;s &quot;Filosofem&quot; and Emperor&#x27;s &quot;In the Nightside Eclipse&quot;) while others are violent, sexually transgressive, sacrilegious, or iconoclastic (for example Marduk&#x27;s &quot;Fuck Me Jesus&quot; and Dimmu Borgir&#x27;s &quot;In Sorte Diaboli&quot;).

=== Production ===
The earliest black metal artists had very limited resources, which meant that recordings were often made in homes or basements, giving their recordings a distinctive &quot;lo-fi&quot; quality. However, even when success allowed access to professional studios, many artists instead chose to continue making lo-fi recordings. Artists believed that by doing so, they would both stay true to the genre&#x27;s underground roots as well as make the music sound more &quot;raw&quot; or &quot;cold&quot;. A well-known example of this approach is on the album &quot;Transilvanian Hunger&quot; by Darkthrone, a band who Johnathan Selzer of &quot;Terrorizer&quot; magazine says &quot;represent the DIY aspect of black metal.&quot; In addition, lo-fi production was used to keep black metal inaccessible or unappealing to mainstream music fans and those who are not committed. Many have claimed that black metal was originally intended only for those who were part of the scene and not for a wider audience. Vocalist Gaahl said that during its early years, &quot;Black metal was never meant to reach an audience, it was purely for our own satisfaction&quot;.

== History ==
=== Roots ===
Occult and Satanic lyrical themes were present in the music of heavy metal and rock bands of the late 1960s and early 1970s such as Black Sabbath and Coven.

In the late 1970s, the form of rough and aggressive heavy metal played by the British band Motörhead gained popularity. Many first wave black metal bands cited Motörhead as an influence. Also popular in the late 1970s, punk rock came to influence the birth of black metal. Tom G. Warrior of Hellhammer and Celtic Frost credited English punk group Discharge as &quot;a revolution, much like Venom&quot;, saying, &quot;When I heard the first two Discharge records, I was blown away. I was just starting to play an instrument and I had no idea you could go so far.&quot;

The use of corpse paint in the black metal imagery was mainly influenced by the American 1970s rock band Kiss.

=== First wave (1982–1990) ===

The term &quot;black metal&quot; was coined by the English band Venom with their second album &quot;Black Metal&quot; (1982). Playing a style bordering speed metal or thrash metal, the album initiated the first wave of black metal, forming an early prototype for the genre. The band introduced many tropes that became ubiquitous in the genre, such as blasphemous lyrics and imagery, as well as stage names, costumes and face paint meant to strike fear. During this first wave of bands, distinct borders of the genre had not been set, instead, black metal bands existed in a broader extreme metal umbrella alongside the earliest groups in death metal, grindcore and thrash metal.

Hellhammer, from Switzerland, &quot;made truly raw and brutal music&quot; with Satanic lyrics, and became an important influence on later black metal; &quot;Their simple yet effective riffs and fast guitar sound were groundbreaking, anticipating the later trademark sound of early Swedish death metal&quot;. In 1984, members of Hellhammer formed Celtic Frost, whose music &quot;explored more orchestral and experimental territories. The lyrics also became more personal, with topics about inner feelings and majestic stories. But for a couple of years, Celtic Frost was one of the world&#x27;s most extreme and original metal bands, with a huge impact on the mid-1990s black metal scene&quot;.

Another influential early band was Bathory from Sweden. The band, led by Thomas Forsberg (a.k.a. Quorthon), created &quot;the blueprint for Scandinavian black metal&quot;. Not only was Bathory&#x27;s music dark, fast, heavily distorted, lo-fi and with anti-Christian themes, Quorthon was also the first to use the shrieked vocals that later became a common trait. Their third album &quot;Under the Sign of the Black Mark&quot; (1987) was the first record in the genre to subvert most traditional rock tropes, in a way that led journalist Dayal Patterson that &quot;undoubtedly... create[d] the black metal sound as we know it&quot;.

The Danish band Mercyful Fate influenced the Norwegian scene with their imagery and lyrics. Frontman King Diamond, who wore ghoulish black-and-white facepaint on stage, may be one of the inspirators of what became known as &#x27;corpse paint&#x27;. Other artists that were a part of this wave included Germany&#x27;s Kreator, Sodom and Destruction (from Germany), Italy&#x27;s Bulldozer and Death SS, Japan&#x27;s Sabbat and Colombia&#x27;s Parabellum.

In 1987, in the fifth issue of his &quot;Slayer&quot; fanzine, Jon &#x27;Metalion&#x27; Kristiansen wrote that &quot;the latest fad of black/Satanic bands seems to be over&quot;, citing United States bands Incubus and Morbid Angel, as well as Sabbat from Great Britain as some of the few continuing the genre. However, black metal continued in the underground, with scenes developing in Brazil with Sepultura, Vulcano, Holocausto and Sarcófago, Czechoslovakia with Root, Törr and Master&#x27;s Hammer, and Sweden with Grotesque, Merciless, Mefisto, Tiamat and Morbid. Sarcófago&#x27;s debut album &quot;I.N.R.I.&quot; (1987), was widely influential on subsequent acts in the genre, especially the second wave Norwegian scene and groups in the war metal style. &quot;BrooklynVegan&quot; writer Kim Kelly calling it &quot;a gigantic influence on black metal&#x27;s sound, aesthetics, and attitude.&quot; Furthermore, during this time other influential records in the genre were released by Von (from the United States), Rotting Christ (from Greece), Tormentor (from Hungary), Mortuary Drape (from Italy), Kat (from Poland), Samael (from Switzerland) and Blasphemy (from Canada). Blasphemy&#x27;s debut album &quot;Fallen Angel of Doom&quot; (1990) is considered one of the most influential records for the war metal style. Fenriz of the Norwegian band Darkthrone called Master&#x27;s Hammer&#x27;s debut album &quot;Ritual&quot; &quot;the first Norwegian black metal album, even though they are from Czechoslovakia&quot;. It was only during this post–1987 era of bands that the various extreme metal styles began to develop definitions distinct from one another, and the borders of what now consistues black metal were drawn.

=== Second wave (1991–1997) ===
The second wave of black metal began in 1991, with &quot;Rock Hard&quot; magazine crediting Samael&#x27;s &quot;Worship Him&quot; (1 April 1991) as its beginnings, while, &quot;Metal Hammer&quot; writer Enrico Ahlig cited it as beginning with the 8 April 1991 suicide of Mayhem vocalist Dead.

====Norwegian scene====


During , a number of Norwegian artists began performing and releasing a new kind of black metal music; this included Mayhem, Darkthrone, Burzum, Immortal, Emperor, Satyricon, Enslaved, Thorns, and Gorgoroth. They developed the style of their 1980s forebears into a distinct genre. This was partly thanks to a new kind of guitar playing developed by Snorre &#x27;Blackthorn&#x27; Ruch and Øystein &#x27;Euronymous&#x27; Aarseth. Fenriz of Darkthrone described it as being &quot;derived from Bathory&quot; and noted that &quot;those kinds of riffs became the new order for a lot of bands in the &#x27;90s&quot;.

The wearing of corpse paint became standard, and was a way for many black metal artists to distinguish themselves from other metal bands of the era. The scene also had an ideology and ethos. Artists were bitterly opposed to Christianity and presented themselves as misanthropic Devil worshippers who wanted to spread terror, hatred and evil. They professed to be serious in their views and vowed to act on them. Ihsahn of Emperor said that they sought to &quot;create fear among people&quot; and &quot;be in opposition to society&quot;. The scene was exclusive and created boundaries around itself, incorporating only those who were &quot;true&quot; and attempting to expel all &quot;poseurs&quot;. Some members of the scene were responsible for a spate of church burnings and murder, which eventually drew attention to it and led to a number of artists being imprisoned.

===== Dead&#x27;s suicide =====
On 8 April 1991, Mayhem vocalist Per &quot;Dead&quot; Ohlin committed suicide while left alone in a house shared by the band. Fellow musicians described Dead as odd, introverted and depressed. Mayhem&#x27;s drummer, Hellhammer, said that Dead was the first to wear the distinctive corpse paint that became widespread in the scene. He was found with slit wrists and a shotgun wound to the head. Dead&#x27;s suicide note began with &quot;Excuse all the blood&quot;, and apologized for firing the weapon indoors. Before calling the police, Euronymous got a disposable camera and photographed the body, after re-arranging some items. One of these photographs was later used as the cover of a bootleg live album, &quot;Dawn of the Black Hearts&quot;.

Euronymous made necklaces with bits of Dead&#x27;s skull and gave some to musicians he deemed worthy. Rumors also spread that he had made a stew with bits of his brain. Euronymous used Dead&#x27;s suicide to foster Mayhem&#x27;s evil image and claimed Dead had killed himself because extreme metal had become trendy and commercialized. Mayhem bassist Jørn &#x27;Necrobutcher&#x27; Stubberud noted that &quot;people became more aware of the black metal scene after Dead had shot himself ... I think it was Dead&#x27;s suicide that really changed the scene&quot;.

Two other members of the early Norwegian scene later committed suicide: Erik &#x27;Grim&#x27; Brødreskift (of Immortal, Borknagar, Gorgoroth) in 1999 and Espen &#x27;Storm&#x27; Andersen (of Strid) in 2001.

===== Helvete and Deathlike Silence =====
During May–June 1991, Euronymous of Mayhem opened an independent record shop named &quot;Helvete&quot; (Norwegian for &quot;Hell&quot;) at Schweigaards gate 56 in Oslo. It quickly became the focal point of Norway&#x27;s emerging black metal scene and a meeting place for many of its musicians; especially the members of Mayhem, Burzum, Emperor and Thorns. Jon &#x27;Metalion&#x27; Kristiansen, writer of the fanzine &quot;Slayer&quot;, said that the opening of Helvete was &quot;the creation of the whole Norwegian black metal scene&quot;. In its basement, Euronymous founded an independent record label named Deathlike Silence Productions. With the rising popularity of his band and others like it, the underground success of Euronymous&#x27;s label is often credited for encouraging other record labels, who had previously shunned black metal acts, to then reconsider and release their material.

===== Church burnings =====
In 1992, members of the Norwegian black metal scene began a wave of arson attacks on Christian churches. By 1996, there had been at least 50 such attacks in Norway. Some of the buildings were hundreds of years old and seen as important historical landmarks. The first to be burnt down was Norway&#x27;s Fantoft Stave Church. Police believe Varg Vikernes of Burzum was responsible. The cover of Burzum&#x27;s EP &quot;Aske&quot; (&quot;ashes&quot;) is a photograph of the destroyed church. In May 1994, Vikernes was found guilty for burning down the Holmenkollen Chapel, Skjold Church, and Åsane Church. In addition, he was found guilty for an attempted arson of a fourth church, and for the theft and storage of 150 kg of explosives. To coincide with the release of Mayhem&#x27;s &quot;De Mysteriis Dom Sathanas&quot;, Vikernes and Euronymous had also allegedly plotted to bomb the Nidaros Cathedral, which appears on the album cover. The musicians Faust, Samoth, (both of Emperor), and Jørn Inge Tunsberg (of Hades Almighty) were also convicted for church arsons. Members of the Swedish black metal scene started to burn churches as well in 1993.

Those convicted for church burnings showed no remorse and described their actions as a symbolic &quot;retaliation&quot; against Christianity in Norway. Mayhem drummer Hellhammer said he had called for attacks on mosques and Hindu temples, on the basis that they were more foreign. Today, opinions on the church burnings differ within the black metal community. Many musicians, singers, and songwriters in the early Norwegian black metal scene, such as Infernus and Gaahl of Gorgoroth, continue to praise the church burnings, with the latter saying &quot;there should have been more of them, and there will be more of them&quot;. Others, such as Necrobutcher and Kjetil Manheim of Mayhem and Abbath of Immortal, see the church burnings as having been futile. Manheim claimed that many arsons were &quot;just people trying to gain acceptance&quot; within the black metal scene. Watain vocalist Erik Danielsson respected the attacks, but said of those responsible: &quot;the only Christianity they defeated was the last piece of Christianity within themselves. Which is a very good beginning, of course&quot;.

===== Murder of Euronymous =====
In early 1993, animosity arose between Euronymous and Vikernes. On the night of 10 August 1993, Varg Vikernes (of Burzum) and Snorre &#x27;Blackthorn&#x27; Ruch (of Thorns) drove from Bergen to Euronymous&#x27;s apartment in Oslo. When they arrived a confrontation began and Vikernes stabbed Euronymous to death. His body was found outside the apartment with 23 cut wounds—two to the head, five to the neck, and sixteen to the back.

It has been speculated that the murder was the result of either a power struggle, a financial dispute over Burzum records or an attempt at outdoing a stabbing in Lillehammer the year before by Faust. Vikernes denies all of these, claiming that he attacked Euronymous in self-defense. He says that Euronymous had plotted to stun him with an electroshock weapon, tie him up and torture him to death while videotaping the event. He said Euronymous planned to use a meeting about an unsigned contract to ambush him. Vikernes claims he intended to hand Euronymous the signed contract that night and &quot;tell him to fuck off&quot;, but that Euronymous panicked and attacked him first. He also claims that most of the cuts were from broken glass Euronymous had fallen on during the struggle. The self-defense story is doubted by Faust, while Necrobutcher confirmed that Vikernes killed Euronymous in self-defense due to the death threats he received from him.

Vikernes was arrested on 19 August 1993, in Bergen. Many other members of the scene were taken in for questioning around the same time. Some of them confessed to their crimes and implicated others. In May 1994, Vikernes was sentenced to 21 years in prison (Norway&#x27;s maximum penalty) for the murder of Euronymous, the arson of four churches, and for possession of 150 kg of explosives. However, he only confessed to the latter. Two churches were burnt the day he was sentenced, &quot;presumably as a statement of symbolic support&quot;. Vikernes smiled when his verdict was read and the picture was widely reprinted in the news media. Blackthorn was sentenced to eight years in prison for being an accomplice to the murder. That month saw the release of Mayhem&#x27;s album &quot;De Mysteriis Dom Sathanas&quot;, which featured Euronymous on guitar and Vikernes on bass guitar. Euronymous&#x27;s family had asked Mayhem&#x27;s drummer, Hellhammer, to remove the bass tracks recorded by Vikernes, but Hellhammer said: &quot;I thought it was appropriate that the murderer and victim were on the same record. I put word out that I was re-recording the bass parts. But I never did&quot;. In 2003, Vikernes failed to return to Tønsberg prison after being given a short leave. He was re-arrested shortly after while driving a stolen car with various weapons. Vikernes was released on parole in 2009.

==== Outside of Norway ====

Japanese band Sigh formed in 1990 and was in regular contact with key members of the Norwegian scene. Their debut album, &quot;Scorn Defeat&quot;, became &quot;a cult classic in the black metal world&quot;.

In 1990 and 1991, Northern European metal acts began to release music influenced by these bands or the older ones from the first wave. In Sweden, this included Dissection, Abruptum, Marduk, and Nifelheim. In Finland, there emerged a scene that mixed the first wave black metal style with elements of death metal and grindcore; this included Beherit, Archgoat and Impaled Nazarene, whose debut album &quot;Tol Cormpt Norz Norz Norz&quot; Rock Hard journalist Wolf-Rüdiger Mühlmann considers a part of war metal&#x27;s roots. Bands such as Demoncy and Profanatica emerged during this time in the United States, when death metal was more popular among extreme metal fans. The Norwegian band Mayhem&#x27;s concert in Leipzig with Eminenz and Manos in 1990, later released as &quot;Live in Leipzig&quot;, was said to have had a strong influence on the East German scene and is even called the unofficial beginning of German black metal.

Black metal scenes also emerged on the European mainland during the early 1990s, inspired by the Norwegian scene or the older bands, or both. In Poland, a scene was spearheaded by Graveland and Behemoth. In France, a close-knit group of musicians known as Les Légions Noires emerged; this included artists such as Mütiilation, Vlad Tepes, Belketre and Torgeist. In Belgium, there were acts such as Ancient Rites and Enthroned. Bands such as Black Funeral, Grand Belial&#x27;s Key and Judas Iscariot emerged during this time in the United States. Black Funeral, from Houston, formed in 1993, was associated with black magic and Satanism.

A notable black metal group in England was Cradle of Filth, who released three demos in a black/death metal style with symphonic flourishes, followed by the album &quot;The Principle of Evil Made Flesh&quot;, which featured a then-unusual hybrid style of black and gothic metal. The band then abandoned black metal for gothic metal, becoming one of the most successful extreme metal bands to date. John Serba of AllMusic commented that their first album &quot;made waves in the early black metal scene, putting Cradle of Filth on the tips of metalheads&#x27; tongues, whether in praise of the band&#x27;s brazen attempts to break the black metal mold or in derision for its &#x27;commercialization&#x27; of an underground phenomenon that was proud of its grimy heritage&quot;. Some black metal fans did not consider Cradle of Filth to be black metal. When asked if he considers Cradle of Filth a black metal band, vocalist Dani Filth said he considers them black metal in terms of philosophy and atmosphere, but not in other ways. Another English band called Necropolis never released any music, but &quot;began a desecratory assault against churches and cemeteries in their area&quot; and &quot;almost caused Black Metal to be banned in Britain as a result&quot;. Dayal Patterson says successful acts like Cradle of Filth &quot;provoked an even greater extremity [of negative opinion] from the underground&quot; scene due to concerns about &quot;selling out&quot;.

The controversy surrounding the Thuringian band Absurd drew attention to the German black metal scene. In 1993, the members murdered a boy from their school, Sandro Beyer. A photo of Beyer&#x27;s gravestone is on the cover of one of their demos, &quot;Thuringian Pagan Madness&quot;, along with pro-Nazi statements. It was recorded in prison and released in Poland by Graveland drummer Capricornus. The band&#x27;s early music was more influenced by Oi! and Rock Against Communism (RAC) than by black metal, and described as being &quot;more akin to &#x27;60s garage punk than some of the […] Black Metal of their contemporaries&quot;. Alexander von Meilenwald from German band Nagelfar considers Ungod&#x27;s 1993 debut &quot;Circle of the Seven Infernal Pacts&quot;, Desaster&#x27;s 1994 demo &quot;Lost in the Ages&quot;, Tha-Norr&#x27;s 1995 album &quot;Wolfenzeitalter&quot;, Lunar Aurora&#x27;s 1996 debut &quot;Weltengänger&quot; and Katharsis&#x27;s 2000 debut &quot;666&quot; to be the most important recordings for the German scene. He said they were &quot;not necessarily the best German releases, but they all kicked off something&quot;.

=== After the second wave (1998–present) ===

In the beginning of the second wave, the different scenes developed their own styles; as Alan &#x27;Nemtheanga&#x27; Averill says, &quot;you had the Greek sound and the Finnish sound, and the Norwegian sound, and there was German bands and Swiss bands and that kind of thing.&quot; By the mid-1990s, the style of the Norwegian scene was being adopted by bands worldwide, and in 1998, &quot;Kerrang!&quot; journalist Malcolm Dome said that &quot;black metal as we know it in 1998 owes more to Norway and to Scandinavia than any other particular country&quot;. Newer black metal bands also began raising their production quality and introducing additional instruments such as synthesizers and even full-symphony orchestras. By the late 1990s, the underground concluded that several of the Norwegian pioneers—like Emperor, Immortal, Dimmu Borgir, Ancient, Covenant/The Kovenant, and Satyricon—had commercialized or sold out to the mainstream and &quot;big bastard labels.&quot; Dayal Patterson states that successful acts like Dimmu Borgir &quot;provoked and even greater extremity [of negative opinion] from the underground&quot; regarding the view that these bands had &quot;sold out.&quot;

After Euronymous&#x27;s death, &quot;some bands went more towards the Viking metal and epic style, while some bands went deeper into the abyss.&quot; Since 1993, the Swedish scene had carried out church burnings, grave desecration, and other violent acts. In 1995, Jon Nödtveidt of Dissection joined the Misanthropic Luciferian Order (MLO). In 1997, he and another MLO member were arrested and charged with shooting dead a 37-year-old man. It was said he was killed &quot;out of anger&quot; because he had &quot;harassed&quot; the two men. Nödtveidt received a 10-year sentence. As the victim was a homosexual immigrant, Dissection was accused of being a Nazi band, but Nödtveidt denied this and dismissed racism and nationalism.

The Swedish band Shining, founded in 1996, began writing music almost exclusively about depression and suicide, musically inspired by Strid and by Burzum&#x27;s albums &quot;Hvis lyset tar oss&quot; and &quot;Filosofem&quot;. Vocalist Niklas Kvarforth wanted to &quot;force-feed&quot; his listeners &quot;with self-destructive and suicidal imagery and lyrics.&quot; In the beginning, he used the term &quot;suicidal black metal&quot; for his music. However, he stopped using the term in 2001 because it had begun to be used by a slew of other bands, whom he felt had misinterpreted his vision and were using the music as a kind of therapy rather than a weapon against the listener as Kvarforth intended. He said that he &quot;wouldn&#x27;t call Shining a black metal band&quot; and called the &quot;suicidal black metal&quot; term a &quot;foolish idea.&quot;
According to Erik Danielsson, when his band Watain formed in 1998, there were very few bands who took black metal as seriously as the early Norwegian scene had. A newer generation of Swedish Satanic bands like Watain and Ondskapt, inspired by Ofermod, the new band of Nefandus member Belfagor, put this scene &quot;into a new light.&quot; Kvarforth said, &quot;It seems like people actually [got] afraid again.&quot; &quot;The current Swedish black metal scene has a particularly ambitious and articulate understanding of mysticism and its validity to black metal. Many Swedish black metal bands, most notably Watain and Dissection, are [or were] affiliated with the Temple of the Black Light, or Misanthropic Luciferian Order […] a Theistic, Gnostic, Satanic organization based in Sweden&quot;. Upon his release in 2004, Jon Nödtveidt restarted Dissection with new members whom he felt were able to &quot;stand behind and live up to the demands of Dissection&#x27;s Satanic concept.&quot; He started calling Dissection &quot;the sonic propaganda unit of the MLO&quot; and released a third full-length album, &quot;Reinkaos&quot;. The lyrics contain magical formulae from the &quot;Liber Azerate&quot; and are based on the organization&#x27;s teachings. After the album&#x27;s release and a few concerts, Nödtveidt said that he had &quot;reached the limitations of music as a tool for expressing what I want to express, for myself and the handful of others that I care about&quot; and disbanded Dissection before dying by suicide.

A part of the underground scene adopted a Jungian interpretation of the church burnings and other acts of the early scene as the re-emergence of ancient archetypes, which Kadmon of Allerseelen and the authors of &quot;Lords of Chaos&quot; had implied in their writings. They mixed this interpretation with Paganism and Nationalism. Varg Vikernes was seen as &quot;an ideological messiah&quot; by some, although Vikernes had disassociated himself from black metal and his neo-Nazism had nothing to do with that subculture. This led to the rise of National Socialist black metal (NSBM), which Hendrik Möbus of Absurd calls &quot;the logical conclusion&quot; of the Norwegian black metal &quot;movement&quot;. Other parts of the scene oppose NSBM as it is &quot;indelibly linked with Asá Trŭ and opposed to Satanism&quot;, or look upon Nazism &quot;with vague skepticism and indifference&quot;. Members of the NSBM scene, among others, see the Norwegian bands as poseurs whose &quot;ideology is cheap&quot;, although they still respect Vikernes and Burzum, whom Grand Belial&#x27;s Key vocalist Richard Mills called &quot;the only Norwegian band that remains unapologetic and literally convicted of his beliefs.&quot;

In France, besides Les Légions Noires (The Black Legions), an NSBM scene arose. Members of French band Funeral desecrated a grave in Toulon in June 1996, and a 19-year-old black metal fan stabbed a priest to death in Mulhouse on Christmas Eve 1996. According to MkM of Antaeus and Aosoth, the early French scene &quot;was quite easy to divide: either you were NSBM, and you had the support from zine and the audience, or you were part of the black legions, and you had that &#x27;cult&#x27; aura&quot;, whereas his band Antaeus, not belonging to either of these sub-scenes, &quot;did not fit anywhere.&quot; Many French bands, like Deathspell Omega and Aosoth, have an avantgarde approach and a disharmonic sound that is representative of that scene.

The early American black metal bands remained underground. Some of them—like Grand Belial&#x27;s Key and Judas Iscariot—joined an international NSBM organization called the Pagan Front, although Judas Iscariot&#x27;s sole member Akhenaten left the organization. Other bands like Averse Sefira never had any link with Nazism. The US bands have no common style. Many were musically inspired by Burzum but did not necessarily adopt Vikernes&#x27;s ideas. Profanatica&#x27;s music is close to death metal, while Demoncy were accused of ripping off Gorgoroth riffs. There also emerged bands like Xasthur and Leviathan (whose music is inspired by Burzum and whose lyrics focus on topics such as depression and suicide), Nachtmystium, Krallice, Wolves in the Throne Room (a band linked to the crust punk scene and the environmental movement), and Liturgy (the style of whom frontwoman Hunter Hunt-Hendrix describes as &#x27;transcendental black metal&#x27;). These bands eschew black metal&#x27;s traditional lyrical content for &quot;something more Whitman-esque&quot; and have been rejected by some traditional black-metallers for their ideologies and the post-rock and shoegazing influences some of them have adopted. Also, some bands like Agalloch started to incorporate &quot;doom and folk elements into the traditional blast-beat and tremolo-picking of the Scandinavian incarnation&quot;, a style that later became known as &quot;Cascadian black metal&quot;, in reference to the region where it emerged.

In Australia, a scene led by bands like Deströyer 666, Vomitor, Hobbs&#x27; Angel of Death, Nocturnal Graves and Gospel of the Horns arose. This scene&#x27;s typical style is a mixture of old school black metal and raw thrash metal influenced by old Celtic Frost, Bathory, Venom, and Sodom but also with its own elements.

Melechesh was formed in Jerusalem in 1993, &quot;the first overtly anti-Christian band to exist in one of the holiest cities in the world&quot;. Melechesh began as a straightforward black metal act with their first foray into folk metal occurring on their 1996 EP &quot;The Siege of Lachish&quot;. Their subsequent albums straddled black, death, and thrash metal. Another band, Arallu, was formed in the late 1990s and has relationships with Melechesh and Salem. Melechesh and Arallu perform a style they call &quot;Mesopotamian Black Metal&quot;, a blend of black metal and Mesopotamian folk music.

Since the 2000s, a number of anti-Islamic and anti-religious black metal bands—whose members come from Muslim backgrounds—have emerged in the Middle East. Janaza, believed to be Iraq&#x27;s first female black metal artist, released the demo &quot;Burning Quran Ceremony&quot; in 2010. Its frontwoman, Anahita, claimed her parents and brother were killed by a suicide bomb during the Iraq War. Another Iraqi band, Seeds of Iblis, also fronted by Anahita, released their debut EP &quot;Jihad Against Islam&quot; in 2011 through French label Legion of Death. Metal news website Metalluminati suggests that their claims of being based in Iraq are a hoax. These bands, along with Tadnees (from Saudi Arabia), Halla (from Iran), False Allah (from Bahrain), and Mosque of Satan (from Lebanon), style themselves as the &quot;Arabic Anti-Islamic Legion&quot;. Another Lebanese band, Ayat, drew much attention with their debut album &quot;Six Years of Dormant Hatred&quot;, released through North American label Moribund Records in 2008. Some European bands have also begun expressing anti-Islamic views, most notably the Norwegian band Taake.

== Stylistic divisions ==

Regarding the sound of black metal, there are two conflicting groups within the genre: &quot;those that stay true to the genre&#x27;s roots, and those that introduce progressive elements&quot;. The former believe that the music should always be minimalist—performed only with the standard guitar-bass-drums setup and recorded in a low fidelity style. One supporter of this train of thought is Blake Judd of Nachtmystium, who has rejected labeling his band black metal for its departure from the genre&#x27;s typical sound. Snorre Ruch of Thorns, on the other hand, has said that modern black metal is &quot;too narrow&quot; and believes that this was &quot;not the idea at the beginning&quot;.

Since the 1990s, different styles of black metal have emerged and some have melded Norwegian-style black metal with other genres:

===Ambient black metal===
Ambient black metal is a style of black metal that relies on heavy incorporation of atmospheric, sometimes dreamy textures, and is therefore less aggressive. It often features synthesizers or classical instrumentation, typically for melody or ethereal &quot;shimmering&quot; over the wall of sound provided by the guitars. The music is usually slow to mid paced with rare blast beat usage, without any abrupt changes and generally features slowly developing, sometimes repetitive melodies and riffs, which separate it from other black metal styles. Subject matter usually concerns nature, folklore, mythology, and personal introspection. Artists include Summoning, Agalloch and Wolves in the Throne Room.

===Black-doom===
Black-doom, also known as blackened doom, is a style that combines the slowness and thicker, bassier sound of doom metal with the shrieking vocals and heavily distorted guitar sound of black metal. Black-doom bands maintain the Satanic ideology associated with black metal, while melding it with moodier themes more related to doom metal, like depression, nihilism and nature. They also use the slower pace of doom metal in order to emphasize the harsh atmosphere present in black metal. Examples of black-doom bands include Barathrum, Forgotten Tomb, Woods of Ypres, Deinonychus, Shining, Nortt, Bethlehem, early Katatonia, Tiamat, Dolorian, and October Tide.

====Depressive suicidal black metal====
Pioneered by black-doom bands like Ophthalamia, Katatonia, Bethlehem, Forgotten Tomb and Shining, depressive suicidal black metal, also known as suicidal black metal, depressive black metal or DSBM, is a style that melds the second wave-style of black metal with doom metal, with lyrics revolving around themes such as depression, self-harm, misanthropy, suicide and death. DSBM bands draw on the lo-fi recording and highly distorted guitars of black metal, while employing the usage of acoustic instruments and non-distorted electric guitar timbres present in doom metal, interchanging the slower, doom-like, sections with faster tremolo picking. Vocals are usually high-pitched like in black metal, but lacking energy, simulating feelings like hopelessness, desperation, and entreaty. The presence of one-man bands is more prominent in this genre compared to others. Examples of bands include Xasthur, Leviathan, Strid, Silencer, Make a Change… Kill Yourself, Lifelover and I Shalt Become.

===Black &#x27;n&#x27; roll===

Black &#x27;n&#x27; roll is a style of black metal that incorporates elements from 1970s hard rock and rock and roll music. Examples of black &#x27;n&#x27; roll bands include Carpathian Forest, Kvelertak, Vreid, and Khold. Bands such as Satyricon, Nachtmystium, Nidingr, Craft, and Sarke also experimented with the genre.

===Blackened crust===
Crust punk groups, such as Antisect, Sacrilege and Anti System took some influence from early black metal bands like Venom, Hellhammer, and Celtic Frost, while Amebix&#x27;s lead vocalist and guitarist sent his band&#x27;s early demo tape to Cronos of Venom, who replied by saying &quot;We&#x27;ll rip you off.&quot; Similarly, Bathory was initially inspired by crust punk as well as heavy metal. Crust punk was affected by a second wave of black metal in the 1990s, with some bands emphasizing these black metal elements. Iskra are probably the most obvious example of second wave black metal-influenced crust punk; Iskra coined their own phrase &quot;blackened crust&quot; to describe their new style. The Japanese group Gallhammer also fused crust punk with black metal while the English band Fukpig has been said to have elements of crust punk, black metal, and grindcore. North Carolina&#x27;s Young and in the Way have been playing blackened crust since their formation in 2009. In addition, Norwegian band Darkthrone have incorporated crust punk traits in their more recent material. As Daniel Ekeroth wrote in 2008,
Many &quot;red and anarchist black metal&quot; (RABM) artists are influenced by crust punk or have a background in that scene.

===Blackened death-doom===
Blackened death-doom is a genre that combines the slow tempos and monolithic drumming of doom metal, the complex and loud riffage of death metal and the shrieking vocals of black metal. Examples of blackened death-doom bands include Morast, Faustcoven, The Ruins of Beverast, Bölzer, Necros Christos, Harvest Gulgaltha, Dragged into Sunlight, Hands of Thieves, and Soulburn. Kim Kelly, journalist from Vice, has called Faustcoven as &quot;one of the finest bands to ever successfully meld black, death, and doom metal into a cohesive, legible whole.&quot;

===Blackened death metal===

Blackened death metal is commonly death metal that incorporates musical, lyrical or ideological elements of black metal, such as an increased use of tremolo picking, anti-Christian or Satanic lyrical themes and chord progressions similar to those used in black metal. Blackened death metal bands are also more likely to wear corpse paint and suits of armour, than bands from other styles of death metal. Lower range guitar tunings, death growls and abrupt tempo changes are common in the genre. Examples of blackened death metal bands are Belphegor, Behemoth, Akercocke, and Sacramentum.

====Melodic black-death====
Melodic black-death (also known as blackened melodic death metal or melodic blackened death metal) is a genre of extreme metal that describes the style created when melodic death metal bands began being inspired by black metal and European romanticism. However, unlike most other black metal, this take on the genre incorporated an increased sense of melody and narrative. Some bands who have played this style include Dissection, Sacramentum, Naglfar, God Dethroned, Dawn, Unanimated, Thulcandra, Skeletonwitch and Cardinal Sin.

====War metal====
War metal (also known as war black metal or bestial black metal) is an aggressive, cacophonous, and chaotic subgenre of blackened death metal, described by Rock Hard journalist Wolf-Rüdiger Mühlmann as &quot;rabid&quot; and &quot;hammering&quot;. Important influences include early black and death metal bands, such as Sodom, Possessed, Autopsy, Sarcófago, and the first two Sepultura releases, as well as seminal grindcore acts like Repulsion. War metal bands include Blasphemy, Archgoat, Impiety, and Bestial Warlust.

===Blackened grindcore===
Blackened grindcore is a fusion genre that combines elements of black metal and grindcore. Notable bands include Anaal Nathrakh and early Rotting Christ.

===Blackened thrash metal===
Blackened thrash metal, also known as black-thrash, is a fusion genre that combines elements of black metal and thrash metal. Being considered one of the first fusions of extreme metal, it was inspired by bands such as Venom, Sodom, and Sarcófago. Notable bands include Aura Noir, Witchery, Black Fast, Sathanas, and Deströyer 666.

===Folk black metal, pagan metal, and Viking metal===

Folk black metal, pagan metal and Viking metal are styles that incorporates elements of folk music, with pagan metal bands focusing on pagan lyrics and imagery, and Viking metal bands giving thematic focus on Norse mythology, Norse paganism, and the Viking Age, more influenced by Nordic folk music. While not focused on Satanism, the bands&#x27; use of ancient folklore and mythologies still express anti-Christian views, with folk black metal doing it as part of a &quot;rebellion to the status quo&quot;, that developed concurrently along with the rise of folk metal in Europe in the 1990s, Notable artist include Negură Bunget, Windir, Primordial, In the Woods..., Cruachan, and Bathory, to whose albums &quot;Blood Fire Death&quot; (1988) and &quot;Hammerheart&quot; (1990) the origin of Viking metal can be traced.

===Industrial black metal===
Industrial black metal is a style of black metal that incorporates elements of industrial music. Mysticum, formed in 1991, was the first of these groups. DHG (Dødheimsgard), Thorns from Norway and Blut Aus Nord, N.K.V.D. and Blacklodge from France, have been acclaimed for their incorporation of industrial elements. Other industrial black metal musicians include Samael, The Axis of Perdition, Aborym, and ...And Oceans. In addition, The Kovenant, Mortiis and Ulver emerged from the Norwegian black metal scene, but later chose to experiment with industrial music.

===Post-black metal===
Post-black metal is an umbrella term for genres that experiment beyond black metal&#x27;s conventions and broaden their sounds, evolving past the genre&#x27;s limits. Notable bands include Myrkur, Alcest, Bosse-de-Nage, and Wildernessking.

====Blackgaze====

Blackgaze incorporates common black metal and post-black metal elements such as blast beat drumming and high-pitched screamed vocals with the melodic and heavily distorted guitar styles typically associated with shoegazing. It is associated with bands such as Deafheaven, Alcest, Vaura, Amesoeurs, Bosse-de-Nage, Oathbreaker, and Fen.

===Psychedelic black metal===
Psychedelic black metal is a subgenre of black metal which employs the usage of psychedelic elements. Notable acts include Oranssi Pazuzu, Nachtmystium, Deafheaven, Woe, Amesoeurs, and In the Woods....

===Raw black metal===
Raw black metal is a subgenre that seeks to amplify the primitive qualities of the second wave of black metal, by giving priority to its lo-fi production values. To achieve this, bands under this style usually emphasize the usage of higher-pitches in their guitar sound and vocals, while employing techniques such as tremolo picking and blast beats more often. Its imagery is often associated with dystopic and minimalistic tendencies. The style was pioneered by Ildjarn, with other notable bands including Gorgoroth and Darkthrone.

===Symphonic black metal===

Symphonic black metal is a style of black metal that incorporates symphonic and orchestral elements. This may include the usage of instruments found in symphony orchestras (piano, violin, cello, flute and keyboards), &quot;clean&quot; or operatic vocals and guitars with less distortion.
Notable bands include Emperor, Troll, Dimmu Borgir and Bal Sagoth.

== Ideology ==
Unlike other metal genres, black metal is associated with an ideology and ethos. It is fiercely opposed to Christianity and the other main institutional religions, Islam and Judaism. Many black metal bands are Satanists and see Satanism as a key part of black metal. Others advocate ethnic Paganism, &quot;often coupled with nationalism&quot;, although the early Pagan bands did not call themselves &#x27;black metal&#x27;.

Black metal tends to be misanthropic and hostile to modern society. It is &quot;a reaction against the mundanity, insincerity and emotional emptiness that participants feel is intrinsic to modern secular culture&quot;. The black metal scene tends to oppose political correctness, humanitarianism, consumerism, globalization and homogeneity. Aaron Weaver from Wolves in the Throne Room said: &quot;I think that black metal is an artistic movement that is critiquing modernity on a fundamental level, saying that the modern world view is missing something&quot;. As part of this, some parts of the scene glorify nature and have a fascination with the distant past. Black metal has been likened to Romanticism and there is an undercurrent of romantic nationalism in the genre. Sam Dunn noted that &quot;unlike any other heavy metal scene, the culture and the place is incorporated into the music and imagery&quot;. Individualism is also an important part of black metal, with Fenriz of Darkthrone describing black metal as &quot;individualism above all&quot;. Unlike other kinds of metal, black metal has numerous one-man bands. However, it is argued that followers of Euronymous were anti-individualistic, and that &quot;Black Metal is characterized by a conflict between radical individualism and group identity and by an attempt to accept both polarities simultaneously&quot;.

In his master&#x27;s thesis, Benjamin Hedge Olson wrote that some artists can be seen as transcendentalists. Dissatisfied with a &quot;world that they feel is devoid of spiritual and cultural significance&quot;, they try to leave or &quot;transcend&quot; their &quot;mundane physical forms&quot; and become one with the divine. This is done through their concerts, which he describes as &quot;musical rituals&quot; that involve self-mortification and taking on an alternative, &quot;spiritual persona&quot; (for example, by the wearing of costume and face paint).

Generally, black metal strives to remain an underground phenomenon.

=== Satanism ===
Black metal was originally a term for extreme metal bands with Satanic lyrics and imagery.
However, most of the &#x27;first wave&#x27; bands (including Venom, who coined the term &#x27;black metal&#x27;) were not Satanists; rather, they used Satanic themes to provoke controversy or gain attention. One of the few exceptions was Mercyful Fate singer and Church of Satan member King Diamond, whom Michael Moynihan calls &quot;one of the only performers of the &#x27;80s Satanic metal who was more than just a poseur using a devilish image for shock value&quot;.

In the early 1990s, many Norwegian black-metallers presented themselves as genuine Devil worshippers. Mayhem&#x27;s Euronymous was the key figure behind this. They attacked the Church of Satan for its &quot;freedom and life-loving&quot; views; the theistic Satanism they espoused was an inversion of Christianity. Benjamin Hedge Olson wrote that they &quot;transform[ed] Venom&#x27;s quasi-Satanic stage theatrics into a form of cultural expression unique from other forms of metal or Satanism&quot; and &quot;abandoned the mundane identities and ambitions of other forms of metal in favor of religious and ideological fanaticism&quot;. Some prominent scene members—such as Euronymous and Faust—stated that only bands who are Satanists can be called &#x27;black metal&#x27;. Bands with a Norwegian style, but without Satanic lyrics, tended to use other names for their music. This view is still held by many artists—such as Infernus, Arioch, Nornagest and Erik Danielsson. Some bands, like the reformed Dissection and Watain, insist that all members must be of the same Satanic belief, whereas Michael Ford of Black Funeral and MkM of Antaeus believe black metal must be Satanic but not all band members need to be Satanists. Others—such as Jan Axel Blomberg, Sigurd Wongraven and Eric Horner—believe that black metal does not need to be Satanic. An article in Metalion&#x27;s &quot;Slayer&quot; fanzine attacked musicians that &quot;care more about their guitars than the actual essence onto which the whole concept was and is based upon&quot;, and insisted that &quot;the music itself doesn&#x27;t come as the first priority&quot;. Bands with a similar style but with Pagan lyrics tend to be referred to as &#x27;Pagan Metal&#x27; by many &#x27;purist&#x27; black-metallers.

Others shun Satanism, seeing it as Christian or &quot;Judeo-Christian&quot; in origin, and regard Satanists as perpetuating the &quot;Judeo-Christian&quot; worldview. Quorthon of Bathory said he used &#x27;Satan&#x27; to provoke and attack Christianity. However, with his third and fourth albums, &quot;Under the Sign of the Black Mark&quot; and &quot;Blood Fire Death&quot;, he began &quot;attacking Christianity from a different angle&quot;, realizing that Satanism is a &quot;Christian product&quot;. Nevertheless, some artists use Satan as a symbol or metaphor for their beliefs, such as LaVeyan Satanists (who are atheist). Vocalist Gaahl, who considers himself a Norse Shaman, said: &quot;We use the word &#x27;Satanist&#x27; because it is Christian world and we have to speak their language ... When I use the word &#x27;Satan&#x27;, it means the natural order, the will of a man, the will to grow, the will to become the superman&quot;. Varg Vikernes called himself a Satanist in early interviews but &quot;now downplays his former interest in Satanism&quot;, saying he was using Satan as a symbol for Odin as the &#x27;adversary&#x27; of the Christian God. He saw Satanism as &quot;an introduction to more indigenous heathen beliefs&quot;. Some bands such as Carach Angren and Enslaved do not have Satanic lyrics.

=== Christianity ===
&#x27;Unblack metal&#x27; (or &#x27;Christian black metal&#x27;) promotes Christianity through its lyrics and imagery. The first unblack metal record, &quot;Hellig Usvart&quot; (1994) by Australian artist Horde, was a provocative parody of Norwegian black metal. It sparked controversy, and death threats were issued against Horde. Norwegian Christian metal band Crush Evil adopted a black metal style in the late 1990s and were renamed Antestor.

Many black-metallers see &quot;Christian black metal&quot; as an oxymoron and believe black metal cannot be Christian. In fact, the early unblack metal groups Horde and Antestor refused to call their music &quot;black metal&quot; because they did not share its ethos. Horde called its music &quot;holy unblack metal&quot; and Antestor called theirs &quot;sorrow metal&quot;. Horde&#x27;s Jayson Sherlock later said &quot;I will never understand why Christians think they can play Black Metal. I really don&#x27;t think they understand what true Black Metal is&quot;. However, current unblack metal bands such as Crimson Moonlight feel that black metal has changed from an ideological movement to a purely musical genre, and thus call their music &#x27;black metal&#x27;.

=== Environmentalism ===
Black metal has a long tradition of environmentalism. Groups such as Botanist and Wolves in the Throne Room have been described as exemplifying radical environmentalism.

=== Politics ===

A wide range of political views are found in the black metal scene. Black metal is generally not political music and the vast majority of bands do not express their political views. The genre is seen more as &quot;fantastical escapism&quot;. Artists usually see themselves as merely depicting the &quot;macabre nature of the world&quot; as opposed to what they see as the &quot;preachiness&quot; of genres like hardcore punk. Ihsahn of Emperor explained: &quot;I see it much more as an atmospheric and emotional thing rather than a political one. Hardcore bands can deal with political things; black metal is something else&quot;.

However, some black metal artists promote political ideologies. National Socialist black metal (NSBM) promotes neo-Nazi or far-right politics through its lyrics and imagery. It is &quot;distinguished only by ideology, not musical character&quot;. Artists typically meld neo-Nazism with ethnic European paganism; however, a few meld these beliefs with Satanism or occultism. Some commentators see it as a natural development of the &quot;black metal worldview&quot;. Members of the early Norwegian scene flirted with Nazi themes, but this was largely for shock value and to provoke. Varg Vikernes—who now refers to his ideology as &#x27;Odalism&#x27;—is credited with popularizing such views within the scene. Some bands blend Nazism and Satanism by voicing support for fascist satanist groups like the Order of Nine Angles. Bands that have featured ONA ideology and symbolism in their albums include Hvile I Kaos, Altar of Perversion, Aosoth and Spear of Longinus.

NSBM artists are a small minority within the genre. While some black metal fans boycott Neo-Nazi artists, others are indifferent or appreciate the music without supporting the musicians. NSBM has been criticized by some prominent and influential black metal artists—including Jon Nödtveidt, Gorgoroth, Dark Funeral, Richard Lederer, Michael Ford, and Arkhon Infaustus. Some liken Nazism to Christianity by arguing that both are authoritarian, collectivist, and a &quot;herd mentality&quot;. Olson writes that the shunning of Nazism by some black-metallers &quot;has nothing to do with notions of a &#x27;universal humanity&#x27; or a rejection of hate&quot; but that Nazism is shunned &quot;because its hatred is too specific and exclusive&quot;.

Partly in reaction to NSBM, a small number of artists began promoting left-wing politics such as anarchism or Marxism, creating a movement known as &quot;Red and anarchist black metal&quot; (RABM). Many artists have a background in anarchist crust punk. Artists labelled RABM include Iskra, Panopticon, Skagos, Storm of Sedition, Not A Cost, and Black Kronstadt. Some others with similar outlook, such as Wolves in the Throne Room, are not overtly political and do not endorse the label.

== Media ==

=== Documentaries on black metal ===
* &quot;666 – At Calling Death&quot; (1993) was a documentary released by Nuclear Blast, which provides an abundance of interviews and perspectives on the meaning of both death and black metal genres from musicians who perform these styles, in light of the Norwegian scene church burnings and murders, which had been occurring around that time. The latter half of the documentary focuses on black metal.
* &quot;Parabellum – The Devil was born in Medellín [English Subtitles] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kUgTN7bfPqk (2016)&quot;
* &quot;svarte alvor&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Satan Rides the Media&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Black Metal&quot; (1998), a Belgian documentary by Marilyn Watelet.
* &quot;Norsk Black Metal&quot; (2003) was aired on Norwegian TV by the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK).
* &quot;&quot; (2005) touches on black metal in the early 1990s, and includes an extensive 25-minute feature on the DVD release.
* &quot;True Norwegian Black Metal&quot; (2007) is a five-part feature from &quot;VICE&quot;. It explores some of the aspects of the lifestyle, beliefs and controversies surrounding former Gorgoroth vocalist Gaahl.
* &quot;Black Metal: A Documentary&quot; (2007), produced by Bill Zebub, explores the world of black metal from the point of view of the artists. There is no narrator and no one outside of black metal takes part in any interview or storytelling.
* &quot;Pure Fucking Mayhem&quot; (2009) tells the story of the black metal band Mayhem and the tragedies surrounding them.
* &quot;Murder Music: A History of Black Metal&quot; (2007)
*&quot;The Misanthrope&quot; (2007) written and directed by Ted &quot;Nocturno Culto&quot; Skjellum from extreme metal duo Darkthrone.
* &quot;Once Upon a Time in Norway&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Black Metal Satanica&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Until the Light Takes Us&quot; (2009) explores black metal&#x27;s origins and subculture, featuring exclusive interviews and including rare footage from the Black Circle&#x27;s early days.
* &quot;Loputon Gehennan Liekki (Eternal Flame of Gehenna)&quot;(2011) Finnish black metal documentary
* &quot;Out of the Black – A Black Metal Documentary&quot; (2012), an examination of the musical and social origins of black metal while exploring the full spectrum of the religious ideology within the scene. Also examines black metal in America and the multiple differences between the American and the Scandinavian scene.
* &quot;One Man Metal&quot; (2012) explores the lifestyle and thoughts of the members of the three one-man bands Xasthur, Leviathan and Striborg.
* &quot;Attention! Black Metal&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Helvete: Historien om norsk black metal&quot; (2020). The history of Norwegian black metal from the early eighties through musical innovation, image building, murder, suicide and church burnings, and international recognition. With more focus on the history of the music and people involved, rather than just the scandals.

=== References in media ===
* A black metal mockumentary &quot;Legalize Murder&quot; was released in 2006.
* Parabellum – The Devil was born in Medellín [English Subtitles] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kUgTN7bfPqk &quot;(2016)&quot;
* The cartoon show &quot;Metalocalypse&quot; is about an extreme metal band called Dethklok, with many references to leading black metal artists on the names of various businesses, such as Fintroll&#x27;s convenience store, Dimmu Burger, Gorgoroth&#x27;s electric wheelchair store, Carpathian Forest High School, Marduk&#x27;s Putt &amp; Stuff, Burzum&#x27;s hot-dogs and Behemoth studios (the man who owns Behemoth studios is also named Mr. Grishnackh). In the episode &quot;Dethdad&quot;, Dethklok travels to Norway to both visit Toki&#x27;s dying father and the original black metal record store, much to the dismay of the band members when they find out the store does not sell any of their music, described by the owner as being &quot;too digital&quot;.
* A Norwegian commercial for a laundry detergent once depicted black metal musicians as part of the advertisement.
* Black metal bands such as 1349, Emperor, Behemoth, Dimmu Borgir, Enslaved and Satyricon have had their videos make appearances on MTV&#x27;s &quot;Headbangers Ball&quot;.
* Comedian Brian Posehn made a visual reference to Norwegian black metal bands in the music video for his comedy song &quot;Metal by Numbers&quot;.
* A KFC commercial screened in Canada (2008) and Australia (2010) featuring a fictional black metal band called Hellvetica. Onstage, the band&#x27;s singer does a fire-eating trick. Once backstage, he takes a bite of the spicy KFC chicken and declares, &quot;Oh man, that is hot&quot;.
* The twenty-first episode of the fourth season of &quot;Bones&quot;, &quot;Mayhem on a Cross&quot;, featured the discovery of a human skeleton at a black metal concert in Norway.
* There are many references to black/extreme metal bands (Bathory, Marduk, Cradle of Filth and Dimmu Borgir) in Åke Edwardson&#x27;s 1999 crime novel &quot;Sun and Shadow&quot; (&quot;Sol och skugga&quot;). The plot involves the music of a fictional Canadian black metal band called Sacrament. As part of the inquiry, Inspector Winter tries to distinguish between black and death metal artists.
*In the UK show &quot;The Inbetweeners&quot; during some scenes in the sixth form common room, a Mayhem poster for the album Ordo ad Chao can be seen.
* A recurring theme in &quot;The IT Crowd&quot; (seasons 1 and 2) is the conversion of a character (Richmond) from executive to pariah through his exposure to Cradle of Filth.
*A black metal act is used to advertise &quot;ZYX Sitruuna&quot;, a Finnish remedy for throat pain.
*Jonas Åkerlund&#x27;s 2018 horror-thriller film, &quot;Lords of Chaos&quot;, based on the 1998 non-fiction book of the same name, centres around a series of crimes that occurred in Oslo, Norway in the early 1990s surrounding the black metal bands Mayhem and Burzum.

== See also ==
* List of black metal bands
* Shrieking
==External links==

== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
*
*
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="0" end="11" title="Black metal" label="Black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465978" start="18" end="25" title="extreme metal" label="extreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="38" end="55" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79" end="90" title="Tempo#Beats per minute" label="fast tempos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94" end="103" title="Screaming (music)#Black metal" label="shrieking"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="135" end="142" title="Electric guitar" label="guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q685431" start="155" end="170" title="tremolo picking" label="tremolo picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507298" start="177" end="182" title="Lo-fi music" label="lo-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561199" start="210" end="224" title="song structure" label="song structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q749230" start="282" end="294" title="corpse paint" label="corpse paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="305" end="314" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q192861" start="318" end="323" title="Venom (band)" label="Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q116972319" start="351" end="361" title="First-wave black metal" label="first wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q804229" start="393" end="404" title="Black Metal (Venom album)" label="Black Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q157201" start="489" end="496" title="Bathory (band)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q647370" start="498" end="511" title="Mercyful Fate" label="Mercyful Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q685190" start="513" end="523" title="Hellhammer" label="Hellhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="528" end="540" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133704" start="637" end="647" title="Parabellum (Colombian band)" label="Parabellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q881957" start="649" end="658" title="Blasphemy (band)" label="Blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176546" start="660" end="669" title="Sarcófago" label="Sarcófago"/>
<link wikidata="Q638161" start="671" end="680" title="Tormentor (band)" label="Tormentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q688874" start="682" end="688" title="Samael (band)" label="Samael"/>
<link wikidata="Q938889" start="693" end="707" title="Rotting Christ" label="Rotting Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="711" end="722" title="Second-wave black metal" label="second wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296521" start="777" end="810" title="early Norwegian black metal scene" label="early Norwegian black metal scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="826" end="832" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="834" end="844" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193172" start="846" end="852" title="Burzum" label="Burzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208417" start="854" end="862" title="Immortal (band)" label="Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q264029" start="864" end="871" title="Emperor (band)" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="873" end="882" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="887" end="896" title="Gorgoroth" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q814482" start="960" end="967" title="Beherit (band)" label="Beherit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499560" start="969" end="977" title="Archgoat" label="Archgoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q629689" start="979" end="995" title="Impaled Nazarene" label="Impaled Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145479" start="1006" end="1016" title="Dissection (band)" label="Dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q331626" start="1018" end="1026" title="Abruptum" label="Abruptum"/>
<link wikidata="Q683775" start="1028" end="1034" title="Marduk (band)" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278412" start="1036" end="1045" title="Nifelheim" label="Nifelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247895" start="1067" end="1078" title="Profanatica" label="Profanatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256240" start="1080" end="1087" title="Demoncy" label="Demoncy"/>
<link wikidata="Q847825" start="1089" end="1112" title="Grand Belial&amp;#x27;s Key" label="Grand Belial&amp;#x27;s Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710878" start="1114" end="1128" title="Judas Iscariot (band)" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959370" start="1139" end="1150" title="Mütiilation" label="Mütiilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423577" start="1152" end="1162" title="Vlad Tepes (band)" label="Vlad Tepes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382642" start="1251" end="1255" title="Sigh (band)" label="Sigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q487479" start="1260" end="1275" title="Cradle of Filth" label="Cradle of Filth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1395" end="1405" title="#Ideology" label="ideologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="1454" end="1466" title="Misanthropy" label="misanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="1519" end="1543" title="anti-Christian sentiment" label="anti-Christian sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="1545" end="1553" title="Satanism" label="Satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189816" start="1558" end="1564" title="Ethnic religion" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="1565" end="1573" title="paganism" label="paganism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1642" end="1657" title="#Church burnings" label="church burnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="1687" end="1695" title="Neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q533914" start="1696" end="1704" title="National Socialist black metal" label="movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373485" start="1825" end="1836" title="Underground music" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181257" start="2087" end="2095" title="Death SS" label="Death SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q647370" start="2097" end="2110" title="Mercyful Fate" label="Mercyful Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="2112" end="2118" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q881957" start="2120" end="2129" title="Blasphemy (band)" label="Blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827865" start="2338" end="2344" title="Treble (sound)" label="trebly"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="2368" end="2378" title="distortion (guitar)" label="distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471452" start="2423" end="2428" title="Palm mute" label="muted"/>
<link wikidata="Q685431" start="2429" end="2444" title="tremolo picking" label="tremolo picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130936" start="2449" end="2460" title="power chord" label="power chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="2484" end="2494" title="Consonance and dissonance" label="dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="2515" end="2521" title="Musical scale" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q189962" start="2523" end="2532" title="Interval (music)" label="intervals"/>
<link wikidata="Q623939" start="2588" end="2595" title="tritone" label="tritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446979" start="2627" end="2638" title="Guitar solo" label="Guitar solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818058" start="2648" end="2662" title="guitar tunings" label="guitar tunings"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="2692" end="2703" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207349" start="2820" end="2834" title="Homophony" label="homophonically"/>
<link wikidata="Q58207" start="2954" end="2966" title="Dimmu Borgir" label="Dimmu Borgir"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="3189" end="3200" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="3211" end="3220" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="3228" end="3236" title="Drum kit" label="drumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697934" start="3267" end="3278" title="Heel-toe technique" label="double-bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q882054" start="3283" end="3293" title="blast beat" label="blast beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q359355" start="3464" end="3487" title="Kjetil-Vidar Haraldstad" label="Kjetil-Vidar Haraldstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q370323" start="3505" end="3522" title="Jan Axel Blomberg" label="Jan Axel Blomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360032" start="3537" end="3549" title="authenticity (philosophy)" label="authenticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q339423" start="3682" end="3688" title="Fenriz" label="Fenriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="3714" end="3724" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561199" start="3947" end="3974" title="Song structure (popular music)" label="conventional song structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q938889" start="4136" end="4150" title="Rotting Christ" label="Rotting Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001169" start="4152" end="4163" title="Necromantia" label="Necromantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="4187" end="4198" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q380318" start="4430" end="4438" title="Quorthon" label="Quorthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157201" start="4442" end="4449" title="Bathory (band)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q335499" start="4451" end="4462" title="Death growl" label="Death growl"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="4479" end="4490" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030234" start="4716" end="4737" title="anti-authoritarianism" label="anti-authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558113" start="4742" end="4760" title="anti-establishment" label="anti-establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="4788" end="4799" title="Theocracy" label="governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="4815" end="4822" title="Satanism" label="Satanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="5046" end="5057" title="Misanthropy" label="Misanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531622" start="5059" end="5077" title="global catastrophe" label="global catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q637536" start="5617" end="5625" title="Arckanum" label="Arckanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q780588" start="5636" end="5641" title="Ulver" label="Ulver"/>
<link wikidata="Q186170" start="5682" end="5692" title="doom metal" label="doom metal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5987" end="5999" title="Authenticity (philosophy)#In music" label="authenticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="6159" end="6165" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="6167" end="6176" title="Gorgoroth" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509682" start="6182" end="6188" title="Watain" label="Watain"/>
<link wikidata="Q504434" start="6375" end="6379" title="Per &amp;quot;Dead&amp;quot; Ohlin" label="Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q552622" start="6381" end="6387" title="Sven Erik Kristiansen" label="Maniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180104" start="6392" end="6401" title="Niklas Kvarforth" label="Kvarforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q622527" start="6417" end="6435" title="Self-harm" label="cutting themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q611126" start="6565" end="6581" title="Cross of St. Peter" label="inverted crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q182186" start="6595" end="6604" title="pentagram" label="pentagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q749230" start="6716" end="6728" title="corpse paint" label="corpse paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q442431" start="7014" end="7021" title="Xerox art" label="xeroxed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193172" start="7385" end="7391" title="Burzum" label="Burzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q644331" start="7405" end="7414" title="Filosofem" label="Filosofem"/>
<link wikidata="Q425848" start="7446" end="7470" title="In the Nightside Eclipse" label="In the Nightside Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q683775" start="7571" end="7577" title="Marduk (band)" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766661" start="7591" end="7604" title="Fuck Me Jesus" label="Fuck Me Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58207" start="7615" end="7627" title="Dimmu Borgir" label="Dimmu Borgir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420083" start="7641" end="7657" title="In Sorte Diaboli" label="In Sorte Diaboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331877" start="8243" end="8263" title="Transilvanian Hunger" label="Transilvanian Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="8273" end="8283" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774859" start="8322" end="8332" title="Terrorizer (magazine)" label="Terrorizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="8373" end="8376" title="DIY" label="DIY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690958" start="8536" end="8549" title="Poseur" label="not committed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257488" start="8691" end="8696" title="Gaahl" label="Gaahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="8994" end="9007" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138029" start="9012" end="9017" title="Coven (band)" label="Coven"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="9111" end="9120" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="9239" end="9248" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q675108" start="9293" end="9307" title="Tom G. Warrior" label="Tom G. Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228418" start="9367" end="9376" title="Discharge (band)" label="Discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="9684" end="9688" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="9694" end="9698" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q804229" start="9833" end="9844" title="Black Metal (Venom album)" label="Black Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211723" start="9885" end="9896" title="speed metal" label="speed metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="9900" end="9912" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q116972319" start="9938" end="9963" title="first wave of black metal" label="first wave of black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="10084" end="10095" title="blasphemous" label="blasphemous"/>
<link wikidata="Q465978" start="10315" end="10328" title="extreme metal" label="extreme metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="10371" end="10382" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188534" start="10384" end="10393" title="grindcore" label="grindcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="10398" end="10410" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q685190" start="10413" end="10423" title="Hellhammer" label="Hellhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="10759" end="10771" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q157201" start="11143" end="11150" title="Bathory (band)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q380318" start="11205" end="11213" title="Quorthon" label="Quorthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q367235" start="11496" end="11528" title="Under the Sign of the Black Mark" label="Under the Sign of the Black Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q43949347" start="11646" end="11661" title="Dayal Patterson" label="Dayal Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q647370" start="11758" end="11771" title="Mercyful Fate" label="Mercyful Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q313818" start="11843" end="11855" title="King Diamond" label="King Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q749230" start="11971" end="11983" title="corpse paint" label="corpse paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q151890" start="12059" end="12066" title="Kreator" label="Kreator"/>
<link wikidata="Q156523" start="12068" end="12073" title="Sodom (band)" label="Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q159497" start="12078" end="12089" title="Destruction (band)" label="Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q548907" start="12119" end="12128" title="Bulldozer (band)" label="Bulldozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181257" start="12133" end="12141" title="Death SS" label="Death SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397606" start="12156" end="12162" title="Sabbat (Japanese band)" label="Sabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133704" start="12183" end="12193" title="Parabellum (Colombian band)" label="Parabellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306470" start="12259" end="12295" title="Metalion" label="Jon &amp;#x27;Metalion&amp;#x27; Kristiansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q309001" start="12414" end="12426" title="Morbid Angel" label="Morbid Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209500" start="12439" end="12445" title="Sabbat (English band)" label="Sabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q239074" start="12595" end="12604" title="Sepultura" label="Sepultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410211" start="12606" end="12613" title="Vulcano (band)" label="Vulcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625051" start="12615" end="12625" title="Holocausto (band)" label="Holocausto"/>
<link wikidata="Q176546" start="12630" end="12639" title="Sarcófago" label="Sarcófago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499184" start="12661" end="12665" title="Root (band)" label="Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060130" start="12667" end="12671" title="Törr" label="Törr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523569" start="12676" end="12696" title="Master&amp;#x27;s Hammer" label="Master&amp;#x27;s Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610715" start="12714" end="12723" title="Grotesque (band)" label="Grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504533" start="12725" end="12734" title="Merciless (band)" label="Merciless"/>
<link wikidata="Q11988881" start="12736" end="12743" title="Mefisto (band)" label="Mefisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q761119" start="12745" end="12751" title="Tiamat (band)" label="Tiamat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030218" start="12756" end="12762" title="Morbid (band)" label="Morbid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755540" start="12799" end="12807" title="I.N.R.I. (Sarcófago album)" label="I.N.R.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q2599472" start="12939" end="12948" title="war metal" label="war metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971931" start="12962" end="12975" title="BrooklynVegan" label="BrooklynVegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q389868" start="13184" end="13187" title="Von (band)" label="Von"/>
<link wikidata="Q938889" start="13214" end="13228" title="Rotting Christ" label="Rotting Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q638161" start="13244" end="13253" title="Tormentor (band)" label="Tormentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3865973" start="13270" end="13284" title="Mortuary Drape" label="Mortuary Drape"/>
<link wikidata="Q142674" start="13299" end="13302" title="Kat (band)" label="Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q688874" start="13318" end="13324" title="Samael (band)" label="Samael"/>
<link wikidata="Q881957" start="13348" end="13357" title="Blasphemy (band)" label="Blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354856" start="13408" end="13428" title="Fallen Angel of Doom" label="Fallen Angel of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q339423" start="13517" end="13523" title="Fenriz" label="Fenriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029572" start="13610" end="13616" title="Ritual (Master&amp;#x27;s Hammer album)" label="Ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q455803" start="14010" end="14019" title="Rock Hard (magazine)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q688874" start="14045" end="14051" title="Samael (band)" label="Samael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569363" start="14065" end="14076" title="Worship Him" label="Worship Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="14130" end="14142" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="14224" end="14230" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q504434" start="14240" end="14244" title="Dead (musician)" label="Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="14390" end="14396" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="14398" end="14408" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193172" start="14410" end="14416" title="Burzum" label="Burzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208417" start="14418" end="14426" title="Immortal (band)" label="Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q264029" start="14428" end="14435" title="Emperor (band)" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="14437" end="14446" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q916688" start="14448" end="14456" title="Enslaved (band)" label="Enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q238822" start="14458" end="14464" title="Thorns (band)" label="Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="14470" end="14479" title="Gorgoroth (band)" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q238822" start="14622" end="14656" title="Snorre Ruch" label="Snorre &amp;#x27;Blackthorn&amp;#x27; Ruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q318871" start="14661" end="14699" title="Euronymous" label="Øystein &amp;#x27;Euronymous&amp;#x27; Aarseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q339423" start="14701" end="14707" title="Fenriz" label="Fenriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q749230" start="14899" end="14911" title="corpse paint" label="corpse paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q386992" start="15296" end="15302" title="Ihsahn" label="Ihsahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690958" start="15568" end="15574" title="poseur" label="poseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q504434" start="15822" end="15848" title="Dead (musician)" label="Per &amp;quot;Dead&amp;quot; Ohlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q370323" start="16005" end="16015" title="Jan Axel Blomberg" label="Hellhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q486396" start="16156" end="16163" title="shotgun" label="shotgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165187" start="16503" end="16527" title="Dawn of the Black Hearts" label="Dawn of the Black Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102922" start="16887" end="16926" title="Necrobutcher" label="Jørn &amp;#x27;Necrobutcher&amp;#x27; Stubberud"/>
<link wikidata="Q208417" start="17209" end="17217" title="Immortal (band)" label="Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q893858" start="17219" end="17228" title="Borknagar" label="Borknagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="17230" end="17239" title="Gorgoroth" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746264" start="17290" end="17295" title="Strid (band)" label="Strid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296521" start="17438" end="17445" title="Helvete (store)" label="Helvete"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="17453" end="17462" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="17512" end="17516" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="17928" end="17952" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q372787" start="17959" end="17988" title="Deathlike Silence Productions" label="Deathlike Silence Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q257558" start="18579" end="18599" title="Fantoft Stave Church" label="Fantoft Stave Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q207824" start="18616" end="18629" title="Varg Vikernes" label="Varg Vikernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q731246" start="18693" end="18697" title="Aske (album)" label="Aske"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883474" start="18825" end="18844" title="Holmenkollen Chapel" label="Holmenkollen Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12001060" start="18846" end="18859" title="Skjold Church, Rogaland" label="Skjold Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q17577889" start="18865" end="18877" title="Old Åsane Church" label="Åsane Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q909773" start="19062" end="19087" title="De Mysteriis Dom Sathanas" label="De Mysteriis Dom Sathanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="19158" end="19175" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Nidaros Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q554527" start="19225" end="19230" title="Faust (musician)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q457595" start="19232" end="19238" title="Samoth" label="Samoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q747103" start="19263" end="19281" title="Jørn Inge Tunsberg" label="Jørn Inge Tunsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389044" start="19286" end="19300" title="Hades Almighty" label="Hades Almighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110553" start="19553" end="19575" title="Christianity in Norway" label="Christianity in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="19637" end="19643" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q842402" start="19649" end="19661" title="Hindu temple" label="Hindu temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411239" start="19877" end="19885" title="Infernus" label="Infernus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257488" start="19890" end="19895" title="Gaahl" label="Gaahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="19899" end="19908" title="Gorgoroth" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102922" start="20070" end="20082" title="Necrobutcher" label="Necrobutcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="20087" end="20101" title="Kjetil Manheim" label="Kjetil Manheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q306080" start="20116" end="20122" title="Abbath" label="Abbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509682" start="20301" end="20307" title="Watain" label="Watain"/>
<link wikidata="Q870114" start="21340" end="21359" title="electroshock weapon" label="electroshock weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102922" start="21837" end="21849" title="Necrobutcher" label="Necrobutcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357120" start="23338" end="23344" title="parole" label="parole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382642" start="23398" end="23402" title="Sigh (band)" label="Sigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435361" start="23511" end="23523" title="Scorn Defeat" label="Scorn Defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145479" start="23752" end="23762" title="Dissection (band)" label="Dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q331626" start="23764" end="23772" title="Abruptum" label="Abruptum"/>
<link wikidata="Q683775" start="23774" end="23780" title="Marduk (band)" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278412" start="23786" end="23795" title="Nifelheim" label="Nifelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q188534" start="23908" end="23917" title="grindcore" label="grindcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q814482" start="23933" end="23940" title="Beherit (band)" label="Beherit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499560" start="23942" end="23950" title="Archgoat" label="Archgoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q629689" start="23955" end="23971" title="Impaled Nazarene" label="Impaled Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q455803" start="24029" end="24038" title="Rock Hard (magazine)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256240" start="24130" end="24137" title="Demoncy" label="Demoncy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247895" start="24142" end="24153" title="Profanatica" label="Profanatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387696" start="24369" end="24384" title="Live in Leipzig" label="Live in Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q942165" start="24705" end="24714" title="Graveland" label="Graveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q272260" start="24719" end="24727" title="Behemoth (band)" label="Behemoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820559" start="24781" end="24799" title="Les Légions Noires" label="Les Légions Noires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959370" start="24839" end="24850" title="Mütiilation" label="Mütiilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423577" start="24852" end="24862" title="Vlad Tepes (band)" label="Vlad Tepes"/>
<link wikidata="Q489338" start="24923" end="24936" title="Ancient Rites" label="Ancient Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q974147" start="24941" end="24950" title="Enthroned" label="Enthroned"/>
<link wikidata="Q847825" start="24981" end="25004" title="Grand Belial&amp;#x27;s Key" label="Grand Belial&amp;#x27;s Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710878" start="25009" end="25023" title="Judas Iscariot (band)" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="25091" end="25098" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q690768" start="25136" end="25147" title="black magic" label="black magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="25152" end="25160" title="Satanism" label="Satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q487479" start="25206" end="25221" title="Cradle of Filth" label="Cradle of Filth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753154" start="25332" end="25364" title="The Principle of Evil Made Flesh" label="The Principle of Evil Made Flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q178145" start="25428" end="25440" title="gothic metal" label="gothic metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465978" start="25532" end="25545" title="extreme metal" label="extreme metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="25575" end="25583" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q503157" start="26086" end="26096" title="Dani Filth" label="Dani Filth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43949347" start="26428" end="26443" title="Dayal Patterson" label="Dayal Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309433" start="26610" end="26621" title="selling out" label="selling out"/>
<link wikidata="Q327310" start="26678" end="26684" title="Absurd (band)" label="Absurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q274401" start="27080" end="27083" title="Oi!" label="Oi!"/>
<link wikidata="Q828181" start="27088" end="27110" title="Rock Against Communism" label="Rock Against Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211573" start="27190" end="27201" title="garage punk" label="garage punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720533" start="27266" end="27290" title="Alexander von Meilenwald" label="Alexander von Meilenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q884942" start="27308" end="27316" title="Nagelfar" label="Nagelfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q569486" start="27399" end="27407" title="Desaster" label="Desaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q65373" start="27455" end="27463" title="Tha-Norr" label="Tha-Norr"/>
<link wikidata="Q75708" start="27571" end="27580" title="Katharsis (band)" label="Katharsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43379" start="27916" end="27951" title="Alan Averill" label="Alan &amp;#x27;Nemtheanga&amp;#x27; Averill"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="28217" end="28225" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742283" start="28243" end="28255" title="Malcolm Dome" label="Malcolm Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="28501" end="28512" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="28537" end="28546" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q58207" start="28657" end="28669" title="Dimmu Borgir" label="Dimmu Borgir"/>
<link wikidata="Q489320" start="28671" end="28678" title="Ancient (band)" label="Ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143750" start="28680" end="28701" title="The Kovenant" label="Covenant/The Kovenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309433" start="28739" end="28747" title="Selling out" label="sold out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309433" start="29001" end="29009" title="selling out" label="sold out"/>
<link wikidata="Q533137" start="29283" end="29296" title="Jon Nödtveidt" label="Jon Nödtveidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145479" start="29300" end="29310" title="Dissection (band)" label="Dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712100" start="29322" end="29351" title="Temple of the Black Light" label="Misanthropic Luciferian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q50845709" start="29425" end="29456" title="Keillers Park murder" label="shooting dead a 37-year-old man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530667" start="29766" end="29773" title="Shining (Swedish band)" label="Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129211" start="29923" end="29941" title="Hvis lyset tar oss" label="Hvis lyset tar oss"/>
<link wikidata="Q644331" start="29958" end="29967" title="Filosofem" label="Filosofem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495218" start="30829" end="30837" title="Ondskapt" label="Ondskapt"/>
<link wikidata="Q674236" start="30851" end="30858" title="Ofermod" label="Ofermod"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="31130" end="31139" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620805" start="31341" end="31349" title="Theism" label="Theistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="31351" end="31358" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566800" start="31723" end="31731" title="Reinkaos" label="Reinkaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781430" start="31758" end="31773" title="magical formula" label="magical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="32182" end="32189" title="Carl Jung" label="Jungian"/>
<link wikidata="Q874358" start="32321" end="32332" title="Allerseelen (band)" label="Allerseelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q427570" start="32358" end="32372" title="Lords of Chaos (book)" label="Lords of Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q533914" start="32686" end="32716" title="National Socialist black metal" label="National Socialist black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q327310" start="32748" end="32754" title="Absurd (band)" label="Absurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690958" start="33100" end="33106" title="poseur" label="poseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="33489" end="33495" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79815" start="33573" end="33581" title="Mulhouse" label="Mulhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q570552" start="33625" end="33632" title="Antaeus (band)" label="Antaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q903033" start="33988" end="34004" title="Deathspell Omega" label="Deathspell Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q847825" start="34185" end="34208" title="Grand Belial&amp;#x27;s Key" label="Grand Belial&amp;#x27;s Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710878" start="34213" end="34227" title="Judas Iscariot (band)" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828346" start="34387" end="34400" title="Averse Sefira" label="Averse Sefira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348912" start="34699" end="34706" title="Xasthur" label="Xasthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q656860" start="34711" end="34720" title="Leviathan (band)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856721" start="34822" end="34834" title="Nachtmystium" label="Nachtmystium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786394" start="34836" end="34844" title="Krallice" label="Krallice"/>
<link wikidata="Q763887" start="34846" end="34871" title="Wolves in the Throne Room" label="Wolves in the Throne Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q825769" start="34894" end="34904" title="crust punk" label="crust punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="34919" end="34941" title="environmental movement" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602155" start="34948" end="34955" title="Liturgy (band)" label="Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="35151" end="35158" title="Walt Whitman" label="Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q209137" start="35259" end="35268" title="post-rock" label="post-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q272167" start="35273" end="35283" title="shoegazing" label="shoegazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q390300" start="35344" end="35352" title="Agalloch" label="Agalloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201024" start="35652" end="35665" title="Deströyer 666" label="Deströyer 666"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621572" start="35676" end="35702" title="Hobbs&amp;#x27; Angel of Death" label="Hobbs&amp;#x27; Angel of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538574" start="35725" end="35744" title="Gospel of the Horns" label="Gospel of the Horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q204480" start="35935" end="35944" title="Melechesh" label="Melechesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="35959" end="35968" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q484179" start="36161" end="36171" title="folk metal" label="folk metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q204480" start="36205" end="36225" title="The Siege of Lachish" label="The Siege of Lachish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512125" start="36313" end="36319" title="Arallu" label="Arallu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="36510" end="36521" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324153" start="36565" end="36577" title="Criticism of Islam" label="anti-Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q565005" start="36582" end="36596" title="Antireligion" label="anti-religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="36895" end="36907" title="suicide bomb" label="suicide bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="36919" end="36927" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830979" start="37410" end="37414" title="Ayat (band)" label="Ayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334010" start="37663" end="37668" title="Taake" label="Taake"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="37943" end="37953" title="Minimalism" label="minimalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507298" start="38029" end="38041" title="Lo-fi music" label="low fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924413" start="38091" end="38101" title="Blake Judd" label="Blake Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856721" start="38105" end="38117" title="Nachtmystium" label="Nachtmystium"/>
<link wikidata="Q238822" start="38236" end="38242" title="Thorns (band)" label="Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q247696" start="39204" end="39213" title="Summoning (band)" label="Summoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q390300" start="39215" end="39223" title="Agalloch" label="Agalloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q763887" start="39228" end="39253" title="Wolves in the Throne Room" label="Wolves in the Throne Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q186170" start="39383" end="39393" title="doom metal" label="doom metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q807287" start="39798" end="39807" title="Barathrum" label="Barathrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437316" start="39809" end="39823" title="Forgotten Tomb" label="Forgotten Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889916" start="39825" end="39839" title="Woods of Ypres" label="Woods of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252478" start="39841" end="39852" title="Deinonychus (band)" label="Deinonychus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530667" start="39854" end="39861" title="Shining (Swedish band)" label="Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118832" start="39863" end="39868" title="Nortt" label="Nortt"/>
<link wikidata="Q565380" start="39870" end="39879" title="Bethlehem (German band)" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q515273" start="39887" end="39896" title="Katatonia" label="Katatonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q761119" start="39898" end="39904" title="Tiamat (band)" label="Tiamat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737770" start="39906" end="39914" title="Dolorian" label="Dolorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q595240" start="39920" end="39932" title="October Tide" label="October Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476817" start="40010" end="40021" title="Ophthalamia" label="Ophthalamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q515273" start="40023" end="40032" title="Katatonia" label="Katatonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q565380" start="40034" end="40043" title="Bethlehem (German band)" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437316" start="40045" end="40059" title="Forgotten Tomb" label="Forgotten Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530667" start="40064" end="40071" title="Shining (Swedish band)" label="Shining"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40200" end="40211" title="#Second wave" label="second wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="40294" end="40304" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q622527" start="40306" end="40315" title="self-harm" label="self-harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="40317" end="40328" title="misanthropy" label="misanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="40330" end="40337" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348912" start="40870" end="40877" title="Xasthur" label="Xasthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q656860" start="40879" end="40888" title="Leviathan (musical project)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746264" start="40890" end="40895" title="Strid (band)" label="Strid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733776" start="40897" end="40905" title="Silencer (band)" label="Silencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824505" start="40937" end="40946" title="Lifelover" label="Lifelover"/>
<link wikidata="Q602447" start="40951" end="40965" title="I Shalt Become" label="I Shalt Become"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="41089" end="41098" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="41103" end="41116" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q160111" start="41175" end="41192" title="Carpathian Forest" label="Carpathian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794838" start="41194" end="41203" title="Kvelertak" label="Kvelertak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640550" start="41205" end="41210" title="Vreid" label="Vreid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740665" start="41216" end="41221" title="Khold" label="Khold"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="41237" end="41246" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856721" start="41248" end="41260" title="Nachtmystium" label="Nachtmystium"/>
<link wikidata="Q22121842" start="41262" end="41269" title="Nidingr (band)" label="Nidingr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138469" start="41271" end="41276" title="Craft (band)" label="Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473629" start="41282" end="41287" title="Sarke" label="Sarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q825769" start="41345" end="41355" title="Crust punk" label="Crust punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618794" start="41372" end="41380" title="Antisect" label="Antisect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210985" start="41382" end="41391" title="Sacrilege (band)" label="Sacrilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618572" start="41396" end="41407" title="Anti System" label="Anti System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41433" end="41450" title="#First wave" label="early black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192861" start="41462" end="41467" title="Venom (band)" label="Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q685190" start="41469" end="41479" title="Hellhammer" label="Hellhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="41485" end="41497" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q460542" start="41505" end="41511" title="Amebix" label="Amebix"/>
<link wikidata="Q717901" start="41587" end="41593" title="Conrad Lant" label="Cronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q157201" start="41673" end="41680" title="Bathory (band)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41915" end="41938" title="#Second wave" label="second wave black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492413" start="42068" end="42078" title="Gallhammer" label="Gallhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058534" start="42244" end="42264" title="Young and in the Way" label="Young and in the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="42358" end="42368" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186170" start="42713" end="42723" title="doom metal" label="doom metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="42757" end="42768" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562090" start="42877" end="42898" title="The Ruins of Beverast" label="The Ruins of Beverast"/>
<link wikidata="Q28000947" start="42900" end="42906" title="Bölzer" label="Bölzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q719720" start="42908" end="42923" title="Necros Christos" label="Necros Christos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304954" start="42944" end="42965" title="Dragged into Sunlight" label="Dragged into Sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23892376" start="42989" end="42997" title="Soulburn" label="Soulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q108915836" start="42999" end="43008" title="Kim Kelly (journalist)" label="Kim Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q249838" start="43026" end="43030" title="Vice (magazine)" label="Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="43244" end="43255" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q685431" start="43359" end="43374" title="alternate picking" label="tremolo picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="43394" end="43401" title="Satanism" label="Satanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q749230" start="43535" end="43547" title="corpse paint" label="corpse paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q335499" start="43642" end="43653" title="death growl" label="death growl"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="43666" end="43671" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q589580" start="43749" end="43758" title="Belphegor (band)" label="Belphegor"/>
<link wikidata="Q272260" start="43760" end="43768" title="Behemoth (band)" label="Behemoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q417451" start="43770" end="43779" title="Akercocke" label="Akercocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888496" start="43785" end="43796" title="Sacramentum (band)" label="Sacramentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q465978" start="43940" end="43953" title="extreme metal" label="extreme metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="44067" end="44078" title="romanticism" label="romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145479" start="44246" end="44256" title="Dissection (band)" label="Dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888496" start="44258" end="44269" title="Sacramentum (band)" label="Sacramentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122398" start="44271" end="44278" title="Naglfar (band)" label="Naglfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q616074" start="44280" end="44293" title="God Dethroned" label="God Dethroned"/>
<link wikidata="Q18815101" start="44295" end="44299" title="Dawn (Swedish band)" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q465220" start="44301" end="44311" title="Unanimated" label="Unanimated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968777" start="44313" end="44323" title="Thulcandra (band)" label="Thulcandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q558627" start="44325" end="44338" title="Skeletonwitch" label="Skeletonwitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038609" start="44343" end="44355" title="Cardinal Sin (band)" label="Cardinal Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q455803" start="44532" end="44541" title="Rock Hard (magazine)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q156523" start="44695" end="44700" title="Sodom (band)" label="Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q830761" start="44702" end="44711" title="Possessed (band)" label="Possessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q676620" start="44713" end="44720" title="Autopsy (band)" label="Autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176546" start="44722" end="44731" title="Sarcófago" label="Sarcófago"/>
<link wikidata="Q239074" start="44751" end="44760" title="Sepultura" label="Sepultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853330" start="44810" end="44819" title="Repulsion (band)" label="Repulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q881957" start="44845" end="44854" title="Blasphemy (band)" label="Blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499560" start="44856" end="44864" title="Archgoat" label="Archgoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007139" start="44866" end="44873" title="Impiety (band)" label="Impiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q830536" start="44879" end="44894" title="Bestial Warlust" label="Bestial Warlust"/>
<link wikidata="Q188534" start="45003" end="45012" title="grindcore" label="grindcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q483140" start="45036" end="45050" title="Anaal Nathrakh" label="Anaal Nathrakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q938889" start="45061" end="45075" title="Rotting Christ" label="Rotting Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="45219" end="45231" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465978" start="45278" end="45291" title="extreme metal" label="extreme metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192861" start="45326" end="45331" title="Venom (band)" label="Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q156523" start="45333" end="45338" title="Sodom (band)" label="Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q176546" start="45344" end="45353" title="Sarcófago" label="Sarcófago"/>
<link wikidata="Q774240" start="45377" end="45386" title="Aura Noir" label="Aura Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298462" start="45388" end="45396" title="Witchery" label="Witchery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153560" start="45398" end="45408" title="Black Fast (band)" label="Black Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201024" start="45424" end="45437" title="Deströyer 666" label="Deströyer 666"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="45583" end="45593" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="45704" end="45719" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="45721" end="45735" title="Norse religion" label="Norse paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="45745" end="45755" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050752" start="45776" end="45793" title="Nordic folk music" label="Nordic folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429330" start="46112" end="46125" title="Negură Bunget" label="Negură Bunget"/>
<link wikidata="Q928093" start="46127" end="46133" title="Windir" label="Windir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345756" start="46135" end="46145" title="Primordial (band)" label="Primordial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648622" start="46147" end="46162" title="In the Woods..." label="In the Woods..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1141894" start="46164" end="46172" title="Cruachan (band)" label="Cruachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q157201" start="46178" end="46185" title="Bathory (band)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q804532" start="46209" end="46225" title="Blood Fire Death" label="Blood Fire Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q570720" start="46249" end="46260" title="Hammerheart" label="Hammerheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="46425" end="46441" title="industrial music" label="industrial music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654953" start="46443" end="46451" title="Mysticum" label="Mysticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271568" start="46500" end="46503" title="Dødheimsgard" label="DHG"/>
<link wikidata="Q238822" start="46520" end="46526" title="Thorns (band)" label="Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q632229" start="46543" end="46556" title="Blut Aus Nord" label="Blut Aus Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905563" start="46571" end="46581" title="Blacklodge" label="Blacklodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q688874" start="46710" end="46716" title="Samael (band)" label="Samael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715106" start="46718" end="46739" title="The Axis of Perdition" label="The Axis of Perdition"/>
<link wikidata="Q323061" start="46741" end="46747" title="Aborym" label="Aborym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591572" start="46753" end="46766" title="...And Oceans" label="...And Oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143750" start="46781" end="46793" title="The Kovenant" label="The Kovenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q376651" start="46795" end="46802" title="Mortiis" label="Mortiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q780588" start="46807" end="46812" title="Ulver" label="Ulver"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="46959" end="46972" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217099" start="47125" end="47131" title="Myrkur" label="Myrkur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517060" start="47133" end="47139" title="Alcest" label="Alcest"/>
<link wikidata="Q48700324" start="47141" end="47154" title="Bosse-de-Nage" label="Bosse-de-Nage"/>
<link wikidata="Q272167" start="47408" end="47418" title="shoegazing" label="shoegazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245804" start="47456" end="47466" title="Deafheaven" label="Deafheaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517060" start="47468" end="47474" title="Alcest" label="Alcest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917429" start="47476" end="47481" title="Vaura" label="Vaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991928" start="47483" end="47492" title="Amesoeurs" label="Amesoeurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q48700324" start="47494" end="47507" title="Bosse-de-Nage" label="Bosse-de-Nage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056204" start="47509" end="47520" title="Oathbreaker (band)" label="Oathbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442949" start="47526" end="47529" title="Fen (band)" label="Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="47642" end="47653" title="psychedelic music" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885754" start="47685" end="47699" title="Oranssi Pazuzu" label="Oranssi Pazuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856721" start="47701" end="47713" title="Nachtmystium" label="Nachtmystium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245804" start="47715" end="47725" title="Deafheaven" label="Deafheaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145048" start="47727" end="47730" title="Woe (band)" label="Woe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991928" start="47732" end="47741" title="Amesoeurs" label="Amesoeurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648622" start="47747" end="47762" title="In the Woods..." label="In the Woods..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1507298" start="47924" end="47929" title="lo-fi music" label="lo-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="48185" end="48193" title="dystopic" label="dystopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="48198" end="48210" title="Minimalism" label="minimalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q660566" start="48250" end="48257" title="Ildjarn" label="Ildjarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="48294" end="48303" title="Gorgoroth" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="48308" end="48318" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="48416" end="48425" title="Symphony" label="symphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="48430" end="48439" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="48538" end="48543" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q264029" start="48660" end="48667" title="Emperor (band)" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320728" start="48669" end="48674" title="Troll (band)" label="Troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q58207" start="48676" end="48688" title="Dimmu Borgir" label="Dimmu Borgir"/>
<link wikidata="Q804571" start="48693" end="48703" title="Bal Sagoth" label="Bal Sagoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="48817" end="48840" title="anti-Christian sentiment" label="opposed to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359138" start="48860" end="48883" title="Organized religion" label="institutional religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324153" start="48885" end="48890" title="Criticism of Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741215" start="48895" end="48902" title="Criticism of Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="48931" end="48940" title="Satanism" label="Satanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="49170" end="49182" title="Misanthropy" label="misanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="49403" end="49424" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q775858" start="49426" end="49441" title="humanitarianism" label="humanitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="49443" end="49454" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="49456" end="49469" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q763887" start="49505" end="49530" title="Wolves in the Throne Room" label="Wolves in the Throne Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="49841" end="49852" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="49885" end="49905" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096083" start="49920" end="49928" title="Sam Dunn" label="Sam Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="50058" end="50071" title="Individualism" label="Individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q339423" start="50119" end="50125" title="Fenriz" label="Fenriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="50613" end="50631" title="Transcendentalism" label="transcendentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373485" start="51133" end="51144" title="Underground music" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q647370" start="51504" end="51517" title="Mercyful Fate" label="Mercyful Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37087" start="51529" end="51544" title="Church of Satan" label="Church of Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313818" start="51552" end="51564" title="King Diamond" label="King Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928669" start="51571" end="51587" title="Michael Moynihan (journalist)" label="Michael Moynihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690958" start="51683" end="51689" title="poseur" label="poseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920937" start="51717" end="51728" title="shock value" label="shock value"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="51839" end="51852" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q318871" start="51853" end="51863" title="Euronymous" label="Euronymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478965" start="51985" end="52002" title="theistic Satanism" label="theistic Satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411239" start="52661" end="52669" title="Infernus" label="Infernus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919860" start="52671" end="52677" title="Daniel Rostén" label="Arioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343920" start="52679" end="52688" title="Nornagest" label="Nornagest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52847" end="52860" title="Black Funeral" label="Black Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q570552" start="52872" end="52879" title="Antaeus (band)" label="Antaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q370323" start="52978" end="52995" title="Jan Axel Blomberg" label="Jan Axel Blomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067783" start="52997" end="53013" title="Sigurd Wongraven" label="Sigurd Wongraven"/>
<link wikidata="Q380318" start="53682" end="53690" title="Quorthon" label="Quorthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q367235" start="53818" end="53850" title="Under the Sign of the Black Mark" label="Under the Sign of the Black Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q804532" start="53867" end="53883" title="Blood Fire Death" label="Blood Fire Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q256223" start="54107" end="54124" title="LaVeyan Satanism" label="LaVeyan Satanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257488" start="54153" end="54158" title="Gaahl" label="Gaahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="54184" end="54189" title="Old Norse religion" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="54190" end="54196" title="Shamanism" label="Shaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="54625" end="54629" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="54666" end="54679" title="God in Christianity" label="Christian God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035310" start="54783" end="54796" title="Carach Angren" label="Carach Angren"/>
<link wikidata="Q916688" start="54801" end="54809" title="Enslaved (band)" label="Enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561240" start="55017" end="55030" title="Hellig Usvart" label="Hellig Usvart"/>
<link wikidata="Q915366" start="55065" end="55070" title="Horde (band)" label="Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q157679" start="55297" end="55305" title="Antestor" label="Antestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123016" start="55696" end="55711" title="Jayson Sherlock" label="Jayson Sherlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140070" start="55920" end="55937" title="Crimson Moonlight" label="Crimson Moonlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="56141" end="56157" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247407" start="56174" end="56182" title="Botanist (band)" label="Botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q763887" start="56187" end="56212" title="Wolves in the Throne Room" label="Wolves in the Throne Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772574" start="56249" end="56273" title="radical environmentalism" label="radical environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q386992" start="56720" end="56726" title="Ihsahn" label="Ihsahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="57037" end="57045" title="Neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="57049" end="57067" title="far-right politics" label="far-right politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q285441" start="57562" end="57569" title="Heathenry (new religious movement)" label="Odalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359326" start="57728" end="57748" title="Order of Nine Angles" label="Order of Nine Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q533137" start="58168" end="58181" title="Jon Nödtveidt" label="Jon Nödtveidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="58183" end="58192" title="Gorgoroth" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834192" start="58194" end="58206" title="Dark Funeral" label="Dark Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741803" start="58208" end="58223" title="Richard Lederer (musician)" label="Richard Lederer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523018" start="58243" end="58259" title="Arkhon Infaustus" label="Arkhon Infaustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="58320" end="58333" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="58335" end="58347" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372908" start="58361" end="58375" title="herd mentality" label="herd mentality"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="58710" end="58728" title="left-wing politics" label="left-wing politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="58737" end="58746" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="58750" end="58757" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q825769" start="58882" end="58892" title="crust punk" label="crust punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839458" start="58931" end="58941" title="Panopticon (band)" label="Panopticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q158886" start="59253" end="59266" title="Nuclear Blast" label="Nuclear Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765687" start="59754" end="59775" title="Satan rir Media" label="Satan Rides the Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q190238" start="59937" end="59971" title="Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847502" start="60116" end="60142" title="True Norwegian Black Metal (documentary)" label="True Norwegian Black Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q249838" start="60190" end="60194" title="Vice (magazine)" label="VICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257488" start="60316" end="60321" title="Gaahl" label="Gaahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640012" start="60384" end="60394" title="Bill Zebub" label="Bill Zebub"/>
<link wikidata="" start="60701" end="60739" title="Murder Music: A History of Black Metal" label="Murder Music: A History of Black Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q438518" start="60813" end="60852" title="Nocturno Culto" label="Ted &amp;quot;Nocturno Culto&amp;quot; Skjellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="60876" end="60886" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575287" start="60986" end="61010" title="Until the Light Takes Us" label="Until the Light Takes Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348912" start="61715" end="61722" title="Xasthur" label="Xasthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q656860" start="61724" end="61733" title="Leviathan (band)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623570" start="61738" end="61746" title="Striborg" label="Striborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="62168" end="62180" title="mockumentary" label="mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994052" start="62385" end="62398" title="Metalocalypse" label="Metalocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201201" start="62443" end="62451" title="Dethklok" label="Dethklok"/>
<link wikidata="Q185112" start="63262" end="63266" title="1349 (band)" label="1349"/>
<link wikidata="Q264029" start="63268" end="63275" title="Emperor (band)" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q272260" start="63277" end="63285" title="Behemoth (band)" label="Behemoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q58207" start="63287" end="63299" title="Dimmu Borgir" label="Dimmu Borgir"/>
<link wikidata="Q916688" start="63301" end="63309" title="Enslaved (band)" label="Enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="63314" end="63323" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="63366" end="63369" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q279329" start="63383" end="63399" title="Headbangers Ball" label="Headbangers Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q912938" start="63418" end="63430" title="Brian Posehn" label="Brian Posehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q207803" start="63898" end="63903" title="Bones (TV series)" label="Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q157201" start="64079" end="64086" title="Bathory (band)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q683775" start="64088" end="64094" title="Marduk (band)" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q487479" start="64096" end="64111" title="Cradle of Filth" label="Cradle of Filth"/>
<link wikidata="Q58207" start="64116" end="64128" title="Dimmu Borgir" label="Dimmu Borgir"/>
<link wikidata="Q270879" start="64133" end="64146" title="Åke Edwardson" label="Åke Edwardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q978011" start="64438" end="64454" title="The Inbetweeners" label="The Inbetweeners"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="64513" end="64519" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q651764" start="64541" end="64553" title="Ordo Ad Chao" label="Ordo ad Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q239672" start="64596" end="64608" title="The IT Crowd" label="The IT Crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q487479" start="64726" end="64741" title="Cradle of Filth" label="Cradle of Filth"/>
<link wikidata="Q455370" start="64844" end="64858" title="Jonas Åkerlund" label="Jonas Åkerlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q30765956" start="64893" end="64919" title="Lords of Chaos (film)" label="&amp;quot;Lords of Chaos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q427570" start="64951" end="64972" title="Lords of Chaos (book)" label="book of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="65025" end="65029" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800998" start="65128" end="65153" title="List of black metal bands" label="List of black metal bands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65156" end="65165" title="Screaming (music)#Black metal" label="Shrieking"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4875" wikidata="Q4913780" url="?curid=4875" title="Bin Laden (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Osama bin Laden]] (1957–2011) was a Saudi-born terrorist and the co-founder of al-Qaeda.

bin Laden or Bin Laden may also refer to:

==People==
*Abdallah bin Laden (born 1976), Saudi businessman and son of Osama bin Laden
*Ashin Wirathu, Burmese Buddhist monk labeled &quot;Burmese Bin Laden&quot; for religious intolerance towards Muslims
*Bakr bin Laden, Saudi businessman and half-brother of Osama bin Laden
*Hamza bin Laden (1989 – 2019), Saudi al-Qaeda figure and son of Osama bin Laden
*MC Bin Laden (born 1994), Brazilian singer and songwriter
*Mohammed bin Awad bin Laden (1908–1967), Saudi businessman who amassed the bin Laden family fortune, father of Osama bin Laden
*Omar bin Laden (born 1981), Saudi son of Osama bin Laden
*Saad bin Laden (1979–2009), Saudi al-Qaeda figure and son of Osama bin Laden
*Salem bin Laden (1946–1988), Saudi former head of the bin Laden family and brother of Osama bin Laden
*Tarek bin Laden (born 1947), Saudi businessman and half-brother of Osama bin Laden
*Wafah Dufour (née bin Laden, born 1975), American model and niece of Osama bin Laden
*Yeslam bin Ladin (born 1950), Swiss businessman and the half-brother of Al-Qaeda leader
*Tom Adam alias Bin Laden, former Central African warlord

==Other uses==
*Osama bin Laden (elephant), an elephant that killed at least 27 people in India from 2004 to 2006
*&quot;Bin Laden&quot; (song), a 2005 hip hop song by Immortal Technique and Mos Def
*bin Laden, a nickname for the 500 euro note
*&quot;Tere Bin Laden&quot;, a 2010 Indian satirical film about the terrorist
**&quot;Tere Bin Laden: Dead or Alive&quot;, a 2016 sequel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4913780" start="0" end="19" title="Bin Laden (disambiguation)" label="[[Osama bin Laden]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913780" start="92" end="101" title="Bin Laden (disambiguation)" label="bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913780" start="105" end="114" title="Bin Laden (disambiguation)" label="Bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821441" start="147" end="165" title="Abdallah bin Laden" label="Abdallah bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13076794" start="225" end="238" title="Ashin Wirathu" label="Ashin Wirathu"/>
<link wikidata="Q428820" start="343" end="357" title="Bakr bin Laden" label="Bakr bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126626" start="414" end="429" title="Hamza bin Laden" label="Hamza bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25439522" start="495" end="507" title="MC Bin Laden" label="MC Bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951898" start="554" end="581" title="Mohammed bin Awad bin Laden" label="Mohammed bin Awad bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196656" start="682" end="696" title="Omar bin Laden" label="Omar bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576276" start="740" end="754" title="Saad bin Laden" label="Saad bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139461" start="818" end="833" title="Salem bin Laden" label="Salem bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q359467" start="921" end="936" title="Tarek bin Laden" label="Tarek bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959413" start="1005" end="1017" title="Wafah Dufour" label="Wafah Dufour"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052924" start="1091" end="1107" title="Yeslam bin Ladin" label="Yeslam bin Ladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q121928018" start="1180" end="1188" title="Tom Adam" label="Tom Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10612826" start="1254" end="1280" title="Osama bin Laden (elephant)" label="Osama bin Laden (elephant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913781" start="1353" end="1381" title="Bin Laden (song)" label="&amp;quot;Bin Laden&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503713" start="1468" end="1481" title="500 euro note" label="500 euro note"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701699" start="1489" end="1503" title="Tere Bin Laden" label="Tere Bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1568" end="1597" title="Tere Bin Laden: Dead or Alive" label="Tere Bin Laden: Dead or Alive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4876" wikidata="Q178824" url="?curid=4876" title="Blizzard Entertainment">
<text>Blizzard Entertainment, Inc. is an American video game developer and publisher based in Irvine, California, and a subsidiary of Activision Blizzard. Originally founded in 1991, the company is best known for producing the highly influential massively multiplayer online role-playing game &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; (2004) as well as the multi million-selling video game franchises &quot;Diablo,&quot; &quot;StarCraft&quot;, and &quot;Overwatch&quot;. The company also operates Battle.net, an online gaming service.

Founded as Silicon &amp; Synapse, Inc. by three graduates of the University of California, Los Angeles: Michael Morhaime, Frank Pearce and Allen Adham, the company began development of their own software in 1993, with games like &quot;Rock n&#x27; Roll Racing&quot; and &quot;The Lost Vikings&quot;, and changed its name to Chaos Studios, Inc. the same year, then to Blizzard Entertainment after being acquired by distributor Davidson &amp; Associates in 1994; that year, the company released &quot;&quot;, which would receive numerous sequels and led to the highly popular &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;. By the end of the decade, Blizzard also found success with the action role-playing game &quot;Diablo&quot; (1997) and strategy game &quot;StarCraft&quot; (1998). The company became part of Vivendi Games in 1998, which would then merge with Activision in 2008, culminating in the inclusion of the Blizzard brand name in the title of the resulting holding company; Activision Blizzard became completely independent from Vivendi in 2013. Microsoft acquired Activision Blizzard in 2023, maintaining that the company will continue to operate as a separate business, while part of the larger Microsoft Gaming division; Blizzard Entertainment retains its function as the publisher of games developed by their studios.

Since 2005, Blizzard Entertainment has hosted annual gaming conventions for fans to meet and to promote their games, called BlizzCon, as well as a number of global events outside the United States. In the 2010s and 2020s, Blizzard has continued development of expansion packs for &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; (the most recent being 2024&#x27;s &quot;The War Within&quot;), while also releasing &quot;&quot; (2017), &quot;Diablo III&quot; (2012) and &quot;Diablo IV&quot; (2023), as well as new material most notably the online multiplayer games &quot;Hearthstone&quot;, a collectible card game; &quot;Heroes of the Storm&quot;, a battle arena game; and &quot;Overwatch&quot; and &quot;Overwatch 2&quot;, which are first-person shooters. Since 2018, the company&#x27;s reputation has suffered from a series of poorly received games, controversies involving players and staff, and allegations of sexual harassment and other misconduct against leading Blizzard employees.

== History ==
=== Founding (1991–1994) ===

Blizzard Entertainment was founded by Michael Morhaime, Allen Adham, and Frank Pearce as Silicon &amp; Synapse in February 1991, after all three had earned their bachelor&#x27;s degrees from the University of California, Los Angeles, the year prior. The name &quot;Silicon &amp; Synapse&quot; was a high concept from the three founders, with &quot;silicon&quot; representing the building block of a computer, while &quot;synapse&quot; the building block of the brain. The initial logo was created by Stu Rose. To fund the company, each of them contributed about $10,000, Morhaime borrowing the sum interest-free from his grandmother. Their offices were established in a business park near the University of California, Irvine in Irvine, California.

During the first two years, the company focused on creating game ports for other studios. Interplay Productions&#x27; Brian Fargo was friends with Adham and had a 10% stake in Silicon &amp; Synapse. Fargo provided the company with conversion contacts for the games Interplay was publishing, starting with &quot;Battle Chess&quot;. Other titles included Ports include titles such as &quot;J.R.R. Tolkien&#x27;s The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I&quot; and &quot;Battle Chess II: Chinese Chess&quot;. Fargo then enlisted Silicon &amp; Synapse around 1991 to help develop &quot;RPM Racing&quot; that Interplay was preparing for the launch of the Super Nintendo Entertainment System. Fargo remained impressed with Silicon &amp; Synapse&#x27;s work, and provided them the ability to write their own games to be published by Interplay. The first two titles developed solely by the company were &quot;Rock n&#x27; Roll Racing&quot;, a sequel to &quot;RPM Racing&quot;, and &quot;The Lost Vikings&quot; inspired by &quot;Lemmings&quot;.

Around 1993, co-founder Adham told the other executives that he did not like the name &quot;Silicon &amp; Synapse&quot; anymore, as people outside the company were confusing the meaning of silicon the chemical element used in microchips with silicone the materials used in breast implants. By the end of 1993, Adham changed the name to &quot;Chaos Studios&quot;, reflecting on the haphazardness of their development processes.

Near this same time, the company started to explore options in publishing their own games, as their conversion contracts were not as lucrative for the company. Inspired by the multiplayer aspects of Westwood Studios&#x27; &quot;Dune II&quot; and the high fantasy setting of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, the company began work on what would become &quot;&quot;. Adham saw this as a start of a series of interconnected titles, similar to the &quot;Gold Box&quot; series by &quot;Strategic Simulations&quot;. To support its development and keep the company afloat, the studio took several more conversion contracts, though the founders were going into debt to keep their twelve developers employed. Davidson &amp; Associates, a company that published educational software and which had previously employed Silicon &amp; Synapse for conversion contracts, made an offer to buy the company for $4 million. Interplay was negotiating to be the publisher for &quot;Warcraft&quot;, and Fargo cautioned Adham and Morhaime against selling the company. Adham and Morhiame rejected Davidson &amp; Associates&#x27; initial offer, but the company came back with another offer of $6.75 million (equivalent to $ million in ), assuring to the founders that they would have creative control over the games they developed. Adham and Morhaime accepted the offer in early 1994. 

Shortly after the sale, they were contacted by a Florida company, Chaos Technologies, who claims their trademark rights on the name &quot;Chaos&quot; and wanted the company to pay () to keep the name. Not wanting to pay that sum, the executives decided to change the studio&#x27;s name to &quot;Ogre Studios&quot; by April 1994. However, Davidson &amp; Associates did not like this name, and forced the company to change it. According to Morhaime, Adham began running through a dictionary from the start, writing down any word that seemed interesting and passing it to the legal department to see if it had any complications. One of the first words they found to be interesting and cleared the legal check was &quot;blizzard&quot;, leading them to change their name to &quot;Blizzard Entertainment&quot; by May 1994. &quot;Warcraft&quot; was released in November 1994, and within a year, helped to establish Blizzard among other development studios like Westwood.

=== Acquisition by Vivendi and &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; (1995–2007) ===
Blizzard Entertainment has changed hands several times since then. Davidson was acquired along with Sierra On-Line by a company called CUC International in 1996. CUC then merged with a hotel, real-estate, and car-rental franchiser called HFS Corporation to form Cendant in 1997. In 1998 it became apparent that CUC had engaged in accounting fraud for years before the merger. Cendant&#x27;s stock lost 80% of its value over the next six months in the ensuing widely discussed accounting scandal. The company sold its consumer software operations, Sierra On-line (which included Blizzard) to French publisher Havas in 1998, the same year Havas was purchased by Vivendi. Blizzard, at this point numbering about 200 employees, became part of the Vivendi Games group of Vivendi.
In 1996, Blizzard Entertainment acquired Condor Games of San Mateo, California, which had been working on the action role-playing game (ARPG) &quot;Diablo&quot; for Blizzard at the time, and was led by David Brevik and brothers Max and Erick Schaefer. Condor was renamed Blizzard North, with Blizzard&#x27;s existing Irvine studios colloquially referred as Blizzard South. &quot;Diablo&quot; was released at the very start of 1997 alongside Battle.net, a matchmaking service for the game. Blizzard North developed the sequel &quot;Diablo II&quot; (2000), and its expansion pack &quot;Lord of Destruction&quot; (2001). 

Following the success of &quot;Warcraft II: Tides of Darkness&quot;, Blizzard began development on a science-fiction themed RTS &quot;StarCraft&quot; and released the title in March 1998. The title was the top-selling PC game for the year, and led to further growth of the Battle.net service and the use of the game for esports. Around 2000, Blizzard engaged with Nihilistic Software to work on a version of &quot;StarCraft&quot; for home consoles for Blizzard. Nihilisitic was co-founded by Robert Huebner, who had worked on &quot;StarCraft&quot; and other games while a Blizzard employee before leaving to found the studio. The game, &quot;&quot;, was a stealth-oriented game compared to the RTS features of &quot;StarCraft&quot;, and was a major feature of the 2002 Tokyo Game Show. However, over the next few years, the game entered development hell with conflicts between Nihilisitic and Blizzard on its direction. Blizzard ordered Nihilistic to stop work on &quot;StarCraft: Ghost&quot; in July 2004, and instead brought on Swingin&#x27; Ape Studios, a third-party studio that had just successfully released &quot;Metal Arms: Glitch in the System&quot; in 2003, to reboot the development of &quot;Ghost&quot;. Blizzard fully acquired Swingin&#x27; Ape Studios in May 2005 to continue on &quot;Ghost&quot;. However, while the game was scheduled to be released in 2005, it was targeted at the consoles of the sixth generation, such as the PlayStation 2 and original Xbox, while the industry was transitioning to the seventh generation. Blizzard decided to cancel &quot;Ghost&quot; rather than extend its development period to work on the newer consoles.

Blizzard started to work on a sequel to the &quot;Warcraft II&quot; in early 1998, which was announced as a &quot;role-playing strategy&quot; game. &quot;Warcraft III: Reign of Chaos,&quot; the third title set in the &quot;Warcraft&quot; fictional universe, was released in July 2002. &quot;Warcraft III&quot; has inspired many future games, having the influence on real-time strategy and multiplayer online battle arena genre. Many of the characters, locations and concepts introduced in &quot;Warcraft III&quot; and its expansion went on to play major roles in numerous future Blizzard&#x27;s titles.

In 2002, Blizzard was able to reacquire rights for three of its earlier Silicon &amp; Synapse titles, &quot;The Lost Vikings&quot;, &quot;Rock n&#x27; Roll Racing&quot; and &quot;Blackthorne&quot;, from Interplay Entertainment and re-release them for the Game Boy Advance handheld console.

Around 2003, Blizzard North was working on &quot;Diablo III&quot; as well as planned science-fiction-based version dubbed &quot;Starblo&quot;. Amid rumors that Vivendi was looking to sell its gaming division around 2003, Blizzard North&#x27;s leadership, consisting of Brevik, the Schaefers, and Bill Roper, asked Blizzard to provide their studio protections from the potential sale, or else they would resign. After several rounds of tense communications, the four gave their resignations to Blizzard&#x27;s management on June 30, 2003. As part of this, a significant portion of Blizzard North&#x27;s staff were laid off, additional work on &quot;Starblo&quot; was terminated and the remaining team focused &quot;Diablo III&quot;. Blizzard&#x27;s management made the decision August 2005 to consolidate Blizzard North into Blizzard Entertainment, relocating staff to the main Blizzard offices in Irvine.

In 2004, Blizzard opened European offices in the Paris suburb of Vélizy, Yvelines, France.

Blizzard began work on &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; near the end of 1999, a massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) based on the &quot;Warcraft&quot; franchise, with gameplay inspired by &quot;EverQuest&quot;. The game was publicly announced in September 2001. The excitement by the media for &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; led to significant growth with Team 2 from forty to the hundreds, as well as a large amount of crunch development to complete the game. In January 2004, Adham announced he was leaving the company from being burnt out over his work on &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, transferring management to Morhaime. &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; was released on November 23, 2004, in North America, and on February 11, 2005, in Europe. By December 2004, the game was the fastest-selling PC game in the United States, and by March 2005, had reached 1.5 million subscribers worldwide. Blizzard partnered with Chinese publisher The9 to publish and distribute &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; in China, as foreign companies could not directly publish into the country themselves. &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; launched in China in June 2005. By the end of 2007, &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; was considered a global phenomenon, having reached over 9 million subscribers and exceeded in revenue since its release. In April 2008, &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; was estimated to hold 62 percent of the MMORPG subscription market.

With the success of &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, Blizzard Entertainment organized the first BlizzCon fan convention in October 2005 held at the Anaheim Convention Center. The inaugural event drew about 6,000 people and became an annual event which Blizzard uses to announce new games, expansions, and content for its properties.

Blizzard&#x27;s staff quadrupled from around 400 employees in 2004 to 1600 by 2006 to provide more resources to &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; and its various expansions. To deal with its growing staff, Blizzard moved their headquarters from the UCI Research Park campus to a newly constructed 240,000-square foot campus in Irvine that was formerly occupied by Broadcom and before that by AST Research; the former Research Park site was taken over by Linksys. Blizzard&#x27;s new base was completed by March 2008; the city named the primary street on this campus as 1 Blizzard Way to honor the company. The campus includes a twelve-foot tall bronze statue of a &quot;Warcraft&quot; orc riding a wolf, with plaques surrounding it representing the eight company values by that point, &quot;Gameplay First&quot;, &quot;Commit to Quality&quot;, &quot;Play Nice; Play Fair&quot;, &quot;Embrace Your Inner Geek&quot;, &quot;Learn &amp; Grow&quot;, &quot;Every Voice Matters&quot;, &quot;Think Globally&quot;, and &quot;Lead Responsibly&quot;.

=== Vivendi merger with Activision and continued growth (2008–2017) ===
Up through 2006, Bobby Kotick, the CEO of Activision, had been working to rebound the company from near-bankruptcy, and had established a number of new studios. However, Activision lacked anything in the MMO market. Kotick saw that &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; was bringing in over a year in subscription fees, and began approaching Vivendi&#x27;s CEO Jean-Bernard Lévy about potential acquisition of their struggling Vivendi Games division, which included Blizzard Entertainment. Lévy was open to a merger, but would only allow it if he controlled the majority of the combined company, knowing the value of &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; to Kotick. Among those Kotick spoke to for advice included Blizzard&#x27;s Morhaime, who told Kotick that they had begun establishing lucrative in-roads into the Chinese market. Kotick accepted Lévy&#x27;s deal, with the deal approved by shareholders in December 2007. By July 2008, the merger was complete, with Vivendi Games effectively dissolved except for Blizzard Entertainment, and the new company was named Activision Blizzard.

Blizzard established a distribution agreement with the Chinese company NetEase in August 2008 to publish Blizzard&#x27;s games in China. The deal focused on &quot;StarCraft II&quot; which was gaining popularity as an esport within southeast Asia, as well as for other Blizzard games with the exception of &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, still being handled by The9. The two companies established the Shanghai EaseNet Network Technology for managing the games within China. Blizzard and The9 prepared to launch the &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; expansion &quot;Wrath of the Lich King&quot;, but the expansion came under scrutiny by China&#x27;s content regulation board, the General Administration of Press and Publication, which rejected publication of it within China in March 2009, even with preliminary modifications made by The9 to clear it. Rumors of Blizzard&#x27;s dissatisfaction with The9 from this and other previous complications with &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; came to a head when, in April 2009, Blizzard announced it was terminating its contract with The9, and transferred operation of &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; in China to NetEase.

They released an improved version of Battle.net (Battle.net 2.0) in March 2009 which included improved matchmaking, storefront features, and better support for all of Blizzard&#x27;s existing titles particularly &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;.

Having peaked at 12 million monthly subscriptions in 2010, &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; subscriptions sunk to 6.8 million in 2014, the lowest number since the end of 2006, prior to &quot;The Burning Crusade&quot; expansion. However, &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; is still the world&#x27;s most-subscribed MMORPG, and holds the Guinness World Record for the most popular MMORPG by subscribers. In 2008, Blizzard was honored at the 59th Annual Technology &amp; Engineering Emmy Awards for the creation of &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;. Mike Morhaime accepted the award.

Following the merger, Blizzard found it was relying on its well-established properties, but at the same time, the industry was experiencing a shift towards indie games. Blizzard established a few small teams within the company to work on developing new concepts based on the indie development approach that it could potentially use. One of these teams quickly came onto the idea of a collectible card game based on the &quot;Warcraft&quot; narrative universe, which ultimately became &quot;Hearthstone&quot;, released as a free-to-play title in March 2014. &quot;Hearthstone&quot; reached over 25 million players by the end of 2014, and exceeded 100 million players by 2018.

Another small internal team began work around 2008 on a new intellectual property known as &quot;Titan&quot;, a more contemporary or near-future MMORPG that would have co-existed alongside &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;. The project gained more visibility in 2010 as a result of some information leaks. Blizzard continued to speak on &quot;Titan&quot;″s development over the next few years, with over 100 people within Blizzard working on the project. However, &quot;Titan&quot;″s development was troubled, and, internally, in May 2013, Blizzard cancelled the project (publicly reporting this in 2014), and reassigned most of the staff but left about 40 people, led by Jeff Kaplan, to either come up with a fresh idea within a few weeks or have their team reassigned to Blizzard&#x27;s other departments. The small team came upon the idea of a team-based multiplayer shooter game, reusing many of the assets from &quot;Titan&quot; but set in a new near-future narrative. The new project was greenlit by Blizzard and became known as &quot;Overwatch&quot;, which was released in May 2016. &quot;Overwatch&quot; became the fourth main intellectual property of Blizzard, following &quot;Warcraft&quot;, &quot;StarCraft&quot;, and &quot;Diablo&quot;.

In addition to &quot;Hearthstone&quot; and &quot;Overwatch&quot;, Blizzard Entertainment continued to produce sequels and expansions to its established properties during this period, including &quot;StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty&quot; (2010) and &quot;Diablo III&quot; (2012). Their major crossover title, &quot;Heroes of the Storm&quot;, was released as a MOBA game in 2015. The game featured various characters from Blizzard&#x27;s franchises as playable heroes, as well as different battlegrounds based on &quot;Warcraft&quot;, &quot;Diablo&quot;, &quot;StarCraft&quot;, and &quot;Overwatch&quot; universes. In the late 2010s, Blizzard released &quot;&quot; (2017) and &quot;Warcraft III: Reforged&quot; (2020)&quot;,&quot; remastered versions of the original &quot;StarCraft&quot; and &quot;Warcraft III,&quot; respectively&quot;.&quot;

The May 2016 release of &quot;Overwatch&quot; was highly successful, and was the highest-selling game on PC for 2016. Several traditional esport events had been established within the year of &quot;Overwatch&quot; release, such as the Overwatch World Cup, but Blizzard continued to expand this and announced the first esports professional league, the Overwatch League at the 2016 BlizzCon event. The company purchased a studio at The Burbank Studios in Burbank, California, that it converted into a dedicated esports venue, Blizzard Arena, to be used for the Overwatch League and other events. The inaugural season of the Overwatch League launched on January 10, 2018, with 12 global teams playing. By the second season in 2019 it had expanded the League to 20 teams, and with its third season in 2020, it will have these teams traveling across the globe in a transitional home/away-style format.

In 2012, Blizzard Entertainment had 4,700 employees, with offices across 11 cities including Austin, Texas, and countries around the globe. , the company&#x27;s headquarters in Irvine, California had 2,622 employees.

=== Change of leadership (2018–2022) ===
By 2018, a rift had developed between Kotick and Morhaime on how Blizzard should continue developing its games, with Morhaime wanting to allow the developers the freedom to experiment while Kotick was focused on generating profit. Morhaime had considered resigning in 2017 but Kotick convinced him to stay on. Morhaime announced his plans to step down as the company president and CEO On October 3, 2018, while remaining an advisor to the company. Morhaime stated publicly that he felt it was time for someone else to lead Blizzard, but those close to him said he had become tired of the conflicts with Kotick. Morhaime formally left on April 7, 2019, and was replaced by J. Allen Brack, the executive producer on &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;.

In February 2019, Kotick announced a company-wide layoff of 8% of Activision Blizzard staff, around 800 total positions, due to lower revenues in 2018; this included a significant portion of Blizzard Entertainment, which had been since as having bloated head count over the years. Blizzard was planning for the announcement of &quot;Diablo IV&quot; and &quot;Overwatch 2&quot; at the 2019 Blizzcon, and to keep the company focused, two other projects, codenamed &quot;Ares&quot; and &quot;Orion&quot;, were cancelled.

Frank Pearce announced he would be stepping down as Blizzard&#x27;s Chief Development Officer on July 19, 2019, though will remain in an advisory role similar to Morhaime. Michael Chu, lead writer on many of Blizzard&#x27;s franchises including &quot;Diablo&quot;, &quot;Warcraft&quot;, and &quot;Overwatch&quot;, announced he was leaving the company after 20 years in March 2020.

On January 22, 2021, Activision transferred Vicarious Visions over to Blizzard Entertainment, stating that the Vicarious Visions team had better opportunity for long-term support for Blizzard. Vicarious had been working with Blizzard for about two years prior to this announcement on the planned remaster of &quot;Diablo II&quot;, &quot;Diablo II: Resurrected&quot;, and according to Brack, it made sense to incorporate Vicarious into Blizzard for ongoing support of the game and for other &quot;Diablo&quot; games including &quot;Diablo IV&quot;. Vicarious was completely merged into Blizzard by April 12, 2022, thereby being renamed Blizzard Albany.

In celebration of the company&#x27;s 30th anniversary, Blizzard Entertainment released a compilation called &quot;Blizzard Arcade Collection&quot; in February 2021, for various video game platforms. The collection includes their three classic video games: &quot;The Lost Vikings&quot;, &quot;Rock n&#x27; Roll Racing,&quot; and &quot;Blackthorne,&quot; each of which containing additional upgrades and numerous modern features.

Activision Blizzard was the subject of a lawsuit from the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing in July 2021, asserting that for several years the management within Blizzard as well as Activision promoted a &quot;frat boy&quot; atmosphere that allowed and encouraged sexual misconduct towards female employees and discrimination in hiring practices. The lawsuit drew a large response from employees and groups outside of Activision Blizzard. In the wake of these events, Brack, one of the few individuals directly named in the suit, announced he was leaving Blizzard to &quot;pursue new opportunities&quot;, and will be replaced by co-leads Jen Oneal, the lead of Vicarious Visions and the first woman in a leadership role for the company, and Mike Ybarra, a Blizzard executive vice president. Oneal announced in November 2021 that she would be leaving the company by the end of 2021, leaving Ybarra as the sole leader of Blizzard.

As a result of the California lawsuit and of delays and release issues with their more recent games, Activision Blizzard&#x27;s stock faced severe pressure. Subsequently, Microsoft seized the opportunity to become one of the largest video game companies in the world and announced its intent to acquire Activision Blizzard and its subsidiaries, including Blizzard, for in January 2022. This exchange marks the largest acquisition in tech history, surpassing the $67 billion Dell-EMC merger from 2016. The deal closed on October 13, 2023, and Activision Blizzard moved into the Microsoft Gaming division.

Blizzard acquired Proletariat, the developers of &quot;Spellbreak&quot;, in June 2022 as to help support &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;. The 100-employee studio remained in Boston but will shutter &quot;Spellbreak&quot; as they move onto &quot;Warcraft&quot;.

=== Challenges with NetEase and Microsoft acquisition (2022–present) ===
Ahead of their license renewal in January 2023, Blizzard (via Activision Blizzard) and NetEase stated in November 2022 that they had been unable to come to an agreement on the renewal terms for their license, and thus most Blizzard games will cease operations in China in January 2023 until the situation can be resolved. According to a report by &quot;The New York Times&quot;, several factors influenced Activision Blizzard&#x27;s decision to terminate the agreement, which included stronger demands made by the Chinese government to know of Activision Blizzard&#x27;s internal business matters, NetEase&#x27;s desire to license the games directly rather than run the license through a joint venture, and Activision Blizzard&#x27;s concerns that NetEase was trying to start their own ventures, including the payment towards Bungie in 2018. NetEase was further concerned about the impact of the pending acquisition of Activision Blizzard by Microsoft. Activision Blizzard stated they were looking to other Chinese firms as replacements for NetEase as to restore their games in China. By April 2024, Blizzard, with Microsoft&#x27;s help, and NetEase had agreed to new publishing terms, with plans to bring back Blizzard&#x27;s games to China by mid-2024, maintaining all prior game ownership from the original publishing deal. Under this new deal, NetEase also will be able to bring games to the Xbox platform.

Following completion of the acquisition, Microsoft announced it was laying off 1,900 staff from Microsoft Gaming on January 25, 2024. Alongside this, Blizzard President Mike Ybarra and Chief Design Officer Allen Adham announced they would be leaving the company. Further, the planned survival game from Blizzard was canceled. On January 29, 2024, Johanna Faries, the former general manager of the &quot;Call of Duty&quot; series, was named Blizzard Entertainment&#x27;s new president, taking office on February 5.

Following the unionization success of Raven Software&#x27;s Game Workers Alliance (GWA) union for quality assurance (QA) testers, the 20-member QA team of Blizzard Albany announced a unionization drive in July 2022 as GWA Albany. The vote passed (14–0).

On July 24, 2024, 500 artists, designers, engineers, producers, and quality assurance testers who work on &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; voted to unionize under the Communications Workers of America. The same day, 60 QA testers at Blizzard&#x27;s Austin office, who work on various games including &quot;Diablo IV&quot; and &quot;Hearthstone&quot;, also voted to unionize and formed the union &quot;Texas Blizzard QA United-CWA&quot;.

== Games ==


Blizzard Entertainment has developed 19 games since the inception of the company in 1991.

=== Main franchises ===
The majority of the games Blizzard published are in the &quot;Warcraft&quot;, &quot;Diablo&quot;, and &quot;StarCraft&quot; series. Since the release of &quot;&quot; (1994), &quot;Diablo&quot; (1997), and &quot;StarCraft&quot; (1998), the focus has been almost exclusively on those three franchises. &quot;Overwatch&quot; (2016) became an exception years later, bringing the number of main franchises to four. Each franchise is supported by other media based around its intellectual property such as novels, collectible card games, comics and video shorts. Blizzard announced in 2006 that they would be producing a &quot;Warcraft&quot; live-action film. The movie was directed by Duncan Jones, financed and produced by Legendary Pictures, Atlas Entertainment, and others, and distributed by Universal Pictures. It was released in June 2016. On October 4, 2022, &quot;Overwatch&quot; servers were officially shut off at the same time &quot;Overwatch 2&quot;&#x27;s went up.

=== Spin-offs ===
Blizzard has released two spin-offs to the main franchises: &quot;Hearthstone&quot; (2014), which is set in the existing &quot;Warcraft&quot; lore, and &quot;Heroes of the Storm&quot; (2015), which features playable characters from all four of Blizzard&#x27;s franchises.

=== Remasters ===
In 2015, Blizzard Entertainment formed &quot;Classic Games division&quot;, a team focused on updating and remastering some of their older titles, with an initially announced focus on &quot;&quot; (2017), &quot;Warcraft III: Reforged&quot; (2020)&quot;,&quot; and &quot;Diablo II: Resurrected&quot; (2021)&quot;.&quot;

=== Re-released games ===
In February 2021, Blizzard Entertainment released a compilation called &quot;Blizzard Arcade Collection&quot; for Microsoft Windows, Xbox One, PlayStation 4, and Nintendo Switch. The collection includes five Blizzard&#x27;s classic video games: &quot;The Lost Vikings&quot;, &quot;Rock n&#x27; Roll Racing&quot;, &quot;Blackthorne&quot;, &quot;The Lost Vikings 2&quot; and &quot;RPM Racing&quot;, with the last two games added in April 2021. Some of the modern features include 16:9 resolution, 4-player split-screen, rewinding and saving of game progress, watching replays, and adding graphic filters to change the look of player&#x27;s game. Additionally, it contains upgrades for each game such as enhanced local multiplayer for &quot;The Lost Vikings&quot;, new songs and artist performances for &quot;Rock n&#x27; Roll Racing&quot;, as well as a new level map for &quot;Blackthorne.&quot; A digital museum, which is included in the collection, features game art, unused content, and interviews.

=== Unreleased and future games ===
Notable unreleased titles include &quot;Warcraft Adventures: Lord of the Clans&quot;, an adventure game which was canceled on May 22, 1998, &quot;Shattered Nations&quot;, a turn-based strategy game cancelled around 1996, and &quot;&quot;, an action game aimed for release on consoles, co-developed with Nihilistic Software, which was &quot;Postponed indefinitely&quot; on March 24, 2006, after being in development hell for much of its lifespan.

Work on a project called &quot;Nomad&quot; started around 1998 after the release of &quot;Starcraft&quot;, with development led by Duane Stinnett. &quot;Nomad&quot; was inspired by the tabletop role playing game &quot;Necromunda&quot; that was played in a post-apocalyptic setting. The project had vague goals, and around that time, many of the staff of Blizzard began playing MMORPGs &quot;EverQuest&quot; and &quot;Ultima Online&quot;. &quot;Nomad&quot; was cancelled in 1999 as Blizzard shifted to making their own MMORPG, &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;.

In the wake of the 2018 layoffs, two projects were cancelled: One was codenamed &quot;Orion&quot;, an asynchronous card game for mobile devices designed by &quot;Hearthstone&quot; developers. While the game was considered fun to play when players were engaged in real time, the asynchronous aspect diluted the enjoyment of the. The second, codenamed &quot;Ares&quot;, was a first-person shooter within the &quot;Starcraft&quot; universe inspired by Electronic Arts&#x27; &quot;Battlefield&quot; series that had been in development for three years.

After seven years of development, Blizzard revealed the cancellation of an unannounced MMO codenamed &quot;Titan&quot; on September 23, 2014, though &quot;Overwatch&quot; was created from its assets. The company also has a history of declining to set release dates, choosing to instead take as much time as needed, generally saying a given product is &quot;done when it&#x27;s done.&quot;

&quot;Pax Imperia II&quot; was originally announced as a title to be published by Blizzard. Blizzard eventually dropped &quot;Pax Imperia II&quot;, though, when it decided it might be in conflict with their other space strategy project, which became known as &quot;StarCraft&quot;. THQ eventually contracted with Heliotrope and released the game in 1997 as &quot;Pax Imperia: Eminent Domain&quot;.

The company announced in January 2022 that it was near release of another new intellectual property, named &quot;Odyssey&quot; according to &quot;Bloomberg News&quot;, a survival game that had been at work at the studio for nearly six years before its cancellation in 2024. &quot;Bloomberg&quot; stated that the game&#x27;s origins came from &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; developer Craig Amai, and was originally prototyped using the Unreal Engine, which Blizzard licensed from Epic Games. When the game was revealed in 2022, about 100 employees were working on it, but around the same time, there was effort to switch from Unreal to Synapse, Blizzard&#x27;s engine used for mobile games, though artists continued to develop assets in Unreal. Near when Microsoft completed its acquisition of Activision Blizzard, there was an internal belief that they would be able to bring on more developers to complete the transition to Synapse and have the game ready for a 2026 release, but with the culling of 1,900 staff from Microsoft Gaming in January 2024, the game&#x27;s development was cancelled.

=== Ports ===
The company, known at the time as the Silicon &amp; Synapse, initially concentrated on porting other studios&#x27; games to computer platforms, developing 8 ports between 1992 and 1993.

== Company structure ==
As with most studios with multiple franchises, Blizzard Entertainment has organized different departments to oversee these franchises. Formally, since around the time of &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; in 2004, these have been denoted through simply numerical designations. The original three teams were:
* Team 1 manages the &quot;StarCraft&quot; property. The team also oversaw the development of the &quot;StarCraft&quot; spin-off &quot;Heroes of the Storm&quot;. Team 1 also included the Classics Team to work on remastering Blizzard&#x27;s earlier properties for modern computers, which have included &quot;&quot;, &quot;Warcraft III: Reforged&quot; and &quot;Diablo II: Resurrected&quot;. The Classic Games team was disbanded around August 2020, about eight months after &quot;Warcraft III: Reforged&quot; was released; according to Jason Schreier of &quot;Bloomberg News&quot;, this was due to Activision Blizzard driving Blizzard away from remastering its old properties, which figured into the launch issues with &quot;Warcraft III: Reforged&quot;.
* Team 2 continues to manage and create content for &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;.
* Team 3 oversees the &quot;Diablo&quot; franchise.

Since 2004, two new teams were created:
* Team 4 was created around 2007 to work on Blizzard&#x27;s first new IP since &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, that being &quot;Titan&quot;. &quot;Titan&quot; had development difficulties near 2013, and most of Team 4 was reallocated to the other teams, but the remaining members, led by Jeff Kaplan, revised &quot;Titan&quot;″s concept into &quot;Overwatch&quot;, which remains in Team 4&#x27;s hands since its release in 2016.
* Team 5 was created in 2008 to explore smaller games that could fit into Blizzard&#x27;s portfolio. This resulted in the creation of &quot;Hearthstone&quot;, a collectible card game based on the &quot;Warcraft&quot; property, which became Team 5&#x27;s priority.

Blizzard has used an informal motto, &quot;it&#x27;ll be ready when it&#x27;s ready&quot; to describe the release schedule for its games. The concept of accepting delays in software releases originally came about when the company opted to push back the release of &quot;Diablo&quot; to assure a quality product at release. By the time of &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, employees began using the phrase in response to eager fans looking for a release date.

== Technology ==
=== Battle.net 2.0 ===

Blizzard Entertainment released its revamped Battle.net service in 2009. The platform provides online gaming, digital distribution, digital rights management, and social networking service. Battle.net allows people who have purchased Blizzard products to download digital copies of games they have purchased, without needing any physical media.

On November 11, 2009, Blizzard required all &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; accounts to switch over to Battle.net accounts. This transition means that all current Blizzard titles can be accessed, downloaded, and played with a singular Battle.net login.

Battle.net 2.0 is the platform for matchmaking service for Blizzard games, which offers players a host of additional features. Players are able to track their friend&#x27;s achievements, view match history, avatars, etc. Players are able to unlock a wide range of achievements for Blizzard games.

The service provides the user with community features such as friends lists and groups, and allows players to chat simultaneously with players from other Blizzard games using VoIP and instant messaging. For example, players no longer need to create multiple user names or accounts for most Blizzard products. To enable cross-game communication, players need to become either Battletag or Real ID friends.

=== Warden client ===
Blizzard Entertainment has made use of a special form of software known as the &#x27;Warden Client&#x27;. The Warden client is known to be used with Blizzard&#x27;s online games such as &quot;Diablo&quot; and &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, and the Terms of Service contain a clause consenting to the Warden software&#x27;s RAM scans while a Blizzard game is running.

The Warden client scans a small portion of the code segment of running processes in order to determine whether any third-party programs are running. The goal of this is to detect and address players who may be attempting to run unsigned code or third party programs in the game. This determination of third party programs is made by hashing the scanned strings and comparing the hashed value to a list of hashes assumed to correspond to banned third party programs. The Warden&#x27;s reliability in correctly discerning legitimate versus illegitimate actions was called into question when a large-scale incident happened. This incident banned many Linux users after an update to Warden caused it to incorrectly detect Cedega as a cheat program. Blizzard issued a statement claiming they had correctly identified and restored all accounts and credited them with 20 days&#x27; play. Warden scans all processes running on a computer, not just the game, and could possibly run across what would be considered private information and other personally identifiable information. It is because of these peripheral scans that Warden has been accused of being spyware and has run afoul of controversy among privacy advocates.

== Controversies and legal disputes ==
=== Blizzard Entertainment, Inc. v. Valve Corporation ===
Shortly after Valve filed its trademark for &quot;Dota&quot; to secure the franchising rights for &quot;Dota 2&quot;, DotA-Allstars, LLC, run by former contributors to the game&#x27;s predecessor, &quot;Defense of the Ancients&quot;, filed an opposing trademark in August 2010. DotA All-Stars, LLC was sold to Blizzard Entertainment in 2011. After the opposition was over-ruled in Valve&#x27;s favor, Blizzard filed an opposition against Valve in November 2011, citing their license agreement with developers, as well as their ownership of DotA-Allstars, LLC. Blizzard conceded their case in May 2012, however, giving Valve undisputed commercial rights to &quot;Dota&quot; name, while Blizzard would rename their &quot;StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm&quot; mod &quot;Blizzard All-Stars&quot;, which would eventually become the stand-alone game, &quot;Heroes of the Storm&quot;.

=== &quot;California Department of Fair Employment and Housing v. Activision Blizzard&quot; ===
Following a two-year investigation, the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH) filed a lawsuit against Activision Blizzard in July 2021 for gender-based discrimination and sexual harassment, principally within the Blizzard Entertainment workplace. The DFEH alleges that female employees were subjected to constant sexual harassment, unequal pay, retaliation, as well as discrimination based on pregnancy. The suit also described a &quot;pervasive frat boy workplace culture&quot; at Blizzard that included objectification of women&#x27;s bodies and jokes about rape. Activision Blizzard&#x27;s statement described the suit as meritless, contending that action had been taken in any instances of misconduct. The company also objected to the DFEH not approaching them prior to filing. The lawsuit prompted an employee walkout, as well as leading J Allen Brack, and head of human resources, Jesse Meschuk, to step down. Amidst the lawsuit, Morhaime, Brack&#x27;s predecessor, posted a statement to Twitter writing that he was “ashamed.” Because of these allegations, Blizzard changed names that referenced employees in multiple of its franchises, including &quot;Overwatch&quot; and &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;.

=== Founder Electronics infringement lawsuit ===
On August 14, 2007, Beijing University Founder Electronics Co., Ltd. sued Blizzard Entertainment Limited for copyright infringement claiming 100 million yuan in damages. The lawsuit alleged the Chinese edition of &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; reproduced a number of Chinese typefaces made by Founder Electronics without permission.

=== &quot;FreeCraft&quot; ===

On June 20, 2003, Blizzard issued a cease and desist letter to the developers of an open-source clone of the Warcraft engine called &quot;FreeCraft&quot;, claiming trademark infringement. This hobby project had the same gameplay and characters as &quot;Warcraft II&quot;, but came with different graphics and music.

As well as a similar name, &quot;FreeCraft&quot; enabled players to use &quot;Warcraft II&quot; graphics, provided they had the &quot;Warcraft II&quot; CD. The programmers of the clone shut down their site without challenge. Soon after that the developers regrouped to continue the work by the name of &quot;Stratagus&quot;.

=== &quot;Hearthstone&quot; ban and Hong Kong protests ===

During an October 2019 &quot;Hearthstone Grandmasters&quot; streaming event in Taiwan, one player Ng Wai Chung, going by his online alias &quot;Blitzchung&quot; used an interview period to show support for the protestors in the 2019–20 Hong Kong protests. Shortly afterwards, on October 7, 2019, Blitzchung was disqualified from the current tournament and forfeited his winnings to date, and banned for a one-year period. The two shoutcasters engaged in the interview were also penalized with similar bans. Blizzard justified the ban as from its &quot;Grandmasters&quot; tournament rules that prevents players from anything that &quot;brings [themselves] into public disrepute, offends a portion or group of the public, or otherwise damages [Blizzard&#x27;s] image&quot;.

Blizzard&#x27;s response led to several protests from current &quot;Hearthstone&quot; players, other video game players, and criticism from Blizzard&#x27;s employees, fearing that Blizzard was giving into the censorship of the Chinese government. Protests were held, including through the 2019 BlizzCon in early November, to urge Blizzard to reverse their bans. The situation also drew the attention of several U.S. lawmakers, fearing that Blizzard, as a U.S. company, was letting China dictate how it handled speech and also urged the bans to be reversed.

Blizzard CEO J. Allen Brack wrote an open letter on October 11, 2019, apologizing for the way Blizzard handled the situation, and reduced the bans for both Blitzchung and the casters to six months. Brack reiterated that while they support free speech and their decision was in no way tied to the Chinese government, they want players and casters to avoid speaking beyond the tournament and the games in such interviews.

=== King&#x27;s &quot;Diversity Tool&quot; controversy ===
On May 12, 2022, Blizzard Entertainment released a blog post about the Diversity Space Tool, developed by a team at King – a mobile business unit at Activision Blizzard – alongside the MIT Game Lab. Jacqueline Chomatas, King&#x27;s globalization project manager, described the tool as a &quot;measurement device&quot; to analyze how diverse the characters are &quot;when compared to the &#x27;norm&#x27;&quot;. The post showed example images of the tool being used on &quot;Overwatch&quot;&#x27;s cast, with graphs showing breakdowns of the character attributes, and stated that &quot;The Overwatch 2 team at Blizzard has also had a chance to experiment with the tool, with equally enthusiastic first impressions.&quot; Blizzard shared the intent to release the tool during the summer and fall of 2022, with the goal of &quot;making the tool available to the industry as a whole&quot;.

The tool received heavy backlash online. Many people asked why Blizzard would create the tool instead of hiring diverse teams, and raised questions regarding the tool&#x27;s rating scale. The blog post originally suggested that the tool was used in an active development, mainly for &quot;Overwatch&quot;, which led some Blizzard employees working on the game to publicly deny the tool was used in &quot;Overwatch&quot; development and to criticize the tool further. On May 13, 2022, the blog post was edited to remove the example images of the tool and any mention of &quot;Overwatch&quot;. Later, the post was deleted altogether.

=== &quot;MDY Industries, LLC v. Blizzard Entertainment, Inc.&quot; ===

On July 14, 2008, the United States District Court for the District of Arizona ruled on the case &quot;MDY Industries, LLC v. Blizzard Entertainment, Inc.&quot;. The Court found that MDY was liable for copyright infringement since users of its Glider bot program were breaking the End User License Agreement and Terms of Use for &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;. MDY Industries appealed the judgment of the district court, and a judgment was delivered by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals on December 14, 2010, in which the summary judgment against MDY for contributory copyright infringement was reversed. Nevertheless, they ruled that the bot violated the DMCA and the case was sent back to the district court for review in light of this decision.

&quot;MDY v. Blizzard&quot;″s decision did affirm a prior Ninth Circuit ruling in &quot;Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc.&quot; that software licenses, such as the one used by Blizzard for &quot;WoW&quot;, were enforceable and enshrined the principle that video games could be sold as licenses to players rather than purchased. This ruling, though limited to the states of the Ninth Circuit, has been used by the industry to continue to sell games as licenses to users.

=== Privacy controversy and Real ID ===
On July 6, 2010, Blizzard Entertainment announced that they were changing the way their forums worked to require that users identify themselves with their real name. The reaction from the community was overwhelmingly negative with multiple game magazines calling the change &quot;foolhardy&quot; and an &quot;epic fail&quot;. It resulted in a significant user response on the Blizzard forums, including one thread on the issue reaching over 11,000 replies. This included personal details of a Blizzard employee who gave his real name &quot;to show it wasn&#x27;t a big deal&quot;. Shortly after revealing his real name, forum users posted personal information including his phone number, picture, age, home address, family members, and favorite TV shows and films.

Some technology media outlets suggested that displaying real names through Real ID is a good idea and would benefit both Battle.net and the Blizzard community. But others were worried that Blizzard was opening their fans up to real-life dangers such as stalking, harassment, and employment issues, since a simple Internet search by someone&#x27;s employer can reveal their online activities.

Blizzard initially responded to some of the concerns by saying that the changes would not be retroactive to previous posts, that parents could set up the system so that minors cannot post, and that posting to the forums is optional. However, due to the significant negative response, Blizzard President Michael Morhaime issued a statement rescinding the plan to use real names on Blizzard&#x27;s forums for the time being. The idea behind this plan was to allow players who had a relationship outside of the games to find each other more easily across all the Blizzard game titles.

=== &quot;StarCraft&quot; privacy and other lawsuits ===
In 1998, Donald P. Driscoll, an Albany, California, attorney filed a suit on behalf of Intervention, Inc., a California consumer group, against Blizzard Entertainment for &quot;unlawful business practices&quot; for the action of collecting data from a user&#x27;s computer without their permission. 

On May 19, 2014, Blizzard Entertainment filed a lawsuit in federal court in California, alleging that the unidentified programmers were involved in creation of software that hacks &quot;StarCraft II&quot;. Most of the alleged charges are related to copyright infringement.

Back in May 2010, MBCPlus Media, which operates the network MBCGame (Korean television stations that are broadcasting tournaments built around &quot;StarCraft&quot;), was sued by Blizzard for broadcasting StarCraft tournaments without the company&#x27;s consent, insisting that &quot;StarCraft&quot; is not a public domain offering, as Blizzard has invested significant money and resources to create the &quot;StarCraft&quot; game.

=== &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; private server complications ===
On December 5, 2008, Blizzard Entertainment issued a cease and desist letter to many administrators of high population &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; private servers (essentially slightly altered hosting servers of the actual &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; game, that players do not have to pay for). Blizzard used the Digital Millennium Copyright Act to influence many private servers to fully shut down and cease to exist.

== Related companies ==
Over the years, some former Blizzard Entertainment employees have moved on and established gaming companies of their own. Several of these occurred following the merger between Activision Holdings and Blizzard&#x27;s parent company at the time, Vivendi Games in 2008, and more recently as Activision Blizzard has directed Blizzard away from properties like &quot;Warcraft&quot; and &quot;StarCraft&quot; that are not seen as financial boons to the larger company. These employees left to form their smaller studios to give themselves the creative freedom that they were lacking at Blizzard. Collectively these studios are known as &quot;Blizzard 2.0&quot;.
* ArenaNet, creators of the &quot;Guild Wars&quot; franchise.
* Bonfire Studios, founded by Rob Pardo.
* Carbine Studios, now defunct as of September 2018, after releasing a massively multiplayer title &quot;WildStar&quot;.
* Castaway Entertainment, now defunct, after working on a game similar to the &quot;Diablo&quot; series, &quot;Djinn&quot;.
* Dreamhaven, founded by Michael Morhaime.
* Fantastic Pixel Castle, founded by Greg Street, working on a new combat-focused MMO, codenamed &quot;Ghost.&quot;
* Flagship Studios, now defunct, creators of &quot;&quot;, also worked on &quot;Mythos&quot;.
* Frost Giant Studios, founded by Tim Morten and Tim Campbell, currently developing real-time strategy game &quot;Stormgate&quot;.
* Hyboreal Games, founded by Michio Okamura.
* Magic Soup Games, founded by J. Allen Brack and Jen Oneal.
* Ready at Dawn Studios, creators of &quot;The Order: 1886&quot;, &quot;Daxter&quot;, &quot;God of War: Chains of Olympus&quot; and an &quot;Ōkami&quot; port for the Wii.
* Red 5 Studios, now defunct, creators of &quot;Firefall&quot;, a free to play game MMOG.
* Runic Games, now defunct, founded by Travis Baldree, Erich Schaefer, and Max Schaefer; creators of &quot;Torchlight&quot;.
* Second Dinner, founded by Ben Brode, creators of &quot;Marvel Snap&quot;.
* Uncapped Games, founded by David Kim and Jason Hughes.

== Notes ==

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="0" end="28" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Blizzard Entertainment, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q210167" start="44" end="64" title="video game developer" label="video game developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137109" start="69" end="78" title="Video game publisher" label="publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="88" end="106" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q344341" start="128" end="147" title="Activision Blizzard" label="Activision Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="240" end="286" title="massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="massively multiplayer online role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="293" end="310" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q44165" start="389" end="395" title="Diablo (series)" label="Diablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q290106" start="409" end="418" title="StarCraft" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q99569678" start="436" end="445" title="Overwatch" label="Overwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q725130" start="479" end="489" title="Battle.net" label="Battle.net"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="494" end="507" title="Online game" label="online gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="529" end="556" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Silicon &amp;amp; Synapse, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="583" end="620" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q52994" start="622" end="638" title="Michael Morhaime" label="Michael Morhaime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140297" start="753" end="777" title="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing" label="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052386" start="794" end="810" title="The Lost Vikings" label="The Lost Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="842" end="861" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Chaos Studios, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2362517" start="944" end="969" title="Davidson &amp;amp; Associates" label="Davidson &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q220960" start="1217" end="1223" title="Diablo (video game)" label="Diablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165929" start="1261" end="1270" title="StarCraft (video game)" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264873" start="1312" end="1325" title="Vivendi Games" label="Vivendi Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="1363" end="1373" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1558" end="1567" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q113685945" start="1568" end="1576" title="Acquisition of Activision Blizzard by Microsoft" label="acquired"/>
<link wikidata="Q117536672" start="1709" end="1725" title="Microsoft Gaming" label="Microsoft Gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070242" start="1888" end="1905" title="gaming convention" label="gaming convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q884557" start="1959" end="1967" title="BlizzCon" label="BlizzCon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2186" end="2200" title="World of Warcraft: The War Within" label="The War Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q244030" start="2257" end="2267" title="Diablo III" label="Diablo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q73154387" start="2291" end="2300" title="Diablo IV" label="Diablo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="2356" end="2374" title="online multiplayer" label="online multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8262784" start="2387" end="2398" title="Hearthstone" label="Hearthstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="2408" end="2429" title="collectible card game" label="collectible card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139655" start="2437" end="2456" title="Heroes of the Storm" label="Heroes of the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515944" start="2495" end="2504" title="Overwatch (video game)" label="Overwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q73163646" start="2521" end="2532" title="Overwatch 2" label="Overwatch 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="2550" end="2562" title="First-person shooter" label="first-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q52994" start="2888" end="2904" title="Michael Morhaime" label="Michael Morhaime"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="3012" end="3034" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="3045" end="3082" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="3543" end="3575" title="University of California, Irvine" label="University of California, Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="3579" end="3597" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="3665" end="3670" title="porting" label="ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q628249" start="3690" end="3711" title="Interplay Productions" label="Interplay Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q607104" start="3718" end="3729" title="Brian Fargo" label="Brian Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q810986" start="3911" end="3923" title="Battle Chess" label="Battle Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805090" start="3988" end="4039" title="J.R.R. Tolkien&amp;#x27;s The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I (1990 video game)" label="J.R.R. Tolkien&amp;#x27;s The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928360" start="4170" end="4180" title="RPM Racing" label="RPM Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="4238" end="4273" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140297" start="4489" end="4513" title="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing" label="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052386" start="4567" end="4583" title="The Lost Vikings" label="The Lost Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q864177" start="4608" end="4616" title="Lemmings (video game)" label="Lemmings"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="4814" end="4842" title="silicon" label="silicon the chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="4867" end="4913" title="Silicone" label="silicone the materials used in breast implants"/>
<link wikidata="Q267949" start="5252" end="5268" title="Westwood Studios" label="Westwood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q596631" start="5281" end="5288" title="Dune II" label="Dune II"/>
<link wikidata="Q326439" start="5303" end="5315" title="high fantasy" label="high fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="5333" end="5354" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534570" start="5505" end="5513" title="Gold Box" label="Gold Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268871" start="5536" end="5557" title="Strategic Simulations" label="Strategic Simulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362517" start="5755" end="5780" title="Davidson &amp;amp; Associates" label="Davidson &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q494614" start="7558" end="7572" title="Sierra Entertainment" label="Sierra On-Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014674" start="7593" end="7610" title="CUC International" label="CUC International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058814" start="7696" end="7711" title="HFS Corporation" label="HFS Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058814" start="7720" end="7727" title="Cendant" label="Cendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q516033" start="8066" end="8071" title="Havas" label="Havas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127887" start="8118" end="8125" title="Vivendi" label="Vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264873" start="8201" end="8214" title="Vivendi Games" label="Vivendi Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q169943" start="8290" end="8311" title="San Mateo, California" label="San Mateo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422746" start="8343" end="8367" title="action role-playing game" label="action role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q220960" start="8381" end="8387" title="Diablo (video game)" label="Diablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703115" start="8435" end="8447" title="David Brevik" label="David Brevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464302" start="8504" end="8518" title="Blizzard North" label="Blizzard North"/>
<link wikidata="Q725130" start="8674" end="8684" title="Battle.net" label="Battle.net"/>
<link wikidata="Q244033" start="8764" end="8773" title="Diablo II" label="Diablo II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8817" end="8836" title="Diablo II: Lord of Destruction" label="Lord of Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8884" end="8914" title="Warcraft II: Tides of Darkness" label="Warcraft II: Tides of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q165929" start="8987" end="8996" title="StarCraft (video game)" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="9173" end="9179" title="esport" label="esport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388106" start="9217" end="9236" title="Nihilistic Software" label="Nihilistic Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q858523" start="9509" end="9530" title="stealth game" label="stealth-oriented game"/>
<link wikidata="Q683877" start="9622" end="9637" title="Tokyo Game Show" label="Tokyo Game Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081312" start="9690" end="9706" title="development hell" label="development hell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9973" end="10005" title="Metal Arms: Glitch in the System" label="Metal Arms: Glitch in the System"/>
<link wikidata="Q129784" start="10266" end="10282" title="Sixth generation of video game consoles" label="sixth generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="10296" end="10309" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="10323" end="10327" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q129581" start="10373" end="10391" title="seventh generation of video game consoles" label="seventh generation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10666" end="10694" title="Warcraft III: Reign of Chaos" label="Warcraft III: Reign of Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="10878" end="10896" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189206" start="10901" end="10932" title="multiplayer online battle arena" label="multiplayer online battle arena"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11030" end="11043" title="Warcraft III: The Frozen Throne" label="its expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052386" start="11224" end="11240" title="The Lost Vikings" label="The Lost Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140297" start="11254" end="11278" title="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing" label="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q880945" start="11295" end="11306" title="Blackthorne" label="Blackthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q628249" start="11319" end="11342" title="Interplay Entertainment" label="Interplay Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="11371" end="11387" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q244030" start="11456" end="11466" title="Diablo III" label="Diablo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q862425" start="11703" end="11713" title="Bill Roper (video game producer)" label="Bill Roper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050847" start="12199" end="12210" title="Consolidation (business)" label="consolidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q387447" start="12378" end="12384" title="Vélizy-Villacoublay" label="Vélizy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="12434" end="12451" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="12482" end="12528" title="massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="massively multiplayer online role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134845" start="12615" end="12624" title="EverQuest" label="EverQuest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711620" start="13356" end="13360" title="The9" label="The9"/>
<link wikidata="Q884557" start="13945" end="13953" title="BlizzCon" label="BlizzCon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750878" start="13997" end="14022" title="Anaheim Convention Center" label="Anaheim Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="14428" end="14431" title="University of California, Irvine" label="UCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q790060" start="14543" end="14551" title="Broadcom" label="Broadcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268043" start="14571" end="14583" title="AST Research" label="AST Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241626" start="14633" end="14640" title="Linksys" label="Linksys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117176" start="15309" end="15321" title="Bobby Kotick" label="Bobby Kotick"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="15334" end="15344" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q556539" start="15645" end="15662" title="Jean-Bernard Lévy" label="Jean-Bernard Lévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030806" start="16093" end="16107" title="Video gaming in China" label="Chinese market"/>
<link wikidata="Q344341" start="16345" end="16364" title="Activision Blizzard" label="Activision Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q196259" start="16438" end="16445" title="NetEase" label="NetEase"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16530" end="16542" title="StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty" label="StarCraft II"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="16584" end="16590" title="esport" label="esport"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16926" end="16948" title="World of Warcraft: Wrath of the Lich King" label="Wrath of the Lich King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531666" start="17040" end="17087" title="General Administration of Press and Publication" label="General Administration of Press and Publication"/>
<link wikidata="Q725130" start="17558" end="17568" title="Battle.net" label="Battle.net"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17953" end="17972" title="World of Warcraft: The Burning Crusade" label="The Burning Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="18093" end="18114" title="Guinness World Record" label="Guinness World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692549" start="18208" end="18247" title="Technology &amp;amp; Engineering Emmy Award" label="Technology &amp;amp; Engineering Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q52994" start="18300" end="18313" title="Mike Morhaime" label="Mike Morhaime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762504" start="18491" end="18501" title="indie game" label="indie game"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="18719" end="18740" title="collectible card game" label="collectible card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8262784" start="18825" end="18836" title="Hearthstone" label="Hearthstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350984" start="19108" end="19113" title="Titan (Blizzard Entertainment project)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019571" start="19679" end="19690" title="Jeff Kaplan" label="Jeff Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515944" start="20048" end="20057" title="Overwatch (video game)" label="Overwatch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20456" end="20486" title="StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty" label="StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q244030" start="20510" end="20520" title="Diablo III" label="Diablo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q21192427" start="20541" end="20556" title="Crossover (fiction)" label="major crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139655" start="20570" end="20589" title="Heroes of the Storm" label="Heroes of the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189206" start="20615" end="20619" title="Multiplayer online battle arena" label="MOBA"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20936" end="20958" title="Warcraft III: Reforged" label="Warcraft III: Reforged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="20985" end="20993" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="21238" end="21244" title="esport" label="esport"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958514" start="21335" end="21354" title="Overwatch World Cup" label="Overwatch World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454335" start="21451" end="21467" title="Overwatch League" label="Overwatch League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720617" start="21530" end="21549" title="The Burbank Studios" label="The Burbank Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="21553" end="21572" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="22091" end="22104" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947354" start="23948" end="23965" title="Blizzard Albany" label="Vicarious Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="24200" end="24208" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q244033" start="24218" end="24227" title="Diablo II" label="Diablo II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24241" end="24263" title="Diablo II: Resurrected" label="Diablo II: Resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q73154387" start="24435" end="24444" title="Diablo IV" label="Diablo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052386" start="24819" end="24835" title="The Lost Vikings" label="The Lost Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140297" start="24849" end="24873" title="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing" label="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q880945" start="24891" end="24902" title="Blackthorne" label="Blackthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q107790974" start="25025" end="25034" title="California Department of Fair Employment and Housing v. Activision Blizzard" label="a lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020416" start="25044" end="25096" title="California Department of Fair Employment and Housing" label="California Department of Fair Employment and Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="26105" end="26114" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q877536" start="26408" end="26416" title="Dell EMC" label="Dell-EMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q117536672" start="26511" end="26527" title="Microsoft Gaming" label="Microsoft Gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q113127575" start="26557" end="26568" title="Proletariat (company)" label="Proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q62290546" start="26594" end="26604" title="Spellbreak" label="Spellbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="27225" end="27243" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="27814" end="27823" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q117536672" start="28380" end="28396" title="Microsoft Gaming" label="Microsoft Gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q192156" start="28687" end="28699" title="Call of Duty" label="Call of Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q121591482" start="28813" end="28825" title="unionization" label="unionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062986" start="28837" end="28851" title="Raven Software" label="Raven Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q110659896" start="28859" end="28880" title="Game Workers Alliance" label="Game Workers Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188522" start="28897" end="28927" title="Software testing" label="quality assurance (QA) testers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947354" start="28954" end="28969" title="Blizzard Albany" label="Blizzard Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154183" start="29218" end="29251" title="Communications Workers of America" label="Communications Workers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q73154387" start="29357" end="29366" title="Diablo IV" label="Diablo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8262784" start="29383" end="29394" title="Hearthstone" label="Hearthstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q815739" start="29680" end="29688" title="Warcraft" label="Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q44165" start="29702" end="29708" title="Diablo (series)" label="Diablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q290106" start="29726" end="29735" title="StarCraft" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q220960" start="29798" end="29804" title="Diablo (video game)" label="Diablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165929" start="29829" end="29838" title="StarCraft (video game)" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q99569678" start="29924" end="29933" title="Overwatch" label="Overwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14513321" start="30233" end="30270" title="Warcraft (film)" label="&amp;quot;Warcraft&amp;quot; live-action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q552731" start="30298" end="30310" title="Duncan Jones" label="Duncan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q621364" start="30337" end="30355" title="Legendary Pictures" label="Legendary Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q19747898" start="30357" end="30376" title="Atlas Entertainment" label="Atlas Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="30409" end="30427" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q73163646" start="30557" end="30568" title="Overwatch 2" label="Overwatch 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186399" start="30636" end="30645" title="Spin-off (media)" label="spin-offs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8262784" start="30676" end="30687" title="Hearthstone" label="Hearthstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139655" start="30768" end="30787" title="Heroes of the Storm" label="Heroes of the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="31007" end="31015" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31111" end="31133" title="Warcraft III: Reforged" label="Warcraft III: Reforged"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31170" end="31192" title="Diablo II: Resurrected" label="Diablo II: Resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="31360" end="31377" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="31379" end="31387" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="31389" end="31402" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="31408" end="31423" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052386" start="31497" end="31513" title="The Lost Vikings" label="The Lost Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140297" start="31527" end="31551" title="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing" label="Rock n&amp;#x27; Roll Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q880945" start="31565" end="31576" title="Blackthorne" label="Blackthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521668" start="31590" end="31608" title="The Lost Vikings 2" label="The Lost Vikings 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928360" start="31625" end="31635" title="RPM Racing" label="RPM Racing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32323" end="32361" title="Warcraft Adventures: Lord of the Clans" label="Warcraft Adventures: Lord of the Clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="32372" end="32386" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q472055" start="32456" end="32480" title="turn-based strategy game" label="turn-based strategy game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388106" start="32586" end="32605" title="Nihilistic Software" label="Nihilistic Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081312" start="32686" end="32702" title="development hell" label="development hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973302" start="32948" end="32958" title="Necromunda" label="Necromunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="32986" end="33010" title="Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="post-apocalyptic setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="33107" end="33113" title="MMORPG" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134845" start="33121" end="33130" title="EverQuest" label="EverQuest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043550" start="33147" end="33160" title="Ultima Online" label="Ultima Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="33737" end="33752" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q474587" start="33765" end="33776" title="Battlefield (video game series)" label="Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350984" start="33944" end="33949" title="Titan (Blizzard Entertainment project)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515944" start="33992" end="34001" title="Overwatch (video game)" label="Overwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q290106" start="34492" end="34501" title="StarCraft" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34590" end="34617" title="Pax Imperia: Eminent Domain" label="Pax Imperia: Eminent Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q124361635" start="34739" end="34746" title="Odyssey (cancelled video game)" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="34772" end="34786" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030988" start="34796" end="34809" title="survival game" label="survival game"/>
<link wikidata="Q608276" start="35060" end="35073" title="Unreal Engine" label="Unreal Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q739711" start="35104" end="35114" title="Epic Games" label="Epic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q117536672" start="35643" end="35659" title="Microsoft Gaming" label="Microsoft Gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="35822" end="35829" title="porting" label="porting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139655" start="36384" end="36403" title="Heroes of the Storm" label="Heroes of the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36570" end="36592" title="Warcraft III: Reforged" label="Warcraft III: Reforged"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36609" end="36631" title="Diablo II: Resurrected" label="Diablo II: Resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q92271928" start="36783" end="36797" title="Jason Schreier" label="Jason Schreier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="36807" end="36821" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350984" start="37305" end="37310" title="Titan (Blizzard Entertainment project)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515944" start="37525" end="37534" title="Overwatch (video game)" label="Overwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8262784" start="37746" end="37757" title="Hearthstone" label="Hearthstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="38464" end="38477" title="Online game" label="online gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q269415" start="38479" end="38499" title="digital distribution" label="digital distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="38501" end="38526" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="38532" end="38557" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988681" start="39231" end="39243" title="Achievement (video games)" label="achievements"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="39440" end="39444" title="Voice over IP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="39449" end="39466" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q836978" start="40108" end="40120" title="code segment" label="code segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q183427" start="40394" end="40401" title="Hash function" label="hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="40414" end="40421" title="String (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052589" start="40779" end="40785" title="Cedega (software)" label="Cedega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="41096" end="41131" title="personally identifiable information" label="personally identifiable information"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="41211" end="41218" title="spyware" label="spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="41258" end="41265" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="41389" end="41394" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q771541" start="41479" end="41485" title="Dota 2" label="Dota 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q215936" start="41578" end="41601" title="Defense of the Ancients" label="Defense of the Ancients"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139655" start="42227" end="42246" title="Heroes of the Storm" label="Heroes of the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020416" start="42391" end="42443" title="California Department of Fair Employment and Housing" label="California Department of Fair Employment and Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="43653" end="43671" title="Beijing University" label="Beijing University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384042" start="43672" end="43691" title="Founder Electronics" label="Founder Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="43786" end="43790" title="Chinese yuan" label="yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="44033" end="44049" title="cease and desist" label="cease and desist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="44081" end="44092" title="Open-source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q98091506" start="44161" end="44183" title="trademark infringement" label="trademark infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936867" start="44622" end="44631" title="Stratagus" label="Stratagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="44779" end="44785" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q64509602" start="44928" end="44954" title="2019–20 Hong Kong protests" label="2019–20 Hong Kong protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q884557" start="45767" end="45775" title="BlizzCon" label="BlizzCon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680856" start="46627" end="46631" title="King (company)" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="46696" end="46699" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889766" start="48126" end="48182" title="United States District Court for the District of Arizona" label="United States District Court for the District of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="48306" end="48328" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569582" start="48348" end="48354" title="glider (bot)" label="Glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="48439" end="48456" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q753379" start="48760" end="48764" title="Digital Millennium Copyright Act" label="DMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922308" start="48941" end="48965" title="Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc." label="Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="50100" end="50108" title="Television show" label="TV shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="50113" end="50118" title="Film" label="films"/>
<link wikidata="Q52994" start="50817" end="50833" title="Michael Morhaime" label="Michael Morhaime"/>
<link wikidata="Q671480" start="51186" end="51204" title="Albany, California" label="Albany, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="52282" end="52298" title="cease and desist" label="cease and desist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="52354" end="52371" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q753379" start="52546" end="52578" title="Digital Millennium Copyright Act" label="Digital Millennium Copyright Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264873" start="52922" end="52935" title="Vivendi Games" label="Vivendi Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q495054" start="53336" end="53344" title="ArenaNet" label="ArenaNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q219335" start="53368" end="53378" title="Guild Wars" label="Guild Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089362" start="53398" end="53413" title="Bonfire Studios" label="Bonfire Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q569404" start="53426" end="53435" title="Rob Pardo" label="Rob Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070295" start="53439" end="53454" title="Carbine Studios" label="Carbine Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q13501195" start="53542" end="53550" title="WildStar (video game)" label="WildStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464302" start="53560" end="53582" title="Castaway Entertainment" label="Castaway Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q52994" start="53684" end="53694" title="Dreamhaven" label="Dreamhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q52994" start="53707" end="53723" title="Michael Morhaime" label="Michael Morhaime"/>
<link wikidata="Q784330" start="53843" end="53859" title="Flagship Studios" label="Flagship Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044785" start="53921" end="53927" title="Mythos (video game)" label="Mythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307228" start="54049" end="54058" title="Stormgate" label="Stormgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837926" start="54095" end="54109" title="Michio Okamura" label="Michio Okamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340558" start="54174" end="54195" title="Ready at Dawn" label="Ready at Dawn Studios"/>
<link wikidata="" start="54215" end="54230" title="The Order: 1886" label="The Order: 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089087" start="54244" end="54250" title="Daxter (video game)" label="Daxter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="54264" end="54293" title="God of War: Chains of Olympus" label="God of War: Chains of Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q385184" start="54313" end="54318" title="Ōkami" label="Ōkami"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="54338" end="54341" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q869371" start="54345" end="54358" title="Red 5 Studios" label="Red 5 Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q869371" start="54391" end="54399" title="Firefall (video game)" label="Firefall"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="54427" end="54431" title="MMOG" label="MMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358751" start="54435" end="54446" title="Runic Games" label="Runic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q201792" start="54540" end="54550" title="Torchlight" label="Torchlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q67155211" start="54586" end="54595" title="Ben Brode" label="Ben Brode"/>
<link wikidata="Q112075374" start="54615" end="54626" title="Marvel Snap" label="Marvel Snap"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4878" wikidata="Q298664" url="?curid=4878" title="Robert Bellarmine">
<text>Robert Bellarmine (; ; 4 October 1542 – 17 September 1621) was an Italian Jesuit and a cardinal of the Catholic Church. He was canonized a saint in 1930 and named Doctor of the Church, one of only 37. He was one of the most important figures in the Counter-Reformation.

Bellarmine was a professor of theology and later rector of the Roman College, and in 1602 became Archbishop of Capua. He supported the reform decrees of the Council of Trent. He is also widely remembered for his role in the Giordano Bruno affair, the Galileo affair, and the trial of Friar Fulgenzio Manfredi.

==Early life==
Robert Bellarmine was born in Montepulciano, the son of noble, albeit impoverished, parents, Vincenzo Bellarmino and his wife Cinzia Cervini, who was the sister of Pope Marcellus II. As a boy he knew Virgil by heart and composed a number of poems in Italian and Latin. One of his hymns, on Mary Magdalene, is included in the Roman Breviary.

Bellarmine entered the Roman Jesuit novitiate in 1560, remaining in Rome for three years. He was then sent to a Jesuit house at Mondovì, in Piedmont, where he learned Greek. While at Mondovì, he came to the attention of Francesco Adorno, the local Jesuit provincial superior, who sent him to the University of Padua.

==Career==
Bellarmine&#x27;s systematic studies of theology began at Padua in 1567 and 1568, where his teachers were adherents of Thomism. In 1569, he was sent to finish his studies at the University of Leuven in Brabant. There he was ordained and obtained a reputation both as a professor and as a preacher. He was the first Jesuit to teach at the university, where the subject of his course was the &quot;Summa Theologica&quot; of Thomas Aquinas. He was involved in a controversy with Michael Baius on the subject of Grace and free will, and wrote a Hebrew grammar. His residency in Leuven lasted seven years. In poor health, in 1576 he made a journey to Italy. Here he remained, commissioned by Pope Gregory XIII to lecture on polemical theology in the new Roman College, now known as the Pontifical Gregorian University. Later, he would promote the cause of the beatification of Aloysius Gonzaga, who had been a student at the college during Bellarmine&#x27;s tenure. His lectures were published under the title &quot;De Controversias&quot; in four large volumes.

===New duties after 1589===

Until 1589, Bellarmine was occupied as professor of theology. After the murder in that year of Henry III of France, Pope Sixtus V sent Enrico Caetani as legate to Paris to negotiate with the Catholic League of France, and chose Bellarmine to accompany him as theologian. He was in the city during its siege by Henry of Navarre.

Upon the death of Pope Sixtus V in 1590, the Count of Olivares wrote to Philip II of Spain, &quot;Bellarmine ... would not do for a Pope, for he is mindful only of the interests of the Church and is unresponsive to the reasons of princes.&quot;

Pope Clement VIII, said of him, &quot;the Church of God had not his equal in learning&quot;. Bellarmine was made rector of the Roman College in 1592, examiner of bishops in 1598, and cardinal in 1599. Immediately after his appointment as Cardinal, Pope Clement made him a Cardinal Inquisitor, in which capacity he served as one of the judges at the trial of Giordano Bruno, and concurred in the decision which condemned Bruno to be burned at the stake as a heretic.

In 1602 he was made archbishop of Capua. He had written against pluralism and non-residence of bishops within their dioceses. As bishop he put into effect the reforming decrees of the Council of Trent. He received some votes in the 1605 conclaves which elected Pope Leo XI, Pope Paul V, and in 1621 when Pope Gregory XV was elected, but his being a Jesuit counted against him in the judgement of many of the cardinals.

Thomas Hobbes saw Bellarmine in Rome at a service on All Saints Day (1 November) 1614 and, exempting him alone from a general castigation of cardinals, described him as &quot;a little lean old man&quot; who lived &quot;more retired&quot;.

===The Galileo case===

In 1616, on the orders of Paul V, Bellarmine summoned Galileo, notified him of a forthcoming decree of the Congregation of the Index condemning the Copernican doctrine of the mobility of the Earth and the immobility of the Sun, and ordered him to abandon it. Galileo agreed to do so.

When Galileo later complained of rumours to the effect that he had been forced to abjure and do penance, Bellarmine wrote out a certificate denying the rumours, stating that Galileo had merely been notified of the decree and informed that, as a consequence of it, the Copernican doctrine could not be &quot;defended or held&quot;. Unlike the previously mentioned formal injunction (see earlier footnote), this certificate would have allowed Galileo to continue using and teaching the mathematical content of Copernicus&#x27;s theory as a purely theoretical device for predicting the apparent motions of the planets.

According to some of his letters, Cardinal Bellarmine believed that a demonstration for heliocentrism could not be found because it would contradict the unanimous consent of the Fathers&#x27; scriptural exegesis, to which the Council of Trent, in 1546, defined all Catholics must adhere. In other passages, Bellarmine argued that he did not support the heliocentric model for the lack of evidence of the time (&quot;I will not believe that there is such a demonstration, until it is shown to me&quot;).

Bellarmine wrote to heliocentrist Paolo Antonio Foscarini in 1615:

and

In 1633, nearly twelve years after Bellarmine&#x27;s death, Galileo was again called before the Inquisition in this matter. Galileo produced Bellarmine&#x27;s certificate for his defense at the trial.

According to Pierre Duhem and Karl Popper &quot;in one respect, at least, Bellarmine had shown himself a better scientist than Galileo by disallowing the possibility of a &quot;strict proof&quot; of the earth&#x27;s motion, on the grounds that an astronomical theory merely &quot;saves the appearances&quot; without necessarily revealing what &quot;really happens.&quot; Philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn, in his book, &quot;The Copernican Revolution&quot;, after commenting on Cesare Cremonini, who refused to look through Galileo&#x27;s telescope, wrote:

==Death==
Robert Bellarmine retired to Sant&#x27;Andrea degli Scozzesi, the Jesuit college of Saint Andrew in Rome. He died on 17 September 1621, aged 78. He was buried in the Church of St. Ignatius in Rome. 
==Works==
Bellarmine&#x27;s books bear the stamp of their period; the effort for literary elegance (so-called &quot;maraviglia&quot;) had given place to a desire to pile up as much material as possible, to embrace the whole field of human knowledge, and incorporate it into theology. His controversial works provoked many replies, and were studied for some decades after his death. At Leuven he made extensive studies in the Church Fathers and scholastic theologians, which gave him the material for his book &quot;De scriptoribus ecclesiasticis&quot; (Rome, 1613). It was later revised and enlarged by Sirmond, Labbeus, and Casimir Oudin. Bellarmine wrote the preface to the new Sixto-Clementine Vulgate. Bellarmine also prepared for posterity his own commentary on each of the Psalms. An English translation from the Latin was published in 1866.

===Dogmatics===

From his research grew &quot;Disputationes de controversiis christianae fidei&quot; (also called &quot;Controversiae&quot;), first published at Ingolstadt in 1581–1593. This major work was the earliest attempt to systematize the various religious disputes between Catholics and Protestants. Bellarmine reviewed the issues and devoted eleven years to it while at the Roman College. In August 1590, Pope Sixtus V decided to place the first volume of the &quot;Disputationes&quot; on the Index because Bellarmine argued in it that the Pope is not the temporal ruler of the whole world and that temporal rulers do not derive their authority to rule from God but from the consent of the governed. However, Sixtus died before the revised Index was published, and the next Pope, Urban VII, removed the book from the Index during his brief twelve-day reign.

In 1597-98 he published a &quot;Catechism&quot; in two versions ( and ) which has been translated to 60 languages and was the official teaching of the Catholic Church for centuries.

===Venetian Interdict===

Under Pope Paul V (reigned 1605–1621), a major conflict arose between Venice and the Papacy. Paolo Sarpi, as spokesman for the Republic of Venice, protested against the papal interdict, and reasserted the principles of the Council of Constance and of the Council of Basel, denying the pope&#x27;s authority in secular matters. Bellarmine wrote three rejoinders to the Venetian theologians, and may have warned Sarpi of an impending murderous attack, when in September 1607, an unfrocked friar and brigand by the name of Rotilio Orlandini planned to kill Sarpi for the sum of 8,000 crowns. Orlandini&#x27;s plot was discovered, and when he and his accomplices crossed from Papal into Venetian territory they were arrested.

===Allegiance oath controversy and papal authority===

Bellarmine also became involved in controversy with King James I of England. From a point of principle for English Catholics, this debate drew in figures from much of Western Europe. It raised the profile of both protagonists, King James as a champion of his own restricted Calvinist Protestantism, and Bellarmine for Tridentine Catholicism.

===Devotional works===
During his retirement, he wrote several short books intended to help ordinary people in their spiritual life: &quot;De ascensione mentis in Deum per scalas rerum creatorum opusculum&quot; (&quot;The Mind&#x27;s Ascent to God by the Ladder of Created Things&quot;; 1614) which was translated into English as &quot;Jacob&#x27;s Ladder&quot; (1638) without acknowledgement by , &quot;&quot; (1619) (in Latin, English translation under this title by Edward Coffin), and &quot;The Seven Words on the Cross&quot;.

==Canonization and final resting place==
Robert Bellarmine was canonized by Pope Pius XI in 1930; the following year he was declared a Doctor of the Church. His remains, in a cardinal&#x27;s red robes, are displayed behind glass under a side altar in the Church of Saint Ignatius, the chapel of the Roman College, next to the body of his student Aloysius Gonzaga, as he himself had wished. In the General Roman Calendar Saint Robert Bellarmine&#x27;s feast day is on 17 September, the day of his death; but some continue to use pre-1969 calendars, in which for 37 years his feast day was on 13 May. The rank assigned to his feast has been &quot;double&quot; (1932–1959), &quot;third-class feast&quot; (1960–1968), and since the 1969 revision &quot;memorial&quot;.

== Notes ==
==References==
===Sources===
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* Butler, Alban (1866). &quot;May XIII. St. Robert Bellarmine, Archbishop of Capua and Cardinal, Doctor of the Church, A.D. 1621&quot;. In &quot;The Lives of the Fathers, Martyrs, and Other Principal Saints&quot;. Dublin: James Duffy. PDF File. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05.
* ()
* Rager, John C. (1930). &quot;Catholic Sources and the Declaration of Independence&quot;. The Catholic Mind, XXVIII, no. 13. Contains notable quotations by St. Robert Bellarmine and St. Thomas Aquinas in reference to the Declaration of Independence. Archived from the original on 2014-07-11
* 
* 
* Bauer, Stefan (2006). &quot;The Censorship and Fortuna of Platina&#x27;s Lives of the Popes in the Sixteenth Century&quot;. .
* 

==External links==

Works of Bellarmine
* &quot;Opera Omnia&quot; - Google Books links to the 1870-74 reprint of his collected works in Latin.
* 
* Bellarmine, Robert (1614). &quot;A Shorte Catechisme of Card.all Bellarmine Illustrated with the Images.&quot; On Google Books.
* Bellarmine, Robert (n. d.). &quot;On the Roman Pontiff. An Extract from St. Robert Bellarmine, De Romano Pontifice, lib. II, cap. 30&quot;. Translated by Jim Larraby. With Introductory Remarks by John Lane. Archived from the original on 2018-12-06.
* Bellarmine, Robert (n.d.). &quot;De Romano Pontifice, On the Roman Pontiff&quot;, 2 vol., 2015–2016, Mediatrix Press. Extract of Book II, Chapter 30 (published online with permission); extract of Book IV, Chapters 6 &amp; 7 (published online with permission).
* Bellarmine, Robert (1705). . Second Edition. London: W. Freeman. On Internet Archive.
* Bellarmine, Robert (1753). &quot;Vita ven. Roberti cardinalis Bellarmini quam ipsemet scripsit rogatu familiaris sui p. Eudæmon Johannis Cretensis eruta ex scriniis Societatis&quot; [autobiography] (in Latin). On Google Books. In English in &quot;Woodstock Letters&quot;, Volume LXXXIX, Number 1, 1 February 1960, on the Jesuit Online Library (in Italian , in French here)
* Bellarmine, Robert (1847). &quot;The Art of Dying Well&quot;. Translated by John Dalton. London: Richardson and Son. PDF File. Archived from the original on 2008-12-18.
* Bellarmine, Robert (2008). &quot;&quot;. Read by Maureen O&#x27;Brien. Audiobook. On Internet Archive.
* Bellarmine, Robert (n.d.). . London: Richardson and Son. On Internet Archive
* Bellarmine, Robert (n.d.). &quot;The Eternal Happiness of the Saints&quot;. London: Richardson and Son. PDF File. Archived from the original on 2015-09-08.

Works about Bellarmine
* CERL-Thesaurus on Robert Bellarmin (1542–1621)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q298664" start="0" end="17" title="Robert Bellarmine" label="Robert Bellarmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="74" end="80" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="87" end="95" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="103" end="118" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="127" end="144" title="canonization" label="canonized a saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="163" end="183" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="249" end="268" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="320" end="326" title="Rector (academia)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157592" start="334" end="347" title="Roman College" label="Roman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364294" start="368" end="387" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Capua" label="Archbishop of Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="428" end="444" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="495" end="509" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517983" start="522" end="536" title="Galileo affair" label="Galileo affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q52295181" start="561" end="579" title="Fulgenzio Manfredi" label="Fulgenzio Manfredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q91217" start="627" end="640" title="Montepulciano" label="Montepulciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q101776" start="761" end="778" title="Pope Marcellus II" label="Pope Marcellus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="797" end="803" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="847" end="854" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="859" end="864" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="887" end="901" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894488" start="922" end="936" title="Roman Breviary" label="Roman Breviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="968" end="974" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q20188" start="1067" end="1074" title="Mondovì" label="Mondovì"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="1079" end="1087" title="Piedmont (Italy)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1106" end="1111" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479936" start="1159" end="1175" title="Francis Adorno" label="Francesco Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="1235" end="1254" title="University of Padua" label="University of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="1308" end="1316" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q328945" start="1387" end="1394" title="Thomism" label="Thomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q693380" start="1446" end="1466" title="Old University of Leuven" label="University of Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="1470" end="1477" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="1664" end="1680" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa Theologica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="1690" end="1704" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q661867" start="1744" end="1757" title="Michael Baius" label="Michael Baius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="1776" end="1781" title="Divine grace" label="Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="1786" end="1795" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1809" end="1815" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="1955" end="1972" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="1987" end="2005" title="polemical theology" label="polemical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157592" start="2017" end="2030" title="Roman College" label="Roman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q467025" start="2049" end="2080" title="Pontifical Gregorian University" label="Pontifical Gregorian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q310307" start="2140" end="2156" title="Aloysius Gonzaga" label="Aloysius Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="2450" end="2469" title="Henry III of France" label="Henry III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="2471" end="2484" title="Pope Sixtus V" label="Pope Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517909" start="2490" end="2504" title="Enrico Caetani" label="Enrico Caetani"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="2508" end="2514" title="Papal legate" label="legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="2546" end="2571" title="Catholic League (French)" label="Catholic League of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="2665" end="2681" title="Henry of Navarre" label="Henry of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160806" start="2729" end="2746" title="Enrique de Guzmán, 2nd Count of Olivares" label="Count of Olivares"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="2756" end="2774" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="2935" end="2947" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157592" start="3057" end="3070" title="Roman College" label="Roman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3092" end="3098" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="3202" end="3221" title="Inquisition" label="Cardinal Inquisitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="3288" end="3302" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="3362" end="3381" title="burned at the stake" label="burned at the stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="3387" end="3394" title="heretic" label="heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364294" start="3417" end="3436" title="archbishop of Capua" label="archbishop of Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="3513" end="3520" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="3581" end="3597" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="3634" end="3643" title="papal election" label="conclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q132716" start="3658" end="3669" title="Pope Leo XI" label="Pope Leo XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="3671" end="3682" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q132692" start="3701" end="3716" title="Pope Gregory XV" label="Pope Gregory XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="3817" end="3830" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="4135" end="4142" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="4174" end="4180" title="decree" label="decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="4188" end="4213" title="Congregation of the Index" label="Congregation of the Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="4229" end="4239" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Copernican"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4747" end="4769" title="#disputedinjunction" label="(see earlier footnote)"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="5161" end="5168" title="Fathers of the Church" label="Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="5175" end="5194" title="scriptural exegesis" label="scriptural exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="5209" end="5225" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="5236" end="5243" title="Dogmatic definition" label="defined"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="5507" end="5520" title="heliocentrism" label="heliocentrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744481" start="5521" end="5544" title="Paolo Antonio Foscarini" label="Paolo Antonio Foscarini"/>
<link wikidata="Q314172" start="5775" end="5787" title="Pierre Duhem" label="Pierre Duhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="5792" end="5803" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q184980" start="6156" end="6167" title="Thomas Kuhn" label="Thomas Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q936308" start="6241" end="6257" title="Cesare Cremonini (philosopher)" label="Cesare Cremonini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="6302" end="6311" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3672478" start="6360" end="6391" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Andrea degli Scozzesi" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Andrea degli Scozzesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465674" start="6497" end="6519" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Ignazio, Rome" label="Church of St. Ignatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="6955" end="6969" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="6974" end="6995" title="scholastic theologian" label="scholastic theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q352520" start="7133" end="7140" title="Sirmond" label="Sirmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961423" start="7142" end="7149" title="Labbeus" label="Labbeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048803" start="7155" end="7168" title="Casimir Oudin" label="Casimir Oudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533226" start="7210" end="7234" title="Sixto-Clementine Vulgate" label="Sixto-Clementine Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282689" start="7425" end="7473" title="Disputationes de controversiis christianae fidei" label="Disputationes de controversiis christianae fidei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004" start="7540" end="7550" title="Ingolstadt" label="Ingolstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="7793" end="7806" title="Pope Sixtus V" label="Pope Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="7881" end="7886" title="Index Librorum Prohibitorum" label="Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="8063" end="8086" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q134337" start="8168" end="8177" title="Pope Urban VII" label="Urban VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189279" start="8279" end="8288" title="Catechism" label="Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8398" end="8413" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="8462" end="8473" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="8526" end="8532" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="8541" end="8547" title="Papacy" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349158" start="8549" end="8560" title="Paolo Sarpi" label="Paolo Sarpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="8631" end="8640" title="Interdict (Catholic canon law)" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="8679" end="8699" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q321032" start="8711" end="8727" title="Council of Basel" label="Council of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="9291" end="9309" title="James I of England" label="James I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135773" start="9341" end="9358" title="English Catholics" label="English Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="9508" end="9517" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="9552" end="9574" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Tridentine Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342345" start="10046" end="10059" title="Edward Coffin" label="Edward Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="10172" end="10181" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="10185" end="10197" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="10244" end="10264" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465674" start="10364" end="10388" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Ignazio" label="Church of Saint Ignatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q310307" start="10455" end="10471" title="Aloysius Gonzaga" label="Aloysius Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="10506" end="10528" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="10560" end="10569" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3979926" start="10712" end="10716" title="ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207301" start="10837" end="10850" title="Mysterii Paschalis" label="1969 revision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417046" start="10857" end="10865" title="memorial (liturgy)" label="memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q27983598" start="11540" end="11553" title="Bauer, Stefan" label="Bauer, Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471011" start="13144" end="13164" title="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4880" wikidata="Q223945" url="?curid=4880" title="Bildungsroman">
<text>In literary criticism, a bildungsroman (, plural bildungsromane, ) is a literary genre that focuses on the psychological and moral growth of the protagonist from childhood to adulthood (coming of age), in which character change is important. The term comes from the German words (&#x27;education&#x27;, alternatively &#x27;forming&#x27;) and (&#x27;novel&#x27;).

==Origin==
The term was coined in 1819 by philologist Johann Karl Simon Morgenstern in his university lectures, and was later famously reprised by Wilhelm Dilthey, who legitimized it in 1870 and popularized it in 1905. The genre is further characterized by a number of formal, topical, and thematic features. The term &quot;coming-of-age novel&quot; is sometimes used interchangeably with bildungsroman, but its use is usually wider and less technical.

The birth of the bildungsroman is normally dated to the publication of &quot;Wilhelm Meister&#x27;s Apprenticeship&quot; by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe in 1795–96, or, sometimes, to Christoph Martin Wieland&#x27;s of 1767. Although the bildungsroman arose in Germany, it has had extensive influence first in Europe and later throughout the world. Thomas Carlyle&#x27;s English translation of Goethe&#x27;s novel (1824) and his own &quot;Sartor Resartus&quot; (1833–34), the first English bildungsroman, inspired many British novelists. In the 20th century, it spread to France and several other countries around the globe.

Barbara Whitman noted that the &quot;Iliad&quot; might be the first bildungsroman. It is not just &quot;the story of the Trojan War. The Trojan War is in effect the backdrop for the story of Achilles&#x27; development. At the beginning Achilles is still a rash youth, making rash decisions which cost dearly to himself and all around him. (...) The story reaches its conclusion when Achilles has reached maturity and allows King Priam to recover Hector&#x27;s body&quot;.

The genre translates fairly directly into the cinematic form, the coming-of-age film.

==Plot outline==
A bildungsroman is a growing up or &quot;coming of age&quot; of a generally naive person who goes in search of answers to life&#x27;s questions with the expectation that these will result in gaining experience of the world. The genre evolved from folklore tales of a dunce or youngest child going out in the world to seek their fortune. Usually in the beginning of the story, there is an emotional loss which makes the protagonist leave on their journey. In a bildungsroman, the goal is maturity, and the protagonist achieves it gradually and with difficulty. The genre often features a main conflict between the main character and society. Typically, the values of society are gradually accepted by the protagonist, and they are ultimately accepted into society—the protagonist&#x27;s mistakes and disappointments are over. In some works, the protagonist is able to reach out and help others after having achieved maturity.

Franco Moretti &quot;argues that the main conflict in the bildungsroman is the myth of modernity with its overvaluation of youth and progress as it clashes with the static teleological vision of happiness and reconciliation found in the endings of Goethe&#x27;s &quot;Wilhelm Meister&quot; and even Jane Austen&#x27;s &quot;Pride and Prejudice&quot;&quot;.

There are many variations and subgenres of bildungsroman that focus on the growth of an individual. An &quot;Entwicklungsroman&quot; (&#x27;development novel&#x27;) is a story of general growth rather than self-cultivation. An &quot;Erziehungsroman&quot; (&quot;education novel&quot;) focuses on training and formal schooling, while a &quot;Künstlerroman&quot; (&quot;artist novel&quot;) is about the development of an artist and shows a growth of the self. Furthermore, some memoirs and published journals can be regarded as bildungsroman although claiming to be predominantly factual (e.g. &quot;The Dharma Bums&quot; by Jack Kerouac or&quot; The Motorcycle Diaries&quot; by Ernesto &quot;Che&quot; Guevara). The term is also more loosely used to describe coming-of-age films and related works in other genres.

==Examples==


===Precursors===
* , by Ibn Tufail (12th century)
* &quot;Parzival&quot;, by Wolfram von Eschenbach (13th century).
* &quot;Sir Gawain and the Green Knight&quot; (14th century).

===16th century===
* (first edition 1554)

===17th century===
* by Baltasar Gracián (first edition 1651). Usually considered the pioneering work in its modern form.

===18th century===
* &quot;Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure&quot; (&quot;Fanny Hill&quot;), by John Cleland (1748)
* &quot;The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling&quot;, by Henry Fielding (1749)
* &quot;Candide&quot;, by Voltaire (1759)
* &quot;The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman&quot;, by Laurence Sterne (1759)
* , by Christoph Martin Wieland (1767)—often considered the first &quot;true&quot; bildungsroman
* &quot;Wilhelm Meister&#x27;s Apprenticeship&quot; by Johann Wolfgang Goethe (1795–96)

===19th century===
* &quot;The Betrothed&quot;, by Alessandro Manzoni (1827)
* &quot;The Red and the Black&quot;, by Stendhal (1830)
* &quot;Sartor Resartus&quot;, by Thomas Carlyle (1833–34)
* &quot;Jane Eyre&quot;, by Charlotte Brontë (1847)
* &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot;, by Emily Brontë (1847)
* (unfinished), by Fyodor Dostoevsky (1849)
* &quot;David Copperfield&quot;, by Charles Dickens (1850)
* &quot;Green Henry&quot;, by Gottfried Keller (1855)
* &quot;The Morgesons&quot;, by Elizabeth Stoddard (1862)
* &quot;Great Expectations&quot;, by Charles Dickens (1861)
* &quot;Little Women&quot;, by Louisa May Alcott (1869)
* &quot;Sentimental Education&quot;, by Gustave Flaubert (1869)
* &quot;The Adolescent&quot;, by Fyodor Dostoevsky (1875)
* &quot;The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn&quot;, by Mark Twain (1884)
* &quot;What Maisie Knew&quot;, by Henry James (1897)

===20th century===
* &quot;Kim&quot;, by Rudyard Kipling (1901)
* &quot;Beneath the Wheel&quot;, by Hermann Hesse, 1906
* &quot;Martin Eden&quot;, by Jack London (1909)
* &quot;The Book of Khalid&quot;, by Ameen Rihani (1911)
* &quot;Sons and Lovers&quot;, by D. H. Lawrence (1913)
* &quot;A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man&quot;, by James Joyce (1916)
* &quot;Demian&quot;, by Hermann Hesse (1919)
* &quot;This Side of Paradise&quot;, by F. Scott Fitzgerald (1920)
* &quot;The Magic Mountain&quot;, by Thomas Mann (1924)
* , by Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay (1929)
* &quot;Their Eyes Were Watching God&quot;, by Zora Neale Hurston (1937)
* &quot;The Catcher in the Rye&quot;, by J. D. Salinger (1951)
* &quot;Invisible Man&quot;, by Ralph Ellison, (1952)
* &quot;Children of Violence&quot;, by Doris Lessing (1952–1969)
* &quot;In the Castle of My Skin&quot;, by George Lamming (1953)
* &quot;A Separate Peace&quot;, by John Knowles (1956)
* &quot;Goodbye, Columbus&quot;, by Philip Roth (1959)
* &quot;To Kill a Mockingbird&quot;, by Harper Lee (1960)
* &quot;Wake in Fright&quot;, by Kenneth Cook (1961)
* &quot;The Emperor of Ice-Cream&quot;, by Brian Moore (1965)
* &quot;Dune&quot;, by Frank Herbert (1965)
* &quot;The Outsiders&quot;, by S. E. Hinton (1967)
* &quot;A Wizard of Earthsea&quot;, by Ursula K. Le Guin (1968)
* &quot;Bright Lights, Big City&quot;, by Jay McInerney (1984)
* &quot;How to Kill a Bull&quot;, by Anna-Leena Härkönen (1984)
* &quot;Ender&#x27;s Game&quot;, by Orson Scott Card (1985)
* &quot;Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit&quot;, by Jeanette Winterson (1985)
* &quot;Norwegian Wood&quot;, by Haruki Murakami (1987)
* &quot;English Music&quot;, by Peter Ackroyd (1992)
* &quot;Harry Potter&quot;, by J. K. Rowling (1997–2007)
* &quot;The Perks of Being a Wallflower&quot;, by Stephen Chbosky (1999)
* &quot;Naruto&quot;, by Masashi Kishimoto (1999)
* &quot;Persepolis&quot;, by Marjane Satrapi (2000)

===21st century===
* &quot;The Secret Life of Bees&quot;, by Sue Monk Kidd (2002)
* &quot;The Kite Runner&quot;, by Khaled Hosseini (2003)
* &quot;The Fortress of Solitude&quot;, by Jonathan Lethem (2003)
* &quot;Never Let Me Go&quot;, by Kazuo Ishiguro (2005)
* &quot;Indecision&quot;, by Benjamin Kunkel (2005)
* &quot;Black Swan Green&quot;, by David Mitchell (2006)
* &quot;Goodnight Punpun&quot;, by Inio Asano (2007–2013)
* &quot;Indignation&quot;, by Philip Roth (2008)
* &quot;Sputnik Caledonia&quot;, by Andrew Crumey (2008)
* &quot;Neapolitan Novels&quot;, by Elena Ferrante (2011–2014)
*&quot;Zuleikha&quot;, by Guzel Yakhina (2015)
* &quot;Washington Black&quot;, by Esi Edugyan (2018)
* &quot;Boy Swallows Universe&quot;, by Trent Dalton (2018)
==See also==
* &quot;Bildung&quot;
* &quot;Künstlerroman&quot;
* Mirrors for princes
* &quot;Roman à clef&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .


==Further reading==
* Revised edition, with bibliographic updates by Charles Bane and Sean M. Flory (Scarecrow Press, 2006). 

==External links==
* The Bildungsroman Project - academic digital humanities project featuring user-submitted articles on genre exemplars and contemporary personal narratives, edited by English literature professor Katherine Carlson</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="3" end="21" title="literary criticism" label="literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="25" end="38" title="Bildungsroman" label="bildungsroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="49" end="63" title="Bildungsroman" label="bildungsromane"/>
<link wikidata="Q223393" start="72" end="86" title="literary genre" label="literary genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="145" end="156" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="186" end="199" title="coming of age" label="coming of age"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="406" end="417" title="Philology" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q67149" start="418" end="447" title="Karl Morgenstern" label="Johann Karl Simon Morgenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q60080" start="511" end="526" title="Wilhelm Dilthey" label="Wilhelm Dilthey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194031" start="895" end="932" title="Wilhelm Meister&amp;#x27;s Apprenticeship" label="Wilhelm Meister&amp;#x27;s Apprenticeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="942" end="968" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154010" start="999" end="1023" title="Christoph Martin Wieland" label="Christoph Martin Wieland"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="1164" end="1178" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134140" start="1254" end="1269" title="Sartor Resartus" label="Sartor Resartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1478" end="1483" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="1632" end="1640" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975633" start="1980" end="1998" title="coming-of-age film" label="coming-of-age film"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="2265" end="2273" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314690" start="2285" end="2290" title="dunce" label="dunce"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="2722" end="2733" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q971600" start="2944" end="2958" title="Franco Moretti" label="Franco Moretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="3031" end="3040" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="3116" end="3128" title="teleological" label="teleological"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="3192" end="3198" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="3243" end="3254" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170583" start="3268" end="3287" title="Pride and Prejudice (novel)" label="Pride and Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q783459" start="3643" end="3656" title="Künstlerroman" label="Künstlerroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493270" start="3900" end="3915" title="The Dharma Bums" label="The Dharma Bums"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="3925" end="3937" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769105" start="3947" end="3969" title="The Motorcycle Diaries (book)" label="The Motorcycle Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="3979" end="4010" title="Che Guevara" label="Ernesto &amp;quot;Che&amp;quot; Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q251259" start="4155" end="4165" title="Ibn Tufail" label="Ibn Tufail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247232" start="4189" end="4197" title="Parzival" label="Parzival"/>
<link wikidata="Q18821" start="4208" end="4230" title="Wolfram von Eschenbach" label="Wolfram von Eschenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q756715" start="4255" end="4286" title="Sir Gawain and the Green Knight" label="Sir Gawain and the Green Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q360512" start="4377" end="4393" title="Baltasar Gracián" label="Baltasar Gracián"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395765" start="4503" end="4533" title="Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure" label="Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q460861" start="4569" end="4581" title="John Cleland" label="John Cleland"/>
<link wikidata="Q248096" start="4597" end="4634" title="The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling" label="The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling"/>
<link wikidata="Q34190" start="4645" end="4659" title="Henry Fielding" label="Henry Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q215894" start="4675" end="4682" title="Candide" label="Candide"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="4693" end="4701" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164083" start="4717" end="4768" title="The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman" label="The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q218960" start="4779" end="4794" title="Laurence Sterne" label="Laurence Sterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q154010" start="4809" end="4833" title="Christoph Martin Wieland" label="Christoph Martin Wieland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194031" start="4907" end="4944" title="Wilhelm Meister&amp;#x27;s Apprenticeship" label="Wilhelm Meister&amp;#x27;s Apprenticeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="4954" end="4976" title="Johann Wolfgang Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28491" start="5015" end="5028" title="The Betrothed (Manzoni novel)" label="The Betrothed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064" start="5039" end="5057" title="Alessandro Manzoni" label="Alessandro Manzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q192649" start="5073" end="5094" title="The Red and the Black" label="The Red and the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="5105" end="5113" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134140" start="5129" end="5144" title="Sartor Resartus" label="Sartor Resartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="5155" end="5169" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182961" start="5188" end="5197" title="Jane Eyre" label="Jane Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q127332" start="5208" end="5224" title="Charlotte Brontë" label="Charlotte Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q202975" start="5240" end="5257" title="Wuthering Heights" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q80137" start="5268" end="5280" title="Emily Brontë" label="Emily Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="5307" end="5324" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q189811" start="5340" end="5357" title="David Copperfield" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="5368" end="5383" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198871" start="5399" end="5410" title="Green Henry" label="Green Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q122370" start="5421" end="5437" title="Gottfried Keller" label="Gottfried Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752256" start="5453" end="5466" title="The Morgesons" label="The Morgesons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362696" start="5477" end="5495" title="Elizabeth Stoddard" label="Elizabeth Stoddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q219552" start="5511" end="5529" title="Great Expectations" label="Great Expectations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="5540" end="5555" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q523076" start="5571" end="5583" title="Little Women" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q185696" start="5594" end="5611" title="Louisa May Alcott" label="Louisa May Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212285" start="5627" end="5648" title="Sentimental Education" label="Sentimental Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="5659" end="5675" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Gustave Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011716" start="5691" end="5705" title="The Adolescent" label="The Adolescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="5716" end="5733" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q215410" start="5749" end="5783" title="The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" label="The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="5794" end="5804" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943614" start="5820" end="5836" title="What Maisie Knew" label="What Maisie Knew"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="5847" end="5858" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q589868" start="5894" end="5897" title="Kim (novel)" label="Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="5908" end="5923" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325403" start="5939" end="5956" title="Beneath the Wheel" label="Beneath the Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="5967" end="5980" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317839" start="5995" end="6006" title="Martin Eden" label="Martin Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q45765" start="6017" end="6028" title="Jack London" label="Jack London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719249" start="6044" end="6062" title="The Book of Khalid" label="The Book of Khalid"/>
<link wikidata="Q471451" start="6073" end="6085" title="Ameen Rihani" label="Ameen Rihani"/>
<link wikidata="Q80771" start="6101" end="6116" title="Sons and Lovers" label="Sons and Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="6127" end="6141" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q465360" start="6157" end="6196" title="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man" label="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="6207" end="6218" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q860577" start="6234" end="6240" title="Demian" label="Demian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="6251" end="6264" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581681" start="6280" end="6301" title="This Side of Paradise" label="This Side of Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="6312" end="6331" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q212898" start="6347" end="6365" title="The Magic Mountain" label="The Magic Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="6376" end="6387" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900953" start="6402" end="6430" title="Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay" label="Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476619" start="6446" end="6474" title="Their Eyes Were Watching God" label="Their Eyes Were Watching God"/>
<link wikidata="Q220480" start="6485" end="6503" title="Zora Neale Hurston" label="Zora Neale Hurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q183883" start="6519" end="6541" title="The Catcher in the Rye" label="The Catcher in the Rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q79904" start="6552" end="6566" title="J. D. Salinger" label="J. D. Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784288" start="6582" end="6595" title="Invisible Man" label="Invisible Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q299965" start="6606" end="6619" title="Ralph Ellison" label="Ralph Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965470" start="6636" end="6656" title="Children of Violence" label="Children of Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q40874" start="6667" end="6680" title="Doris Lessing" label="Doris Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307454" start="6701" end="6725" title="In the Castle of My Skin" label="In the Castle of My Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340511" start="6736" end="6750" title="George Lamming" label="George Lamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659417" start="6766" end="6782" title="A Separate Peace" label="A Separate Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q983113" start="6793" end="6805" title="John Knowles" label="John Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q960840" start="6821" end="6838" title="Goodbye, Columbus" label="Goodbye, Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="6849" end="6860" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q212340" start="6876" end="6897" title="To Kill a Mockingbird" label="To Kill a Mockingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q182658" start="6908" end="6918" title="Harper Lee" label="Harper Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q28429640" start="6934" end="6948" title="Wake in Fright (novel)" label="Wake in Fright"/>
<link wikidata="Q339196" start="6959" end="6971" title="Kenneth Cook" label="Kenneth Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731932" start="6987" end="7011" title="The Emperor of Ice-Cream (novel)" label="The Emperor of Ice-Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q912791" start="7022" end="7033" title="Brian Moore (novelist)" label="Brian Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="7049" end="7053" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="7064" end="7077" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215312" start="7093" end="7106" title="The Outsiders (novel)" label="The Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q117425" start="7117" end="7129" title="S. E. Hinton" label="S. E. Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771810" start="7145" end="7165" title="A Wizard of Earthsea" label="A Wizard of Earthsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="7176" end="7193" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074256" start="7209" end="7232" title="Bright Lights, Big City (novel)" label="Bright Lights, Big City"/>
<link wikidata="Q721578" start="7243" end="7256" title="Jay McInerney" label="Jay McInerney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864126" start="7272" end="7290" title="How to Kill a Bull" label="How to Kill a Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178461" start="7301" end="7320" title="Anna-Leena Härkönen" label="Anna-Leena Härkönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q816016" start="7336" end="7353" title="Ender&amp;#x27;s Game" label="Ender&amp;#x27;s Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q217110" start="7364" end="7380" title="Orson Scott Card" label="Orson Scott Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843750" start="7396" end="7426" title="Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit" label="Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q233584" start="7437" end="7455" title="Jeanette Winterson" label="Jeanette Winterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q751348" start="7471" end="7485" title="Norwegian Wood (novel)" label="Norwegian Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q134798" start="7496" end="7511" title="Haruki Murakami" label="Haruki Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052531" start="7527" end="7540" title="English Music (novel)" label="English Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q319169" start="7551" end="7564" title="Peter Ackroyd" label="Peter Ackroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="7580" end="7592" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="7603" end="7616" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723889" start="7637" end="7668" title="The Perks of Being a Wallflower" label="The Perks of Being a Wallflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070360" start="7679" end="7694" title="Stephen Chbosky" label="Stephen Chbosky"/>
<link wikidata="Q26971382" start="7710" end="7716" title="Naruto" label="Naruto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993" start="7727" end="7744" title="Masashi Kishimoto" label="Masashi Kishimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q756604" start="7760" end="7770" title="Persepolis (comics)" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q126633" start="7781" end="7796" title="Marjane Satrapi" label="Marjane Satrapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435184" start="7832" end="7855" title="The Secret Life of Bees (novel)" label="The Secret Life of Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q291774" start="7866" end="7879" title="Sue Monk Kidd" label="Sue Monk Kidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q637839" start="7895" end="7910" title="The Kite Runner" label="The Kite Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193116" start="7921" end="7936" title="Khaled Hosseini" label="Khaled Hosseini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822446" start="7952" end="7976" title="The Fortress of Solitude (novel)" label="The Fortress of Solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q440100" start="7987" end="8002" title="Jonathan Lethem" label="Jonathan Lethem"/>
<link wikidata="Q951587" start="8018" end="8033" title="Never Let Me Go (novel)" label="Never Let Me Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q272855" start="8044" end="8058" title="Kazuo Ishiguro" label="Kazuo Ishiguro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8074" end="8084" title="Benjamin Kunkel#Indecision" label="Indecision"/>
<link wikidata="Q817585" start="8095" end="8110" title="Benjamin Kunkel" label="Benjamin Kunkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921967" start="8126" end="8142" title="Black Swan Green" label="Black Swan Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q40479" start="8153" end="8167" title="David Mitchell (author)" label="David Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910245" start="8183" end="8199" title="Goodnight Punpun" label="Goodnight Punpun"/>
<link wikidata="Q600217" start="8210" end="8220" title="Inio Asano" label="Inio Asano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339508" start="8241" end="8252" title="Indignation (novel)" label="Indignation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="8263" end="8274" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q651466" start="8290" end="8307" title="Sputnik Caledonia" label="Sputnik Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504303" start="8318" end="8331" title="Andrew Crumey" label="Andrew Crumey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22981812" start="8347" end="8364" title="Neapolitan Novels" label="Neapolitan Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q368127" start="8375" end="8389" title="Elena Ferrante" label="Elena Ferrante"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996841" start="8409" end="8417" title="Zuleikha (novel)" label="Zuleikha"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130661" start="8428" end="8441" title="Guzel Yakhina" label="Guzel Yakhina"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748023" start="8457" end="8473" title="Washington Black" label="Washington Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q542425" start="8484" end="8495" title="Esi Edugyan" label="Esi Edugyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124353118" start="8511" end="8532" title="Boy Swallows Universe" label="Boy Swallows Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q63866876" start="8543" end="8555" title="Trent Dalton" label="Trent Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653450" start="8584" end="8591" title="Bildung" label="Bildung"/>
<link wikidata="Q783459" start="8606" end="8619" title="Künstlerroman" label="Künstlerroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483342" start="8628" end="8647" title="Mirrors for princes" label="Mirrors for princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q512207" start="8656" end="8668" title="Roman à clef" label="Roman à clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026962" start="8945" end="8963" title="digital humanities" label="digital humanities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4881" wikidata="Q516445" url="?curid=4881" title="Bachelor">
<text>A bachelor is a man who is not and never has been married.

==Etymology==
A bachelor is first attested as the 12th-century &quot;bacheler&quot;: a knight bachelor, a knight too young or poor to gather vassals under his own banner. The Old French &#x27; presumably derives from Provençal &#x27; and Italian &#x27;, but the ultimate source of the word is uncertain. The proposed Medieval Latin * (&quot;vassal&quot;, &quot;field hand&quot;) is only attested late enough that it may have derived from the vernacular languages, rather than from the southern French and northern Spanish Latin . Alternatively, it has been derived from Latin &#x27; (&quot;a stick&quot;), in reference to the wooden sticks used by knights in training.

==History==
From the 14th century, the term &quot;bachelor&quot; was also used for a junior member of a guild (otherwise known as &quot;yeomen&quot;) or university and then for low-level ecclesiastics, as young monks and recently appointed canons. As an inferior grade of scholarship, it came to refer to one holding a &quot;bachelor&#x27;s degree&quot;. This sense of &#x27; or &#x27; is first attested at the University of Paris in the 13th century in the system of degrees established under the auspices of Pope Gregory IX as applied to scholars still &#x27;. There were two classes of &#x27;: the &#x27;, theological candidates passed for admission to the divinity course, and the &#x27;, who had completed the course and were entitled to proceed to the higher degrees.

In the Victorian era, the term &quot;eligible bachelor&quot; was used in the context of upper class matchmaking, denoting a young man who was not only unmarried and eligible for marriage, but also considered &quot;eligible&quot; in financial and social terms for the prospective bride under discussion. Also in the Victorian era, the term &quot;confirmed bachelor&quot; denoted a man who desired to remain single.

By the later 19th century, the term &quot;bachelor&quot; had acquired the general sense of &quot;unmarried man&quot;. The expression bachelor party is recorded 1882. In 1895, a feminine equivalent &quot;bachelor-girl&quot; was coined, replaced in US English by &quot;bachelorette&quot; by the mid-1930s. This terminology is now generally seen as antiquated, and has been largely replaced by the gender-neutral term &quot;single&quot; (first recorded 1964). In England and Wales, the term &quot;bachelor&quot; remained the official term used for the purpose of marriage registration until 2005, when it was abolished in favor of &quot;single.&quot;

Bachelors have been subject to penal laws in many countries, most notably in Ancient Sparta and Rome. At Sparta, men unmarried after a certain age were subject to various penalties (, &quot;atimía&quot;): they were forbidden to watch women&#x27;s gymnastics; during the winter, they were made to march naked through the agora singing a song about their dishonor; and they were not provided with the traditional respect due to the elderly. Some Athenian laws were similar.
Over time, some punishments developed into no more than a teasing game. In some parts of Germany, for instance, men who were still unmarried by their 30th birthday were made to sweep the stairs of the town hall until kissed by a &quot;virgin&quot;. In a 1912 Pittsburgh Press article, there was a suggestion that local bachelors should wear a special pin that identified them as such, or a black necktie to symbolize that &quot;...they [bachelors] should be in perpetual mourning because they are so foolish as to stay unmarried and deprive themselves of the comforts of a wife and home.&quot;

The idea of a tax on bachelors has existed throughout the centuries. Bachelors in Rome fell under the Lex Julia of 18 BC and the Lex Papia Poppaea of AD 9: these lay heavy fines on unmarried or childless people while providing certain privileges to those with several children. A law known as the Marriage Duty Act 1695 was imposed on single males over 25 years old by the English Crown to help generate income for the Nine Years&#x27; War. In Britain, taxes occasionally fell heavier on bachelors than other persons: examples include 6 &amp; 7 Will. 3, the 1785 Tax on Servants, and the 1798 Income Tax.

A study that was conducted by professor Charles Waehler at the University of Akron in Ohio on non-married heterosexual males deduced that once non-married men hit middle age, they will be less likely to marry and remain unattached later into their lives. The study concluded that there is only a 1-in-6 chance that men older than 40 will leave the single life, and that after the age 45, the odds fall to 1-in-20.

In certain Gulf Arab countries, &quot;bachelor&quot; can refer to men who are single as well as immigrant men married to a spouse residing in their country of origin (due to the high added cost of sponsoring a spouse onsite).

== Bachelorette ==

The term &quot;bachelorette&quot; is sometimes used to refer to a woman who has never been married.

The traditional female equivalent to bachelor is spinster, which is considered pejorative and implies unattractiveness (i.e. old maid, cat lady). The term &quot;bachelorette&quot; has been used in its place, particularly in the context of bachelorette parties and reality TV series &quot;The Bachelorette&quot;.

==See also==
* Bachelor pad
* Incel
* Men Going Their Own Way
* Singleton (lifestyle)

==References==
==External links==

* Cole, David. &quot;Note on Analyticity and the Definability of &#x27;Bachelor&#x27;.&quot; Philosophy Department of the University of Minnesota Duluth. 1 February 1999.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q516445" start="2" end="10" title="Bachelor" label="bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="147" end="162" title="knight bachelor" label="knight bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="166" end="172" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q385010" start="215" end="229" title="knights banneret" label="his own banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="235" end="245" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="277" end="286" title="Occitan language" label="Provençal"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="298" end="305" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210319" start="368" end="376" title="linguistic reconstruction" label="proposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="377" end="391" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="834" end="839" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="883" end="893" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="941" end="945" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="970" end="976" title="Canon (priest)" label="canons"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1055" end="1077" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="1141" end="1160" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="1240" end="1255" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1512" end="1525" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360815" start="1542" end="1559" title="eligible bachelor" label="eligible bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="1593" end="1604" title="upper class" label="upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="1605" end="1616" title="arranged marriage" label="matchmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164968" start="1850" end="1868" title="confirmed bachelor" label="confirmed bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057959" start="2053" end="2067" title="bachelor party" label="bachelor party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838841" start="2187" end="2199" title="bachelorette" label="bachelorette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404524" start="2315" end="2334" title="Gender-neutral language" label="gender-neutral term"/>
<link wikidata="Q908826" start="2341" end="2347" title="single person" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="2600" end="2609" title="penal law" label="penal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="2646" end="2653" title="Ancient history" label="Ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="2654" end="2660" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2665" end="2669" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="2889" end="2894" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064853" start="3013" end="3021" title="Ancient Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="3242" end="3251" title="town hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199377" start="3300" end="3316" title="Pittsburgh Press" label="Pittsburgh Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416661" start="3650" end="3666" title="bachelor tax" label="tax on bachelors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267783" start="3738" end="3747" title="Lex Julia" label="Lex Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477796" start="3765" end="3782" title="Lex Papia Poppaea" label="Lex Papia Poppaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q106093124" start="3933" end="3955" title="Marriage Duty Act 1695" label="Marriage Duty Act 1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="4055" end="4075" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4080" end="4087" title="UK" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460402" start="4171" end="4188" title="6 &amp;amp; 7 Will. 3" label="6 &amp;amp; 7 Will. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346135" start="4305" end="4324" title="University of Akron" label="University of Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="4348" end="4360" title="Heterosexuality" label="heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q217172" start="4668" end="4677" title="Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf" label="Gulf Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q253506" start="5054" end="5062" title="spinster" label="spinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="5084" end="5094" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415055" start="5107" end="5123" title="unattractiveness" label="unattractiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051098" start="5140" end="5148" title="cat lady" label="cat lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q56707" start="5244" end="5264" title="Bachelorette party" label="bachelorette parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="5269" end="5279" title="Reality television" label="reality TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278334" start="5287" end="5315" title="The Bachelorette (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Bachelorette&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838837" start="5333" end="5345" title="Bachelor pad" label="Bachelor pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q332395" start="5348" end="5353" title="Incel" label="Incel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906846" start="5356" end="5379" title="Men Going Their Own Way" label="Men Going Their Own Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524094" start="5382" end="5403" title="Singleton (lifestyle)" label="Singleton (lifestyle)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4882" wikidata="Q1185086" url="?curid=4882" title="Background radiation">
<text>Background radiation is a measure of the level of ionizing radiation present in the environment at a particular location which is due to deliberate introduction of radiation sources.

Background radiation originates from a variety of sources, both natural and artificial. These include both cosmic radiation and environmental radioactivity from naturally occurring radioactive materials (such as radon and radium), as well as man-made medical X-rays, fallout from nuclear weapons testing and nuclear accidents.

==Definition==
Background radiation is defined by the International Atomic Energy Agency as &quot;Dose or the dose rate (or an observed measure related to the dose or dose rate) attributable to all sources other than the one(s) specified. A distinction is thus made between the dose which is already in a location, which is defined here as being &quot;background&quot;, and the dose due to a deliberately introduced and specified source. This is important where radiation measurements are taken of a specified radiation source, where the existing background may affect this measurement. An example would be measurement of radioactive contamination in a gamma radiation background, which could increase the total reading above that expected from the contamination alone.

However, if no radiation source is specified as being of concern, then the total radiation dose measurement at a location is generally called the background radiation, and this is usually the case where an ambient dose rate is measured for environmental purposes.

==Background dose rate examples==

Background radiation varies with location and time, and the following table gives examples:

==Natural background radiation==
Radioactive material is found throughout nature. Detectable amounts occur naturally in soil, rocks, water, air, and vegetation, from which it is inhaled and ingested into the body. In addition to this &quot;internal exposure&quot;, humans also receive &quot;external exposure&quot; from radioactive materials that remain outside the body and from cosmic radiation from space. The worldwide average natural dose to humans is about per year. This is four times the worldwide average artificial radiation exposure, which in 2008 amounted to about per year. In some developed countries, like the US and Japan, artificial exposure is, on average, greater than the natural exposure, due to greater access to medical imaging. In Europe, average natural background exposure by country ranges from under annually in the United Kingdom to more than annually for some groups of people in Finland.

The International Atomic Energy Agency states:
:&quot;Exposure to radiation from natural sources is an inescapable feature of everyday life in both working and public environments. This exposure is in most cases of little or no concern to society, but in certain situations the introduction of health protection measures needs to be considered, for example when working with uranium and thorium ores and other Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material (NORM). These situations have become the focus of greater attention by the Agency in recent years.&quot;

===Terrestrial sources===

Terrestrial background radiation, for the purpose of the table above, only includes sources that remain external to the body. The major radionuclides of concern are potassium, uranium and thorium and their decay products, some of which, like radium and radon are intensely radioactive but occur in low concentrations. Most of these sources have been decreasing, due to radioactive decay since the formation of the Earth, because there is no significant amount currently transported to the Earth. Thus, the present activity on Earth from uranium-238 is only half as much as it originally was because of its 4.5 billion year half-life, and potassium-40 (half-life 1.25 billion years) is only at about 8% of original activity. But during the time that humans have existed the amount of radiation has decreased very little.

Many shorter half-life (and thus more intensely radioactive) isotopes have not decayed out of the terrestrial environment because of their on-going natural production. Examples of these are radium-226 (decay product of thorium-230 in decay chain of uranium-238) and radon-222 (a decay product of radium-226 in said chain).

Thorium and uranium (and their daughters) primarily undergo alpha and beta decay, and are not easily detectable. However, many of their daughter products are strong gamma emitters. Thorium-232 is detectable via a 239 keV peak from lead-212, 511, 583 and 2614 keV from thallium-208, and 911 and 969 keV from actinium-228. Uranium-238 manifests as 609, 1120, and 1764 keV peaks of bismuth-214 (&quot;cf.&quot; the same peak for atmospheric radon). Potassium-40 is detectable directly via its 1461 keV gamma peak.

The level over the sea and other large bodies of water tends to be about a tenth of the terrestrial background. Conversely, coastal areas (and areas by the side of fresh water) may have an additional contribution from dispersed sediment.

===Airborne sources===
The biggest source of natural background radiation is airborne radon, a radioactive gas that emanates from the ground. Radon and its isotopes, parent radionuclides, and decay products all contribute to an average inhaled dose of 1.26 mSv/a (millisievert ). Radon is unevenly distributed and varies with weather, such that much higher doses apply to many areas of the world, where it represents a significant health hazard. Concentrations over 500 times the world average have been found inside buildings in Scandinavia, the United States, Iran, and the Czech Republic. Radon is a decay product of uranium, which is relatively common in the Earth&#x27;s crust, but more concentrated in ore-bearing rocks scattered around the world. Radon seeps out of these ores into the atmosphere or into ground water or infiltrates into buildings. It can be inhaled into the lungs, along with its decay products, where they will reside for a period of time after exposure.

Although radon is naturally occurring, exposure can be enhanced or diminished by human activity, notably house construction. A poorly sealed dwelling floor, or poor basement ventilation, in an otherwise well insulated house can result in the accumulation of radon within the dwelling, exposing its residents to high concentrations. The widespread construction of well insulated and sealed homes in the northern industrialized world has led to radon becoming the primary source of background radiation in some localities in northern North America and Europe. Basement sealing and suction ventilation reduce exposure. Some building materials, for example lightweight concrete with alum shale, phosphogypsum and Italian tuff, may emanate radon if they contain radium and are porous to gas.

Radiation exposure from radon is indirect. Radon has a short half-life (4 days) and decays into other solid particulate radium-series radioactive nuclides. These radioactive particles are inhaled and remain lodged in the lungs, causing continued exposure. Radon is thus assumed to be the second leading cause of lung cancer after smoking, and accounts for 15,000 to 22,000 cancer deaths per year in the US alone. However, the discussion about the opposite experimental results is still going on.

About 100,000 Bq/m3 of radon was found in Stanley Watras&#x27;s basement in 1984. He and his neighbours in Boyertown, Pennsylvania, United States may hold the record for the most radioactive dwellings in the world. International radiation protection organizations estimate that a committed dose may be calculated by multiplying the equilibrium equivalent concentration (EEC) of radon by a factor of 8 to 9 and the EEC of thoron by a factor of 40 .

Most of the atmospheric background is caused by radon and its decay products. The gamma spectrum shows prominent peaks at 609, 1120, and 1764 keV, belonging to bismuth-214, a radon decay product. The atmospheric background varies greatly with wind direction and meteorological conditions. Radon also can be released from the ground in bursts and then form &quot;radon clouds&quot; capable of traveling tens of kilometers.

===Cosmic radiation===
The Earth and all living things on it are constantly bombarded by radiation from outer space. This radiation primarily consists of positively charged ions from protons to iron and larger nuclei derived from outside the Solar System. This radiation interacts with atoms in the atmosphere to create an air shower of secondary radiation, including X-rays, muons, protons, alpha particles, pions, electrons, and neutrons. The immediate dose from cosmic radiation is largely from muons, neutrons, and electrons, and this dose varies in different parts of the world based largely on the geomagnetic field and altitude. For example, the city of Denver in the United States (at 1650 meters elevation) receives a cosmic ray dose roughly twice that of a location at sea level. This radiation is much more intense in the upper troposphere, around 10 km altitude, and is thus of particular concern for airline crews and frequent passengers, who spend many hours per year in this environment. During their flights airline crews typically get an additional occupational dose between per year and 2.19 mSv/year, according to various studies.

Similarly, cosmic rays cause higher background exposure in astronauts than in humans on the surface of Earth. Astronauts in low orbits, such as in the International Space Station or the Space Shuttle, are partially shielded by the magnetic field of the Earth, but also suffer from the Van Allen radiation belt which accumulates cosmic rays and results from the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field. Outside low Earth orbit, as experienced by the Apollo astronauts who traveled to the Moon, this background radiation is much more intense, and represents a considerable obstacle to potential future long term human exploration of the Moon or Mars.

Cosmic rays also cause elemental transmutation in the atmosphere, in which secondary radiation generated by the cosmic rays combines with atomic nuclei in the atmosphere to generate different nuclides. Many so-called cosmogenic nuclides can be produced, but probably the most notable is carbon-14, which is produced by interactions with nitrogen atoms. These cosmogenic nuclides eventually reach the Earth&#x27;s surface and can be incorporated into living organisms. The production of these nuclides varies slightly with short-term variations in solar cosmic ray flux, but is considered practically constant over long scales of thousands to millions of years. The constant production, incorporation into organisms and relatively short half-life of carbon-14 are the principles used in radiocarbon dating of ancient biological materials, such as wooden artifacts or human remains.

The cosmic radiation at sea level usually manifests as 511 keV gamma rays from annihilation of positrons created by nuclear reactions of high energy particles and gamma rays. At higher altitudes there is also the contribution of continuous bremsstrahlung spectrum.

===Food and water===
Two of the essential elements that make up the human body, namely potassium and carbon, have radioactive isotopes that add significantly to our background radiation dose. An average human contains about 17 milligrams of potassium-40 (40K) and about 24 nanograms (10−9 g) of carbon-14 (14C), (half-life 5,730 years). Excluding internal contamination by external radioactive material, these two are the largest components of internal radiation exposure from biologically functional components of the human body. About 4,000 nuclei of 40K decay per second, and a similar number of 14C. The energy of beta particles produced by 40K is about 10 times that from the beta particles from 14C decay.

14C is present in the human body at a level of about 3700 Bq (0.1 μCi) with a biological half-life of 40 days. This means there are about 3700 beta particles per second produced by the decay of 14C. However, a 14C atom is in the genetic information of about half the cells, while potassium is not a component of DNA. The decay of a 14C atom inside DNA in one person happens about 50 times per second, changing a carbon atom to one of nitrogen.

The global average internal dose from radionuclides other than radon and its decay products is 0.29 mSv/a, of which 0.17 mSv/a comes from 40K, 0.12 mSv/a comes from the uranium and thorium series, and 12 μSv/a comes from 14C.

===Areas with high natural background radiation===
Some areas have greater dosage than the country-wide averages. In the world in general, exceptionally high natural background locales include Ramsar in Iran, Guarapari in Brazil, Karunagappalli in India, Arkaroola in Australia and Yangjiang in China.

The highest level of purely natural radiation ever recorded on the Earth&#x27;s surface was 90 μGy/h on a Brazilian black beach (&quot;areia preta&quot; in Portuguese) composed of monazite. This rate would convert to 0.8 Gy/a for year-round continuous exposure, but in fact the levels vary seasonally and are much lower in the nearest residences. The record measurement has not been duplicated and is omitted from UNSCEAR&#x27;s latest reports. Nearby tourist beaches in Guarapari and Cumuruxatiba were later evaluated at 14 and 15 μGy/h. Note that the values quoted here are in Grays. To convert to Sieverts (Sv) a radiation weighting factor is required; these weighting factors vary from 1 (beta &amp; gamma) to 20 (alpha particles).

The highest background radiation in an inhabited area is found in Ramsar, primarily due to the use of local naturally radioactive limestone as a building material. The 1000 most exposed residents receive an average external effective radiation dose of per year, six times the ICRP recommended limit for exposure to the public from artificial sources. They additionally receive a substantial internal dose from radon. Record radiation levels were found in a house where the effective dose due to ambient radiation fields was per year, and the internal committed dose from radon was per year. This unique case is over 80 times higher than the world average natural human exposure to radiation.

Epidemiological studies are underway to identify health effects associated with the high radiation levels in Ramsar. It is much too early to draw unambiguous statistically significant conclusions. While so far support for beneficial effects of chronic radiation (like longer lifespan) has been observed in few places only, a protective and adaptive effect is suggested by at least one study whose authors nonetheless caution that data from Ramsar are not yet sufficiently strong to relax existing regulatory dose limits. However, the recent statistical analyses discussed that there is no correlation between the risk of negative health effects and elevated level of natural background radiation.

===Photoelectric===
Background radiation doses in the immediate vicinity of particles of high atomic number materials, within the human body, have a small enhancement due to the photoelectric effect.

===Neutron background===
Most of the natural neutron background is a product of cosmic rays interacting with the atmosphere. The neutron energy peaks at around 1 MeV and rapidly drops above. At sea level, the production of neutrons is about 20 neutrons per second per kilogram of material interacting with the cosmic rays (or, about 100–300 neutrons per square meter per second). The flux is dependent on geomagnetic latitude, with a maximum near the magnetic poles. At solar minimums, due to lower solar magnetic field shielding, the flux is about twice as high vs the solar maximum. It also dramatically increases during solar flares. In the vicinity of larger heavier objects, e.g. buildings or ships, the neutron flux measures higher; this is known as &quot;cosmic ray induced neutron signature&quot;, or &quot;ship effect&quot; as it was first detected with ships at sea.

==Artificial background radiation==
===Atmospheric nuclear testing===


Frequent above-ground nuclear explosions between the 1940s and 1960s scattered a substantial amount of radioactive contamination. Some of this contamination is local, rendering the immediate surroundings highly radioactive, while some of it is carried longer distances as nuclear fallout; some of this material is dispersed worldwide. The increase in background radiation due to these tests peaked in 1963 at about 0.15 mSv per year worldwide, or about 7% of average background dose from all sources. The Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 prohibited above-ground tests, thus by the year 2000 the worldwide dose from these tests has decreased to only 0.005 mSv per year.

This global fallout has caused up to 2.4 million deaths by 2020.

===Occupational exposure===
The International Commission on Radiological Protection recommends limiting occupational radiation exposure to 50 mSv (5 rem) per year, and 100 mSv (10 rem) in 5 years.

However, background radiation for occupational doses includes radiation that is not measured by radiation dose instruments in potential occupational exposure conditions. This includes both offsite &quot;natural background radiation&quot; and any medical radiation doses. This value is not typically measured or known from surveys, such that variations in the total dose to individual workers is not known. This can be a significant confounding factor in assessing radiation exposure effects in a population of workers who may have significantly different natural background and medical radiation doses. This is most significant when the occupational doses are very low.

At an IAEA conference in 2002, it was recommended that occupational doses below 1–2 mSv per year do not warrant regulatory scrutiny.

===Nuclear accidents===
Under normal circumstances, nuclear reactors release small amounts of radioactive gases, which cause small radiation exposures to the public. Events classified on the International Nuclear Event Scale as incidents typically do not release any additional radioactive substances into the environment. Large releases of radioactivity from nuclear reactors are extremely rare. To the present day, there were two major &quot;civilian&quot; accidents – the Chernobyl accident and the Fukushima I nuclear accidents – which caused substantial contamination. The Chernobyl accident was the only one to cause immediate deaths.

Total doses from the Chernobyl accident ranged from 10 to 50 mSv over 20 years for the inhabitants of the affected areas, with most of the dose received in the first years after the disaster, and over 100 mSv for liquidators. There were 28 deaths from acute radiation syndrome.

Total doses from the Fukushima I accidents were between 1 and 15 mSv for the inhabitants of the affected areas. Thyroid doses for children were below 50 mSv. 167 cleanup workers received doses above 100 mSv, with 6 of them receiving more than 250 mSv (the Japanese exposure limit for emergency response workers).

The average dose from the Three Mile Island accident was 0.01 mSv.

Non-civilian: In addition to the civilian accidents described above, several accidents at early nuclear weapons facilities – such as the Windscale fire, the contamination of the Techa River by the nuclear waste from the Mayak compound, and the Kyshtym disaster at the same compound – released substantial radioactivity into the environment. The Windscale fire resulted in thyroid doses of 5–20 mSv for adults and 10–60 mSv for children. The doses from the accidents at Mayak are unknown.

===Nuclear fuel cycle===
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and other U.S. and international agencies, require that licensees limit radiation exposure to individual members of the public to 1 mSv (100 mrem) per year.

=== Energy sources ===
Per UNECE life-cycle assessment, nearly all sources of energy result in some level of occupational and public exposure to radionuclides as result of their manufacturing or operations. The following table uses man·Sievert/GW-annum:
====Coal burning====
Coal plants emit radiation in the form of radioactive fly ash which is inhaled and ingested by neighbours, and incorporated into crops. A 1978 paper from Oak Ridge National Laboratory estimated that coal-fired power plants of that time may contribute a whole-body committed dose of 19 μSv/a to their immediate neighbours in a radius of 500 m. The United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation&#x27;s 1988 report estimated the committed dose 1 km away to be 20 μSv/a for older plants or 1 μSv/a for newer plants with improved fly ash capture, but was unable to confirm these numbers by test. When coal is burned, uranium, thorium and all the uranium daughters accumulated by disintegration – radium, radon, polonium – are released. Radioactive materials previously buried underground in coal deposits are released as fly ash or, if fly ash is captured, may be incorporated into concrete manufactured with fly ash.

==Other sources of dose uptake==

===Medical===
The global average human exposure to artificial radiation is 0.6 mSv/a, primarily from medical imaging. This medical component can range much higher, with an average of 3 mSv per year across the USA population. Other human contributors include smoking, air travel, radioactive building materials, historical nuclear weapons testing, nuclear power accidents and nuclear industry operation.

A typical chest x-ray delivers 20 μSv (2 mrem) of effective dose. A dental x-ray delivers a dose of 5 to 10 μSv. A CT scan delivers an effective dose to the whole body ranging from 1 to 20 mSv (100 to 2000 mrem). The average American receives about 3 mSv of diagnostic medical dose per year; countries with the lowest levels of health care receive almost none. Radiation treatment for various diseases also accounts for some dose, both in individuals and in those around them.

===Consumer items===
Cigarettes contain polonium-210, originating from the decay products of radon, which stick to tobacco leaves. Heavy smoking results in a radiation dose of 160 mSv/year to localized spots at the bifurcations of segmental bronchi in the lungs from the decay of polonium-210. This dose is not readily comparable to the radiation protection limits, since the latter deal with whole body doses, while the dose from smoking is delivered to a very small portion of the body.

==Radiation metrology==
In a radiation metrology laboratory, background radiation refers to the measured value from any incidental sources that affect an instrument when a specific radiation source sample is being measured. This background contribution, which is established as a stable value by multiple measurements, usually before and after sample measurement, is subtracted from the rate measured when the sample is being measured.

This is in accordance with the International Atomic Energy Agency definition of background as being &quot;Dose or dose rate (or an observed measure related to the dose or dose rate) attributable to all sources other than the one(s) specified.

The same issue occurs with radiation protection instruments, where a reading from an instrument may be affected by the background radiation. An example of this is a scintillation detector used for surface contamination monitoring. In an elevated gamma background the scintillator material will be affected by the background gamma, which will add to the reading obtained from any contamination which is being monitored. In extreme cases it will make the instrument unusable as the background swamps the lower level of radiation from the contamination. In such instruments the background can be continually monitored in the &quot;Ready&quot; state, and subtracted from any reading obtained when being used in &quot;Measuring&quot; mode.

Regular Radiation measurement is carried out at multiple levels. Government agencies compile radiation readings as part of environmental monitoring mandates, often making the readings available to the public and sometimes in near-real-time. Collaborative groups and private individuals may also make real-time readings available to the public. Instruments used for radiation measurement include the Geiger–Müller tube and the Scintillation detector. The former is usually more compact and affordable and reacts to several radiation types, while the latter is more complex and can detect specific radiation energies and types. Readings indicate radiation levels from all sources including background, and real-time readings are in general unvalidated, but correlation between independent detectors increases confidence in measured levels.

List of near-real-time government radiation measurement sites, employing multiple instrument types:
* Europe and Canada: European Radiological Data Exchange Platform (EURDEP) Simple map of Gamma Dose Rates
* USA: EPA Radnet near-real-time and laboratory data by state

List of international near-real-time collaborative/private measurement sites, employing primarily Geiger-Muller detectors:
* GMC map: http://www.gmcmap.com/ (mix of old-data detector stations and some near-real-time ones)
* Netc: http://www.netc.com/
* Radmon: http://www.radmon.org/
* Radiation Network: http://radiationnetwork.com/
* Radioactive@Home: http://radioactiveathome.org/map/ 
* Safecast: http://safecast.org/tilemap (the green circles are real-time detectors)
* uRad Monitor: http://www.uradmonitor.com/

==See also==
* Background radiation equivalent time (BRET)
* Banana equivalent dose
* Environmental radioactivity
* Flight-time equivalent dose
* Noise (electronics)
* Low-background steel

==References==
==External links==
* Background radiation description from the Radiation Effects Research Foundation
* Environmental and Background Radiation FAQ from the Health Physics Society
* Radiation Dose Chart from the American Nuclear Society
* Radiation Dose Calculator from the United States Environmental Protection Agency</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1185086" start="0" end="20" title="Background radiation" label="Background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="50" end="68" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="291" end="307" title="cosmic radiation" label="cosmic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4844927" start="312" end="339" title="environmental radioactivity" label="environmental radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873354" start="345" end="385" title="naturally occurring radioactive material" label="naturally occurring radioactive material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="396" end="401" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="406" end="412" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="443" end="449" title="X-ray" label="X-rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="451" end="458" title="Nuclear fallout" label="fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="464" end="487" title="nuclear weapons testing" label="nuclear weapons testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620824" start="492" end="508" title="nuclear accident" label="nuclear accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="566" end="600" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1796" end="1800" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239054" start="2115" end="2119" title="effective radiation dose" label="dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="2411" end="2426" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="2600" end="2634" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873354" start="3048" end="3052" title="NORM" label="NORM"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="3316" end="3328" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="3345" end="3354" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="3356" end="3363" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="3368" end="3375" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="3422" end="3428" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="3433" end="3438" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="3549" end="3566" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="3717" end="3728" title="uranium-238" label="uranium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q16021" start="3790" end="3797" title="1000000000 (number)" label="billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251076" start="3818" end="3830" title="potassium-40" label="potassium-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="4191" end="4197" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387827" start="4267" end="4276" title="radon-222" label="radon-222"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="4297" end="4303" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="4385" end="4390" title="alpha decay" label="alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="4395" end="4405" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="4461" end="4477" title="daughter product" label="daughter product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885290" start="4506" end="4517" title="Thorium-232" label="Thorium-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372384" start="4556" end="4564" title="lead-212" label="lead-212"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223" start="4593" end="4605" title="thallium-208" label="thallium-208"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417724" start="4632" end="4644" title="actinium-228" label="actinium-228"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="5162" end="5167" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="5232" end="5239" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="5249" end="5261" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="5268" end="5281" title="decay product" label="decay product"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5333" end="5338" title="Sievert#Common SI usage" label="mSv/a"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126611" start="5495" end="5520" title="Health effects of radon" label="significant health hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="5855" end="5859" title="ores" label="ores"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="5981" end="5994" title="decay product" label="decay product"/>
<link wikidata="Q916964" start="6711" end="6731" title="lightweight concrete" label="lightweight concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737349" start="6737" end="6747" title="alum shale" label="alum shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q729386" start="6749" end="6762" title="phosphogypsum" label="phosphogypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="6775" end="6779" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="6815" end="6821" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6966" end="6979" title="Decay chain#Radium series" label="radium-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="7158" end="7169" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="7176" end="7183" title="tobacco smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7385" end="7406" title="Health effects of radon#Accumulation in dwellings" label="Stanley Watras&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132054" start="7450" end="7473" title="Boyertown, Pennsylvania" label="Boyertown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152911" start="7623" end="7637" title="committed dose" label="committed dose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7675" end="7711" title="equilibrium equivalent concentration" label="equilibrium equivalent concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334543" start="7764" end="7770" title="thoron" label="thoron"/>
<link wikidata="Q906816" start="7874" end="7888" title="gamma spectroscopy" label="gamma spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="7934" end="7937" title="keV" label="keV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372372" start="7952" end="7963" title="bismuth-214" label="bismuth-214"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="8398" end="8404" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="8409" end="8413" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="8425" end="8431" title="atomic nucleus" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="8457" end="8469" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316958" start="8538" end="8548" title="air shower (physics)" label="air shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="8583" end="8588" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151" start="8591" end="8595" title="muon" label="muon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="8598" end="8604" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="8607" end="8621" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097" start="8624" end="8628" title="pion" label="pion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="8631" end="8639" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="8646" end="8653" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="8819" end="8836" title="geomagnetic field" label="geomagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="8876" end="8882" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q40631" start="9054" end="9065" title="troposphere" label="troposphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="9128" end="9135" title="airline" label="airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="9425" end="9434" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="9494" end="9499" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="9517" end="9544" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="9552" end="9565" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="9597" end="9611" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q188533" start="9651" end="9675" title="Van Allen radiation belt" label="Van Allen radiation belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="9803" end="9809" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="9841" end="9845" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="9989" end="9993" title="moon landing" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51075" start="9997" end="10001" title="Human mission to Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="10027" end="10050" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="elemental transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="10142" end="10155" title="atomic nuclei" label="atomic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q108149" start="10196" end="10203" title="nuclide" label="nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174319" start="10221" end="10239" title="cosmogenic nuclide" label="cosmogenic nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="10291" end="10300" title="carbon-14" label="carbon-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="10341" end="10349" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="10740" end="10749" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="10790" end="10808" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="10981" end="10989" title="positron" label="positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q655904" start="11126" end="11140" title="bremsstrahlung" label="bremsstrahlung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251076" start="11393" end="11405" title="potassium-40" label="potassium-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="11447" end="11456" title="carbon-14" label="carbon-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="11770" end="11783" title="beta particle" label="beta particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="11943" end="11963" title="biological half-life" label="biological half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="12177" end="12180" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="12299" end="12307" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q951051" start="12730" end="12736" title="Ramsar, Mazandaran" label="Ramsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q267439" start="12746" end="12755" title="Guarapari" label="Guarapari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373673" start="12767" end="12781" title="Karunagappalli" label="Karunagappalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791941" start="12792" end="12801" title="Arkaroola" label="Arkaroola"/>
<link wikidata="Q59209" start="12819" end="12828" title="Yangjiang" label="Yangjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q422011" start="13020" end="13028" title="monazite" label="monazite"/>
<link wikidata="Q267439" start="13311" end="13320" title="Guarapari" label="Guarapari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13325" end="13337" title="Cumuruxatiba" label="Cumuruxatiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q190095" start="13419" end="13424" title="Gray (unit)" label="Grays"/>
<link wikidata="Q951051" start="13643" end="13649" title="Ramsar, Mazandaran" label="Ramsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239054" start="13801" end="13825" title="effective radiation dose" label="effective radiation dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667473" start="13853" end="13857" title="ICRP" label="ICRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152911" start="14128" end="14142" title="committed dose" label="committed dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="14148" end="14153" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="15146" end="15166" title="photoelectric effect" label="photoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q817114" start="16222" end="16247" title="radioactive contamination" label="radioactive contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="16391" end="16406" title="nuclear fallout" label="nuclear fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="16624" end="16647" title="Limited Test Ban Treaty" label="Limited Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="16793" end="16807" title="global fallout" label="global fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667473" start="16886" end="16937" title="ICRP" label="International Commission on Radiological Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="17729" end="17733" title="IAEA" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q185657" start="18048" end="18081" title="International Nuclear Event Scale" label="International Nuclear Event Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="18332" end="18350" title="Chernobyl accident" label="Chernobyl accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="18359" end="18388" title="Fukushima I nuclear accidents" label="Fukushima I nuclear accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377734" start="18712" end="18723" title="Liquidator (Chernobyl)" label="liquidators"/>
<link wikidata="Q275459" start="18751" end="18775" title="acute radiation syndrome" label="acute radiation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q840847" start="19118" end="19144" title="Three Mile Island accident" label="Three Mile Island accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q649682" start="19297" end="19311" title="Windscale fire" label="Windscale fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062895" start="19338" end="19349" title="Techa River" label="Techa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q612137" start="19380" end="19385" title="Mayak" label="Mayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349539" start="19404" end="19420" title="Kyshtym disaster" label="Kyshtym disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320326" start="19678" end="19707" title="Nuclear Regulatory Commission" label="Nuclear Regulatory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="19713" end="19758" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q103246" start="19892" end="19895" title="sievert" label="mSv"/>
<link wikidata="Q260126" start="19902" end="19905" title="roentgen equivalent man" label="rem"/>
<link wikidata="Q659012" start="19945" end="19950" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Europe" label="UNECE"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="20063" end="20075" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q103246" start="20154" end="20161" title="Sievert" label="Sievert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137808" start="20247" end="20254" title="fly ash" label="fly ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q714439" start="20347" end="20376" title="Oak Ridge National Laboratory" label="Oak Ridge National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297408" start="20540" end="20610" title="United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation" label="United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="21267" end="21282" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21685" end="21692" title="CT scan#Scan dose" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395430" start="22088" end="22100" title="polonium-210" label="polonium-210"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="22163" end="22177" title="tobacco leaves" label="tobacco leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="23006" end="23040" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q910990" start="23384" end="23406" title="scintillation detector" label="scintillation detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210142" start="24354" end="24372" title="Geiger–Müller tube" label="Geiger–Müller tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q910990" start="24381" end="24403" title="Scintillation detector" label="Scintillation detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839654" start="25596" end="25632" title="Background radiation equivalent time" label="Background radiation equivalent time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630196" start="25642" end="25664" title="Banana equivalent dose" label="Banana equivalent dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4844927" start="25667" end="25694" title="Environmental radioactivity" label="Environmental radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952277" start="25697" end="25724" title="Flight-time equivalent dose" label="Flight-time equivalent dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306265" start="25727" end="25746" title="Noise (electronics)" label="Noise (electronics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692715" start="25749" end="25769" title="Low-background steel" label="Low-background steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280334" start="25849" end="25886" title="Radiation Effects Research Foundation" label="Radiation Effects Research Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859887" start="25941" end="25963" title="Health Physics Society" label="Health Physics Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q465883" start="25996" end="26020" title="American Nuclear Society" label="American Nuclear Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="26058" end="26103" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4884" wikidata="Q418882" url="?curid=4884" title="Balmoral">
<text>Balmoral may refer to:

== Places ==
=== Australia ===
* Balmoral, New South Wales, a locality of Sydney
* Balmoral, New South Wales (Lake Macquarie)
* Balmoral, New South Wales (Southern Highlands)
* Balmoral, Queensland
* Balmoral Ridge, Queensland
* Balmoral, Victoria

=== Belgium ===
* Balmoral, a hamlet near the town of Spa, Belgium

=== Canada ===
* Balmoral, British Columbia
* Balmoral, New Brunswick
* Balmoral Parish, New Brunswick
* Balmoral Mills, Nova Scotia
* Balmoral, Ontario, a community in Haldimand County
* Balmoral Grist Mill Museum, Balmoral Mills, Nova Scotia
* Balmoral, Manitoba

=== New Zealand ===
* Balmoral, New Zealand, a suburb of Auckland

=== Northern Ireland ===
* Balmoral (District Electoral Area), an area in south Belfast
* Balmoral railway station, Belfast
* Balmoral Golf Club, Belfast
* The Balmoral Show, an agricultural show that takes place annually near Belfast
* Balmoral Park, Lisburn, the new location of the Balmoral Show

=== Scotland ===
* Balmoral, a suburb of Galashiels
* Balmoral Castle, a residence of King Charles III in Aberdeenshire, Scotland
*The Balmoral Hotel in Edinburgh

=== South Africa ===
* Balmoral, Mpumalanga, a village and colliery near Witbank

=== United States ===
* Balmoral, Louisiana
* Balmoral, Maryland
* Balmoral, Tennessee
* Balmoral, Wisconsin
* Balmoral Park, Illinois, horse racing track in Crete, Illinois
* Lakewood Balmoral Historic District, Chicago, Illinois

== Clothing ==
* Balmoral bonnet, an unbrimmed cap common in Highland dress
* Balmoral (shoe), a type of men&#x27;s dress shoe
* Balmoral tartan pattern worn by the British Royal Family

== Education ==
* Balmoral Hall School, Winnipeg, Canada
* Balmoral High School (Belfast, Northern Ireland)
* Balmoral Jr Secondary School, North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
*Balmoral School, Auckland, New Zealand
* Balmoral State High School, Queensland, Australia

== Food ==
* Balmoral Chicken

== Ships ==
* , a passenger ship used for pleasure cruises in the UK
* , a cruise ship owned and operated by Fred. Olsen Cruise Lines

== Theater ==
* &quot;Balmoral&quot; (play), a 1987 play by Michael Frayn

== See also ==
* Balmoral Reef Plate, small tectonic plate in the Pacific Ocean north of Fiji
* Battle of Coral–Balmoral, a series of actions in May and June 1968 during the Vietnam War</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q418882" start="0" end="8" title="Balmoral" label="Balmoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390840" start="57" end="82" title="Balmoral, New South Wales" label="Balmoral, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852370" start="107" end="149" title="Balmoral, New South Wales (Lake Macquarie)" label="Balmoral, New South Wales (Lake Macquarie)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852371" start="152" end="198" title="Balmoral, New South Wales (Southern Highlands)" label="Balmoral, New South Wales (Southern Highlands)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852374" start="201" end="221" title="Balmoral, Queensland" label="Balmoral, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253027" start="224" end="250" title="Balmoral Ridge, Queensland" label="Balmoral Ridge, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852375" start="253" end="271" title="Balmoral, Victoria" label="Balmoral, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39865" start="327" end="339" title="Spa, Belgium" label="Spa, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852366" start="358" end="384" title="Balmoral, British Columbia" label="Balmoral, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881468" start="387" end="410" title="Balmoral, New Brunswick" label="Balmoral, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365776" start="413" end="443" title="Balmoral Parish, New Brunswick" label="Balmoral Parish, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852391" start="446" end="473" title="Balmoral Mills, Nova Scotia" label="Balmoral Mills, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q385346" start="476" end="493" title="Balmoral, Ontario" label="Balmoral, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852386" start="529" end="555" title="Balmoral Grist Mill Museum" label="Balmoral Grist Mill Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852367" start="587" end="605" title="Balmoral, Manitoba" label="Balmoral, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852373" start="629" end="650" title="Balmoral, New Zealand" label="Balmoral, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852377" start="701" end="735" title="Balmoral (District Electoral Area)" label="Balmoral (District Electoral Area)"/>
<link wikidata="Q568784" start="764" end="788" title="Balmoral railway station" label="Balmoral railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852385" start="800" end="818" title="Balmoral Golf Club" label="Balmoral Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16904352" start="834" end="847" title="Balmoral Show" label="Balmoral Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q89284110" start="911" end="933" title="Balmoral Park, Lisburn" label="Balmoral Park, Lisburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016925" start="1015" end="1025" title="Galashiels" label="Galashiels"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="1028" end="1043" title="Balmoral Castle" label="Balmoral Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700280" start="1109" end="1123" title="Balmoral Hotel" label="Balmoral Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975794" start="1161" end="1181" title="Balmoral, Mpumalanga" label="Balmoral, Mpumalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691566" start="1244" end="1263" title="Balmoral, Louisiana" label="Balmoral, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691873" start="1266" end="1284" title="Balmoral, Maryland" label="Balmoral, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709801" start="1287" end="1306" title="Balmoral, Tennessee" label="Balmoral, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852376" start="1309" end="1328" title="Balmoral, Wisconsin" label="Balmoral, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852397" start="1331" end="1354" title="Balmoral Park, Illinois" label="Balmoral Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479369" start="1396" end="1431" title="Lakewood Balmoral Historic District" label="Lakewood Balmoral Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q285487" start="1469" end="1484" title="Balmoral bonnet" label="Balmoral bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q461765" start="1530" end="1545" title="Balmoral (shoe)" label="Balmoral (shoe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="1581" end="1596" title="Balmoral tartan" label="Balmoral tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852387" start="1657" end="1677" title="Balmoral Hall School" label="Balmoral Hall School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852388" start="1698" end="1746" title="Balmoral High School (Belfast, Northern Ireland)" label="Balmoral High School (Belfast, Northern Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852390" start="1749" end="1777" title="Balmoral Jr Secondary School" label="Balmoral Jr Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q63627398" start="1822" end="1837" title="Balmoral School" label="Balmoral School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852399" start="1863" end="1889" title="Balmoral State High School" label="Balmoral State High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q115801829" start="1927" end="1943" title="Balmoral Chicken" label="Balmoral Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852378" start="2096" end="2123" title="Balmoral (play)" label="&amp;quot;Balmoral&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363051" start="2172" end="2191" title="Balmoral Reef Plate" label="Balmoral Reef Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870789" start="2251" end="2275" title="Battle of Coral–Balmoral" label="Battle of Coral–Balmoral"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4885" wikidata="Q402487" url="?curid=4885" title="Bannock">
<text>Bannock may mean:

* Bannock (British and Irish food), a kind of bread, cooked on a stone or griddle served mainly in Scotland but consumed throughout the British Isles
* Bannock (Indigenous American food), various types of bread, usually prepared by pan-frying also known as a native delicacy 
* Bannock people, a Native American people of what is now southeastern Oregon and western Idaho
* Bannock County, Idaho
* Bannock Mountain, a summit in Washington state, US
* Bannock, Ohio
* Bannock Pass, between Idaho and Montana
* Russell Bannock (1919–2020), Canadian World War II flying ace and test pilot

==See also==
*Bannack, Montana, town named after the tribe, today a ghost town</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q402487" start="0" end="7" title="Bannock" label="Bannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q806901" start="21" end="53" title="Bannock (British and Irish food)" label="Bannock (British and Irish food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109827446" start="171" end="205" title="Bannock (Indigenous American food)" label="Bannock (Indigenous American food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q806902" start="297" end="311" title="Bannock people" label="Bannock people"/>
<link wikidata="Q113017" start="393" end="414" title="Bannock County, Idaho" label="Bannock County, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q49010648" start="417" end="433" title="Bannock Mountain" label="Bannock Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472861" start="470" end="483" title="Bannock, Ohio" label="Bannock, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857001" start="486" end="498" title="Bannock Pass" label="Bannock Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381342" start="528" end="543" title="Russell Bannock" label="Russell Bannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q806862" start="620" end="636" title="Bannack, Montana" label="Bannack, Montana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4886" wikidata="Q806945" url="?curid=4886" title="Banquo">
<text>Lord Banquo , the Thane of Lochaber, is a semi-historical character in William Shakespeare&#x27;s 1606 play &quot;Macbeth&quot;. In the play, he is at first an ally of Macbeth (both are generals in the King&#x27;s army) and they meet the Three Witches together. After prophesying that Macbeth will become king, the witches tell Banquo that he will not be king himself, but that his descendants will be. Later, Macbeth in his lust for power sees Banquo as a threat and has him murdered by three hired assassins; Banquo&#x27;s son, Fleance, escapes. Banquo&#x27;s ghost returns in a later scene, causing Macbeth to react with alarm in public during a feast.

Shakespeare borrowed the character Banquo from &quot;Holinshed&#x27;s Chronicles&quot;, a history of Britain published by Raphael Holinshed in 1587. In &quot;Chronicles&quot;, Banquo is an accomplice to Macbeth in the murder of the king, rather than a loyal subject of the king who is seen as an enemy by Macbeth. Shakespeare may have changed this aspect of his character to please King James, who was thought at the time to be a descendant of the real Banquo. Critics often interpret Banquo&#x27;s role in the play as being a foil to Macbeth, resisting evil whereas Macbeth embraces it. Sometimes, however, his motives are unclear, and some critics question his purity. He does nothing to accuse Macbeth of murdering the king, even though he has reason to believe Macbeth is responsible.

==Sources==
Shakespeare often used Raphael Holinshed&#x27;s &quot;Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland&quot;, commonly known as &quot;Holinshed&#x27;s Chronicles&quot;, as a source for his plays, and in &quot;Macbeth&quot;, he borrows from several of the tales in that work. Holinshed portrays Banquo as a historical figure, who is an accomplice in the murder by Mac Bethad mac Findlaích (Macbeth) of Donnchad mac Crínáin (King Duncan) and plays an important part in ensuring that Macbeth, not Máel Coluim mac Donnchada (Malcolm), takes the throne in the coup that follows. Holinshed in turn used an earlier work, the &quot;Scotorum Historiae&quot; (1526–7) by Hector Boece, as his source. Boece&#x27;s work is the first known record of Banquo and his son Fleance (spelled &quot;Banquho&quot; and &quot;Fleancho&quot; in the Latin), and scholars such as David Bevington generally consider them fictional characters invented by Boece. In Shakespeare&#x27;s day, however, they were considered historical figures of great repute, and the king, James I, based his claim to the throne in part on a descent from Banquo.

Within the literature there exists various claims surrounding Thane Banquo&#x27;s ancestry. According to the 17th century historian Frederic van Bossen, Thane Banquo (which he wrote as Banqwho and sometimes as Banchou) was the son of Dunclina, the daughter of Albanach ap Crinan, the thane of the Isles, and her husband Kenneth. Kenneth was the son of Fferqwhart, who was the son of son of Murdoch the Thane of &quot;Lochabar&quot;, the son of Prince Dorus, who was the son of a King named Erlus, whose kingdom was not identified. According to Frederic van Bossen, Banquo married his 4th cousin Mauldvina the daughter of Thalus the Thane of Atholl, and together they were the parents of Fleance, a daughter called Castisa who married Frederic the Lord of Cromartie, and a number of other sons who were murdered by King Macbeth.

It is known that the House of Stuart descends from Walter fitz Alan, Steward of Scotland, and in some studies he is believed to have been the grandson of Fleance and Gruffydd ap Llywelyn&#x27;s daughter, Nesta ferch Gruffydd. However, in Frederic van Bossen&#x27;s handwritten notes, which were created from numerous resources he collected in his travels through Europe, Fleance&#x27;s wife is identified as Nesta&#x27;s sister, Marjoretta the daughter of &quot;griffin ap Livlein&quot;. In reality, Walter fitz Alan was the son of Alan fitz Flaad, a Breton knight.

Unlike his sources, Shakespeare gives Banquo no role in the King&#x27;s murder, making it a deed committed solely by Macbeth and his wife, Lady Macbeth. Why Shakespeare&#x27;s Banquo is so different from the character described by Holinshed and Boece is not known, though critics have proposed several possible explanations. First among them is the risk associated with portraying the king&#x27;s ancestor as a murderer and conspirator in the plot to overthrow a rightful king, as well as the author&#x27;s desire to flatter a powerful patron. But Shakespeare may also simply have altered Banquo&#x27;s character because there was no dramatic need for another accomplice to the murder. There was, however, a need to provide a dramatic contrast to Macbeth; a role that many scholars argue is filled by Banquo. Similarly, when Jean de Schelandre wrote about Banquo in his &quot;Stuartide&quot; in 1611, he also changed the character by portraying him as a noble and honourable man—the critic D.W. Maskell describes him as &quot;...Schelandre&#x27;s paragon of valour and virtue&quot;—probably for reasons similar to Shakespeare&#x27;s.

Banquo&#x27;s role in the coup that follows the murder is harder to explain. Banquo&#x27;s loyalty to Macbeth, rather than Malcolm, after Duncan&#x27;s death makes him a passive accomplice in the coup: Malcolm, as Prince of Cumberland, is the rightful heir to the throne and Macbeth a usurper. Daniel Amneus argued that &quot;Macbeth&quot; as it survives is a revision of an earlier play, in which Duncan granted Macbeth not only the title of Thane of Cawdor, but the &quot;greater honor&quot; of Prince of Cumberland (i.e. heir to the throne of Scotland). Banquo&#x27;s silence may be a survival from the posited earlier play, in which Macbeth was the legitimate successor to Duncan.

==Role in the play==

Banquo is in a third of the play&#x27;s scenes, as both a human and a ghost. As significant as he is to the plot, he has fewer lines than the relatively insignificant Ross, a Scottish nobleman who survives the play. In the second scene of the play, a wounded soldier describes the manner in which Macbeth, Thane of Glamis, and Banquo, Thane of Lochaber, resisted invading forces, fighting side by side. In the next scene, Banquo and Macbeth, returning from the battle together, encounter the Three Witches, who predict that Macbeth will become Thane of Cawdor, and then king. Banquo, sceptical of the witches, challenges them to predict his own future, and they foretell that Banquo will never himself take the throne, but will beget a line of kings. Banquo remains sceptical after the encounter, wondering aloud if evil can ever speak the truth. He warns Macbeth that evil will offer men a small, hopeful truth only to catch them in a deadly trap.

When Macbeth kills the king and takes the throne, Banquo—the only one aware of this encounter with the witches—reserves judgment for God. He is unsure whether Macbeth committed regicide to gain the throne, but muses in a soliloquy that &quot;I fear / Thou play&#x27;dst most foully for &#x27;t&quot;. He offers his respects to the new King Macbeth and pledges loyalty. Later, worried that Banquo&#x27;s descendants and not his own will rule Scotland, Macbeth sends two men, and then a Third Murderer, to kill Banquo and his son Fleance. During the melee, Banquo holds off the assailants so that Fleance can escape, but is himself killed. The ghost of Banquo later returns to haunt Macbeth at the banquet in Act Three, Scene Four. A terrified Macbeth sees him, while the apparition is invisible to his guests. He appears again to Macbeth in a vision granted by the Three Witches, wherein Macbeth sees a long line of kings descended from Banquo.

==Analysis==

===Foil to Macbeth===

Many scholars see Banquo as a foil and a contrast to Macbeth. Macbeth, for example, eagerly accepts the Three Witches&#x27; prophecy as true and seeks to help it along. Banquo, on the other hand, doubts the prophecies and the intentions of these seemingly evil creatures. Whereas Macbeth places his hope in the prediction that he will be king, Banquo argues that evil only offers gifts that lead to destruction. Banquo steadily resists the temptations of evil within the play, praying to heaven for help, while Macbeth seeks darkness, and prays that evil powers will aid him. This is visible in act two; after Banquo sees Duncan to bed, he says: &quot;There&#x27;s husbandry in heaven, / Their candles are all out&quot;. This premonition of the coming darkness in association with Macbeth&#x27;s murders is repeated just before Banquo is killed: &quot;it will be rain to-night&quot;, Banquo tells his son Fleance.

Banquo&#x27;s status as a contrast to Macbeth makes for some tense moments in the play. In act two, scene one, Banquo meets his son Fleance and asks him to take both his sword and his dagger (&quot;Hold, take my sword ... Take thee that too&quot;). He also explains that he has been having trouble sleeping due to &quot;cursed thoughts that nature / gives way to in repose!&quot; On Macbeth&#x27;s approach, he demands the sword returned to him quickly. Scholars have interpreted this to mean that Banquo has been dreaming of murdering the king as Macbeth&#x27;s accomplice to take the throne for his own family, as the Three Witches prophesied to him. In this reading, his good nature is so revolted by these thoughts that he gives his sword and dagger to Fleance to be sure they do not come true, but is so nervous at Macbeth&#x27;s approach that he demands them back. Other scholars have responded that Banquo&#x27;s dreams have less to do with killing the king and more to do with Macbeth. They argue that Banquo is merely setting aside his sword for the night. Then, when Macbeth approaches, Banquo, having had dreams about Macbeth&#x27;s deeds, takes back his sword as a precaution in this case.

Macbeth eventually sees that Banquo can no longer be trusted to aid him in his evil, and considers his friend a threat to his newly acquired throne; thus, he has him murdered. Banquo&#x27;s ability to live on in different ways is another oppositional force, in this case to Macbeth&#x27;s impending death. His spirit lives on in Fleance, his son, and in his ghostly presence at the banquet.

===Ghost scenes===
When Macbeth returns to the witches later in the play, they show him an apparition of the murdered Banquo, along with eight of his descendants. The scene carries deep significance: King James, on the throne when &quot;Macbeth&quot; was written, was believed to be separated from Banquo by nine generations. What Shakespeare writes here thus amounts to a strong support of James&#x27; right to the throne by lineage, and for audiences of Shakespeare&#x27;s day, a very real fulfilment of the witches&#x27; prophecy to Banquo that his sons would take the throne. This apparition is also deeply unsettling to Macbeth, who not only wants the throne for himself, but also desires to father a line of kings.

Banquo&#x27;s other appearance as a ghost during the banquet scene serves as an indicator of Macbeth&#x27;s conscience returning to plague his thoughts. Banquo&#x27;s triumph over death appears symbolically, insofar as he literally takes Macbeth&#x27;s seat during the feast. Shocked, Macbeth uses words appropriate to the metaphor of usurpation, describing Banquo as &quot;crowned&quot; with wounds. The spirit drains Macbeth&#x27;s manhood along with the blood from his cheeks; as soon as Banquo&#x27;s form vanishes, Macbeth announces: &quot;Why, so; being gone, / I am a man again.&quot;

Like the vision of Banquo&#x27;s lineage, the banquet scene has also been the subject of criticism. Critics have questioned whether not one, but perhaps two ghosts appear in this scene: Banquo and Duncan. Scholars arguing that Duncan attends the banquet state that Macbeth&#x27;s lines to the Ghost could apply equally well to the slain king. &quot;Thou canst not say I did it&quot;, for example, can mean that Macbeth is not the man who actually killed Banquo, or it can mean that Duncan, who was asleep when Macbeth killed him, cannot claim to have seen his killer. To add to the confusion, some lines Macbeth directs to the ghost, such as &quot;Thy bones are marrowless&quot;, cannot rightly be said of Banquo, who has only recently died.

Scholars debate whether Macbeth&#x27;s vision of Banquo is real or a hallucination. Macbeth had already seen a hallucination before murdering Duncan: a knife hovering in the air. Several performances of the play have even ignored the stage direction to have the Ghost of Banquo enter at all, heightening the sense that Macbeth is growing mad, since the audience cannot see what he claims to see. Scholars opposing this view claim that while the dagger is unusual, ghosts of murdered victims are more believable, having a basis in the audience&#x27;s superstitions. Spirits in other Shakespeare plays—notably &quot;Hamlet&quot; and &quot;Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;—exist in ambiguous forms, occasionally even calling into question their own presence.

The concept of a character being confronted at a triumphant feast with a reminder of their downfall is not unique to Shakespeare and may originate from Belshazzar&#x27;s feast, as portrayed in the Bible. The term &#x27;ghost at the feast&#x27; has entered popular culture, and is often used as a metaphor for a subject a person would rather avoid considering, or (considering the general plot of &quot;Macbeth&quot;) a reminder of a person&#x27;s unpleasant past or likely future.

==Performances and interpretations==

Banquo&#x27;s role, especially in the banquet ghost scene, has been subject to a variety of mediums and interpretations. Shakespeare&#x27;s text states: &quot;Enter Ghost of Banquo, and sits in Macbeth&#x27;s place.&quot; Several television versions have altered this slightly, having Banquo appear suddenly in the chair, rather than walking onstage and into it. Special effects and camera tricks also allow producers to make the ghost disappear and reappear, highlighting the fact that &quot;only&quot; Macbeth can see it.

Stage directors, unaided by post-production effects and camera tricks, have used other methods to depict the ghost. In the late 19th century, elaborate productions of the play staged by Henry Irving employed a wide variety of approaches for this task. In 1877 a green silhouette was used to create a ghostlike image; ten years later a trick chair was used to allow an actor to appear in the middle of the scene, and then again from the midst of the audience. In 1895 a shaft of blue light served to indicate the presence of Banquo&#x27;s spirit. In 1933 a Russian director Theodore Komisarjevsky staged a modern retelling of the play (Banquo and Macbeth were told of their future through palmistry); he used Macbeth&#x27;s shadow as the ghost. In 1936, Orson Welles directed the Federal Theatre Project production of the play, with an African-American cast that included Canada Lee in the role of Banquo.

Film adaptations have approached Banquo&#x27;s character in a variety of ways. Akira Kurosawa&#x27;s 1957 adaptation &quot;Throne of Blood&quot; makes the character into Capitan Miki (played by Minoru Chiaki), slain by Macbeth&#x27;s equivalent (Captain Washizu) when his wife explains that she is with child. News of Miki&#x27;s death does not reach Washizu until after he has seen the ghost in the banquet scene. In Roman Polanski&#x27;s 1971 adaptation, Banquo is played by acclaimed stage actor Martin Shaw, in a style reminiscent of earlier stage performances. Polanski&#x27;s version also emphasises Banquo&#x27;s objection to Macbeth&#x27;s ascendency by showing him remaining silent as the other thanes around him hail Macbeth as king. In the 1990 film &quot;Men of Respect&quot;, a reimagining of &quot;Macbeth&quot; as taking place among a New York Mafia crime family, the character of Banquo is named &quot;Bankie Como&quot; and played by American actor Dennis Farina.

==See also==
*List of ghosts

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q806945" start="0" end="4" title="Banquo" label="Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q806945" start="5" end="11" title="Banquo" label="Banquo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451020" start="18" end="23" title="Thane (Scotland)" label="Thane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181006" start="27" end="35" title="Lochaber" label="Lochaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="71" end="90" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="114" end="121" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10322723" start="168" end="175" title="Macbeth (character)" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15698345" start="238" end="251" title="Three Witches" label="Three Witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429667" start="530" end="537" title="Fleance" label="Fleance"/>
<link wikidata="Q690389" start="710" end="737" title="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles" label="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q503126" start="779" end="796" title="Raphael Holinshed" label="Raphael Holinshed"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1039" end="1049" title="James I of England" label="King James"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563727" start="1184" end="1188" title="Foil (literature)" label="foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q503126" start="1482" end="1499" title="Raphael Holinshed" label="Raphael Holinshed"/>
<link wikidata="Q690389" start="1589" end="1616" title="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles" label="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="1664" end="1671" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q244403" start="1818" end="1842" title="Macbeth of Scotland" label="Mac Bethad mac Findlaích"/>
<link wikidata="Q26326" start="1856" end="1876" title="Duncan I of Scotland" label="Donnchad mac Crínáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q68508" start="1949" end="1974" title="Malcolm III of Scotland" label="Máel Coluim mac Donnchada"/>
<link wikidata="Q652097" start="2116" end="2128" title="Hector Boece" label="Hector Boece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429667" start="2211" end="2218" title="Fleance" label="Fleance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231395" start="2309" end="2324" title="David Bevington" label="David Bevington"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="2496" end="2503" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="3420" end="3435" title="House of Stuart" label="House of Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q593455" start="3450" end="3487" title="Walter fitz Alan, Steward of Scotland" label="Walter fitz Alan, Steward of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q727897" start="3565" end="3585" title="Gruffydd ap Llywelyn" label="Gruffydd ap Llywelyn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3603" end="3623" title="Nesta ferch Gruffydd" label="Nesta ferch Gruffydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607788" start="3931" end="3946" title="Alan fitz Flaad" label="Alan fitz Flaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454065" start="4105" end="4117" title="Lady Macbeth" label="Lady Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175704" start="4791" end="4809" title="Jean de Schelandre" label="Jean de Schelandre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4842" end="4851" title="Stuartide" label="Stuartide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203840" start="5224" end="5231" title="Malcolm (Macbeth)" label="Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15698345" start="6301" end="6314" title="Three Witches" label="Three Witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q184528" start="6980" end="6989" title="soliloquy" label="soliloquy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="7200" end="7208" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28474842" start="7244" end="7258" title="Third Murderer" label="Third Murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429667" start="7287" end="7294" title="Fleance" label="Fleance"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="7401" end="7406" title="Ghosts in European culture" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563727" start="7771" end="7775" title="foil (literature)" label="foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="12923" end="12929" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="12946" end="12974" title="Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884683" start="13220" end="13243" title="Belshazzar&amp;#x27;s feast" label="Belshazzar&amp;#x27;s feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="13265" end="13270" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q32505" start="14299" end="14311" title="Henry Irving" label="Henry Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q182687" start="14801" end="14810" title="palmistry" label="palmistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="14866" end="14878" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440463" start="14892" end="14915" title="Federal Theatre Project" label="Federal Theatre Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941656" start="14916" end="14938" title="Voodoo Macbeth" label="production of the play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031985" start="14984" end="14994" title="Canada Lee" label="Canada Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="15098" end="15112" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q257818" start="15142" end="15157" title="Throne of Blood" label="Throne of Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q975630" start="15213" end="15226" title="Minoru Chiaki" label="Minoru Chiaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="15437" end="15451" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q929582" start="15464" end="15474" title="Macbeth (1971 film)" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324008" start="15518" end="15529" title="Martin Shaw" label="Martin Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471487" start="15786" end="15800" title="Men of Respect" label="Men of Respect"/>
<link wikidata="Q352935" start="15984" end="15997" title="Dennis Farina" label="Dennis Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585901" start="16014" end="16028" title="List of ghosts" label="List of ghosts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4887" wikidata="Q222595" url="?curid=4887" title="British Army">
<text>The British Army is the principal land warfare force of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. the British Army comprises 74,296 regular full-time personnel, 4,244 Gurkhas, 25,934 volunteer reserve personnel and 4,612 &quot;other personnel&quot;, for a total of 109,086.

The British Army traces back to 1707 and the formation of the united Kingdom of Great Britain which joined the Kingdoms of England and Scotland into a single state and, with that, united the English Army and the Scots Army as the British Army. The English Bill of Rights 1689 and Scottish Claim of Right Act 1689 require parliamentary consent for the Crown to maintain a peacetime standing army. Members of the British Army swear allegiance to the monarch as their commander-in-chief. The army is administered by the Ministry of Defence and commanded by the Chief of the General Staff.

At its inception, being composed primarily of cavalry and infantry, the British Army was one of two &quot;Regular&quot; Forces (there were also separate &quot;Reserve Forces&quot;) within the British military (those parts of the British Armed Forces tasked with land warfare, as opposed to the naval forces), with the other having been the &quot;Ordnance Military Corps&quot; (made up of the Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers, and the Royal Sappers and Miners) of the Board of Ordnance, which along with the originally civilian Commissariat Department, stores and supply departments, as well as barracks and other departments, were absorbed into the British Army when the Board of Ordnance was abolished in 1855. Various other civilian departments of the board were absorbed into the War Office.

The British Army has seen action in major wars between the world&#x27;s great powers, including the Seven Years&#x27; War, the American Revolutionary War, the Napoleonic Wars, the Crimean War and the First and Second World Wars. Britain&#x27;s victories in most of these decisive wars allowed it to influence world events and establish itself as one of the world&#x27;s leading military and economic powers. Since the end of the Cold War, the British Army has been deployed to a number of conflict zones, often as part of an expeditionary force, a coalition force or part of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.

== History ==
=== Formation ===

Until the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, neither England or Scotland had had a standing army with professional officers and career corporals and sergeants. England relied on militia organised by local officials or private forces mobilised by the nobility, or on hired mercenaries from Europe. From the later Middle Ages until the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, when a foreign expeditionary force was needed, such as the one that Henry V of England took to France and that fought at the Battle of Agincourt (1415), the army, a professional one, was raised for the duration of the expedition.

During the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, the members of the English Long Parliament realised that the use of county militia organised into regional associations (such as the Eastern Association), often commanded by local members of Parliament (both from the House of Commons and the House of Lords), while more than able to hold their own in the regions which Parliamentarians (&#x27;Roundheads&quot;) controlled, were unlikely to win the war. So Parliament initiated two actions. The Self-denying Ordinance forbade members of Parliament (with the notable exception of Oliver Cromwell, then a member of parliament and future Lord Protector) from serving as officers in the Parliamentary armies. This created a distinction between the civilians in Parliament, who tended to be Presbyterian and conciliatory to the Royalists (&quot;Cavaliers&quot;) in nature, and a corps of professional officers, who tended to be Independent (Congregational) in theology. The second action was legislation for the creation of a Parliamentary-funded army, commanded by Lord General Thomas Fairfax, which became known as the New Model Army (originally phrased &quot;new-modelled Army&quot;).

While this proved to be a war-winning formula, the New Model Army, being organised and politically active, went on to dominate the politics of the Interregnum and by 1660 was widely disliked. The New Model Army was paid off and disbanded at the later Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 with the accession of King Charles II. For many decades the alleged excesses of the New Model Army under the Protectorate / Commonwealth under Oliver Cromwell were used as propaganda (and still feature in Irish folklore) and the Whig Party element recoiled from allowing a standing army to continue with the agreed-upon rights and privileges under the return of a king. The militia acts of 1661 and 1662 prevented local authorities from calling up militia and oppressing their own local opponents. Calling up the militia was possible only if the king and local elites agreed to do so.

King Charles II and his &quot;Cavalier&quot; / Royalist supporters favoured a new army under royal control, and immediately after the Restoration of 1660 to 1661 began working on its establishment. The first English Army regiments, including elements of the disbanded New Model Army, were formed between November 1660 and January 1661 and became a standing military force for England (financed by Parliament). The Royal Scots and Irish Armies were financed by the parliaments of Scotland and Ireland. Parliamentary control was established by the Bill of Rights 1689 and Claim of Right Act 1689, although the monarch continued to influence aspects of army administration until at least the end of the 19th century.

After the Restoration, King Charles II pulled together four regiments of infantry and cavalry, calling them his guards, at a cost of £122,000 from his general budget. This became the foundation of the permanent English Army. By 1685, it had grown to number 7,500 soldiers in marching regiments, and 1,400 men permanently stationed in garrisons. A Monmouth Rebellion in 1685 allowed successor King James II to raise the forces to 20,000 men. There were 37,000 in 1678, when England played a role in the closing stage of the cross-channel Franco-Dutch War. After Protestant dual Monarchs William III, formerly William of the Dutch House of Orange, and his wife Mary II&#x27;s joint accession to the throne after a short constitutional crisis with Parliament sending Mary&#x27;s father, predecessor King James II, (who remained a Catholic) during his brief controversial reign, off the throne and into exile. England then involved itself in the War of the Grand Alliance on the Continent, primarily to prevent a possible French Catholic monarch organizing invasion restoring the exiled James II (Queen Mary&#x27;s father and still a Roman Catholic). Later in 1689, William III to solidify his and Mary&#x27;s hold on the monarchy, expanded the new English army to 74,000, and then a few years later to 94,000 in 1694. Parliament was very nervous and reduced the cadre to 70,000 in 1697. Scotland and Ireland had theoretically separate military establishments, but they were unofficially merged with the English Crown force.

By the time of the 1707 Acts of Union, many regiments of the English and Scottish armies were combined under one operational command and stationed in the Netherlands for the War of the Spanish Succession. Although all the regiments were now part of the new British military establishment, they remained under the old operational-command structure and retained much of the institutional ethos, customs and traditions of the standing armies created shortly after the Restoration of the Monarchy 47 years earlier. The order of seniority of the most-senior British Army line regiments is based on that of the earlier English army. Although technically the Scots Royal Regiment of Foot was raised in 1633 and is the oldest Regiment of the Line, Scottish and Irish regiments were only allowed to take a rank in the English army on the date of their arrival in England (or the date when they were first placed on the English establishment). In 1694, a board of general officers was convened to decide the rank of English, Irish and Scots regiments serving in the Netherlands; the regiment which became known as the Scots Greys were designated the 4th Dragoons because there were three English regiments raised prior to 1688 when the Scots Greys were first placed in the English establishment. In 1713, when a new board of general officers was convened to decide the rank of several regiments, the seniority of the Scots Greys was reassessed and based on their June 1685 entry into England. At that time there was only one English regiment of dragoons, and the Scots Greys eventually received the British Army rank of 2nd Dragoons.

=== British Empire (1700–1914) ===
After 1700, British continental policy was to contain expansion by competing powers such as France and Spain. Although Spain was the dominant global power during the previous two centuries and the chief threat to England&#x27;s early trans-Atlantic colonial ambitions, its influence was now waning. The territorial ambitions of the French, however, led to the War of the Spanish Succession and the later Napoleonic Wars.

Although the Royal Navy is widely regarded as vital to the rise of the British Empire, the British Army played an important role in the formation of colonies, protectorates and dominions in the Americas, Africa, Asia, India and Australasia. British soldiers captured strategically important sites and territories, with the army involved in wars to secure the empire&#x27;s borders, internal safety and support friendly governments and princes. Among these actions were the French and Indian War / Seven Years&#x27; War, the American Revolutionary War, the Napoleonic Wars, the First and Second Opium Wars, the Boxer Rebellion, the New Zealand Wars, the Australian frontier wars, the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857, the first and second Boer Wars, the Fenian raids, the Irish War of Independence, interventions in Afghanistan (intended to maintain a buffer state between British India and the Russian Empire) and the Crimean War (to keep the Russian Empire to the north on the Black Sea at a safe distance by aiding the Ottoman Empire). Like the English Army, the British Army fought the kingdoms of Spain, France (including the First French Empire) and the Netherlands (Dutch Republic) for supremacy in North America and the West Indies. With native and provincial and colonial assistance, the Army conquered New France in the French and Indian War (North American theatre) of the parallel Seven Years&#x27; War and suppressed a Native / Indian North Americans uprising in Pontiac&#x27;s War around the Great Lakes. The British Army was defeated in the American Revolutionary War, losing the Thirteen Colonies but retaining The Canadas and The Maritimes as in British North America, including Bermuda (originally part of the Colony of Virginia, and which had been originally strongly sympathetic to the American colonial rebels early in the war).

Halifax, Nova Scotia and Bermuda were to become Imperial fortresses (although Bermuda, being safer from attack over water and impervious to attack overland, quickly became the most important in British North America), along with Malta and Gibraltar, providing bases in the eastern Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea for Royal Navy squadrons to control the oceans and trade routes, and heavily garrisoned by the British Army both for defence of the bases and to provide mobile military forces to work with the Navy in amphibious operations throughout their regions.

The British Army was heavily involved in the Napoleonic Wars, participating in a number of campaigns in Europe (including continuous deployment in the Peninsular War), the Caribbean, North Africa and North America. The war between the British and the First French Empire of Napoleon Bonaparte stretched around the world; at its peak in 1813, the regular army contained over 250,000 men. A coalition of Anglo-Dutch and Prussian armies under the Duke of Wellington and Field Marshal von Blücher finally defeated Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815.

The English were involved politically and militarily in Ireland. The campaign of English republican Protector Oliver Cromwell involved uncompromising treatment of the Irish towns (most notably Drogheda and Wexford) which supported the Royalists during the English Civil War. The English Army (and the subsequent British Army) remained in Ireland primarily to suppress Irish revolts or disorder. In addition to its conflict with Irish nationalists, it was faced with the prospect of battling Anglo-Irish and Ulster Scots in Ireland who were angered by unfavourable taxation of Irish produce imported into Britain. With other Irish groups, they raised a volunteer army and threatened to emulate the American colonists if their conditions were not met. Learning from their experience in America, the British government sought a political solution. The British Army fought Irish rebels—Protestant and Catholic—primarily in Ulster and Leinster (Wolfe Tone&#x27;s United Irishmen) in the 1798 rebellion.
In addition to battling the armies of other European empires (and its former colonies, the United States, in the American War of 1812), the British Army fought the Chinese in the First and Second Opium Wars and the Boxer Rebellion, Māori tribes in the first of the New Zealand Wars, Nawab Shiraj-ud-Daula&#x27;s forces and British East India Company mutineers in the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857, the Boers in the first and second Boer Wars, Irish Fenians in Canada during the Fenian raids and Irish separatists in the Anglo-Irish War. The increasing demands of imperial expansion and the inadequacy and inefficiency of the underfunded British Army, Militia, Ordnance Military Corps, Yeomanry and Volunteer Force after the Napoleonic Wars led to series of reforms following the failures of the Crimean War.
Inspired by the successes of the Prussian Army (which relied on short-term conscription of all eligible young men to maintain a large reserve of recently discharged soldiers, ready to be recalled on the outbreak of war to immediately bring the small peacetime regular army up to strength), the &quot;Regular Reserve&quot; of the British Army was originally created in 1859 by Secretary of State for War Sidney Herbert, and re-organised under the Reserve Force Act 1867. Prior to this, a soldier was generally enlisted into the British Army for a 21-year engagement, following which (should he survive so long) he was discharged as a Pensioner. Pensioners were sometimes still employed on garrison duties, as were younger soldiers no longer deemed fit for expeditionary service who were generally organised in invalid units or returned to the regimental depot for home service. The cost of paying pensioners, and the obligation the government was under to continue to employ invalids as well as soldiers deemed by their commanding officers as detriments to their units were motivations to change this system. The long period of engagement also discouraged many potential recruits. The long service enlistments were consequently replaced with short service enlistments, with undesirable soldiers not permitted to re-engage on the completion of their first engagement. The size of the army also fluctuated greatly, increasing in war time, and drastically shrinking with peace. Battalions posted on garrison duty overseas were allowed an increase on their normal peacetime establishment, which resulted in their having surplus men on their return to a &quot;Home&quot; station. Consequently, soldiers engaging on short term enlistments were enabled to serve several years with the colours and the remainder in the Regular Reserve, remaining liable for recall to the colours if required. Among the other benefits, this thereby enabled the British Army to have a ready pool of recently trained men to draw upon in an emergency. The name of the Regular Reserve (which for a time was divided into a &quot;First Class&quot; and a &quot;Second Class&quot;) has resulted in confusion with the &quot;Reserve Forces&quot;, which were the pre-existing part-time, local-service home-defence forces that were auxiliary to the British Army (or &quot;Regular Force&quot;), but not originally part of it: the Yeomanry, Militia (or &quot;Constitutional Force&quot;) and Volunteer Force. These were consequently also referred to as &quot;Auxiliary Forces&quot; or &quot;Local Forces&quot;.

The late-19th-century Cardwell and Childers Reforms gave the army its modern shape and redefined its regimental system. The 1907 Haldane Reforms created the Territorial Force as the army&#x27;s volunteer reserve component, merging and reorganising the Volunteer Force, Militia and Yeomanry.

=== World Wars (1914–1945) ===

Great Britain was challenged by other powers, primarily the German Empire and Nazi Germany, during the 20th century. A century earlier it vied with Napoleonic France for global pre-eminence, and Hanoverian Britain&#x27;s natural allies were the kingdoms and principalities of northern Germany. By the middle of the 19th century, Britain and France were allies in preventing Russia&#x27;s appropriation of the Ottoman Empire, although the fear of French invasion led shortly afterwards to the creation of the Volunteer Force. By the first decade of the 20th century, the United Kingdom was allied with France (by the Entente Cordiale) and Russia (which had a secret agreement with France for mutual support in a war against the Prussian-led German Empire and the Austro-Hungarian Empire).

When the First World War broke out in August 1914 the British Army sent the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), consisting mainly of regular army troops, to France and Belgium. The fighting bogged down into static trench warfare for the remainder of the war. In 1915 the army created the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force to invade the Ottoman Empire via Gallipoli, an unsuccessful attempt to capture Constantinople and secure a sea route to Russia.

The First World War was the most devastating in British military history, with nearly 800,000 men killed and over two million wounded. Early in the war, the BEF was virtually destroyed and was replaced first by volunteers and then by a conscript force. Major battles included those at the Somme and Passchendaele. Advances in technology saw the advent of the tank (and the creation of the Royal Tank Regiment) and advances in aircraft design (and the creation of the Royal Flying Corps) which would be decisive in future battles. Trench warfare dominated Western Front strategy for most of the war, and the use of chemical weapons (disabling and poison gases) added to the devastation.

The Second World War broke out in September 1939 with the Soviet and German Army&#x27;s invasion of Poland. British assurances to the Poles led the British Empire to declare war on Germany. As in the First World War, a relatively small BEF was sent to France but then hastily evacuated from Dunkirk as the German forces swept through the Low Countries and across France in May 1940.

After the British Army recovered from its earlier defeats, it defeated the Germans and Italians at the Second Battle of El Alamein in North Africa in 1942–1943 and helped drive them from Africa. It then fought through Italy and, with the help of American, Canadian, Australian, New Zealand, Indian and Free French forces, was the principal organiser and participant in the D-Day invasion of Normandy on 6 June 1944; nearly half the Allied soldiers were British. In the Far East, the British Army rallied against the Japanese in the Burma Campaign and regained the British Far Eastern colonial possessions.

=== Postcolonial era (1945–2000) ===
After the Second World War the British Army was significantly reduced in size, although National Service continued until 1960. This period saw decolonisation begin with the partition and independence of India and Pakistan, followed by the independence of British colonies in Africa and Asia.

The Corps Warrant, which is the official list of which bodies of the British Military (not to be confused with &quot;naval&quot;) Forces were to be considered Corps of the British Army for the purposes of the Army Act, the Reserve Forces Act, 1882, and the Territorial and Reserve Forces Act, 1907, had not been updated since 1926 (Army Order 49 of 1926), although amendments had been made up to and including Army Order 67 of 1950. A new Corps Warrant was declared in 1951.

Although the British Army was a major participant in Korea in the early 1950s and Suez in 1956, during this period Britain&#x27;s role in world events was reduced and the army was downsized. The British Army of the Rhine, consisting of I (BR) Corps, remained in Germany as a bulwark against Soviet invasion. The Cold War continued, with significant technological advances in warfare, and the army saw the introduction of new weapons systems. Despite the decline of the British Empire, the army was engaged in Aden, Indonesia, Cyprus, Kenya and Malaya. In 1982, the British Army and the Royal Marines helped liberate the Falkland Islands during the conflict with Argentina after that country&#x27;s invasion of the British territory.

In the three decades following 1969, the army was heavily deployed in Northern Ireland&#x27;s Operation Banner to support the Royal Ulster Constabulary (later the Police Service of Northern Ireland) in their conflict with republican paramilitary groups. The locally recruited Ulster Defence Regiment was formed, becoming home-service battalions of the Royal Irish Regiment in 1992 before it was disbanded in 2006. Over 700 soldiers were killed during the Troubles. Following the 1994–1996 IRA ceasefires and since 1997, demilitarisation has been part of the peace process and the military presence has been reduced. On 25 June 2007 the 2nd Battalion of the Princess of Wales&#x27;s Royal Regiment left the army complex in Bessbrook, County Armagh, ending the longest operation in British Army history.

==== Persian Gulf War ====


The British Army contributed 50,000 troops to the coalition which fought Iraq in the Persian Gulf War, and British forces controlled Kuwait after its liberation. Forty-seven British military personnel died during the war.

==== Balkan conflicts ====

The army was deployed to former Yugoslavia in 1992. Initially part of the United Nations Protection Force, in 1995 its command was transferred to the Implementation Force (IFOR) and then to the Stabilisation Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (SFOR); the commitment rose to over 10,000 troops. In 1999, British forces under SFOR command were sent to Kosovo and the contingent increased to 19,000 troops. Between early 1993 and June 2010, 72 British military personnel died during operations in the former Yugoslavian countries of Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia.

==== The Troubles ====
Although there have been permanent garrisons in Northern Ireland throughout its history, the British Army was deployed as a peacekeeping force from 1969 to 2007 in Operation Banner. Initially, this was (in the wake of unionist attacks on nationalist communities in Derry and Belfast) to prevent further loyalist attacks on Catholic communities; it developed into support of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) and its successor, the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) against the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA). Under the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, there was a gradual reduction in the number of soldiers deployed. In 2005, after the PIRA declared a ceasefire, the British Army dismantled posts, withdrew many troops and restored troop levels to those of a peacetime garrison.

Operation Banner ended at midnight on 31 July 2007 after about 38 years of continuous deployment, the longest in British Army history. According to an internal document released in 2007, the British Army had failed to defeat the IRA but made it impossible for them to win by violence. Operation Helvetic replaced Operation Banner in 2007, maintaining fewer service personnel in a more-benign environment. Of the 300,000 troops who served in Northern Ireland since 1969, there were 763 British military personnel killed and 306 killed by the British military, mostly civilians. An estimated 100 soldiers committed suicide during Operation Banner or soon afterwards and a similar number died in accidents. A total of 6,116 were wounded.

Sierra Leone

The British Army deployed to Sierra Leone for Operation Palliser in 1999, under United Nations resolutions, to aid the government in quelling violent uprisings by militiamen. British troops also provided support during the 2014 West African Ebola virus epidemic.

=== Recent history (2000–present) ===
==== War in Afghanistan ====


In November 2001, as part of Operation Enduring Freedom with the United States, the United Kingdom deployed forces in Afghanistan to topple the Taliban in Operation Herrick. The 3rd Division were sent to Kabul to assist in the liberation of the capital and defeat Taliban forces in the mountains. In 2006 the British Army began concentrating on fighting Taliban forces and bringing security to Helmand Province, with about 9,500 British troops (including marines, airmen and sailors) deployed at its peak—the second-largest force after that of the US. In December 2012 Prime Minister David Cameron announced that the combat mission would end in 2014, and troop numbers gradually fell as the Afghan National Army took over the brunt of the fighting. Between 2001 and 26 April 2014 a total of 453 British military personnel died in Afghan operations. Operation Herrick ended with the handover of Camp Bastion on 26 October 2014, but the British Army maintained a deployment in Afghanistan as part of Operation Toral.

Following an announcement by the US Government of the end of their operations in the Afghanistan, the Ministry of Defence announced in April 2021 that British forces would withdraw from the country by 11 September 2021. It was later reported that all UK troops would be out by early July. Following the collapse of the Afghan Army, and the completion of the withdrawal of civilians, all British troops had left by the end of August 2021.

==== Iraq War ====


In 2003, the United Kingdom was a major contributor to the invasion of Iraq, sending a force of over 46,000 military personnel. The British Army controlled southern Iraq, and maintained a peace-keeping presence in Basra. All British troops were withdrawn from Iraq by 30 April 2009, after the Iraqi government refused to extend their mandate. One hundred and seventy-nine British military personnel died in Iraqi operations. The British Armed Forces returned to Iraq in 2014 as part of Operation Shader to counter the Islamic State (ISIL).

==== Recent military aid ====

The British Army maintains a standing liability to support the civil authorities in certain circumstances, usually in either niche capabilities (e.g. explosive ordnance removal) or in general support of the civil authorities when their capacity is exceeded. In recent years this has been seen as army personnel supporting the civil authorities in the face of the 2001 United Kingdom foot-and-mouth outbreak, the 2002 firefighters strike, widespread flooding in 2005, 2007, 2009, 2013 and 2014, Operation Temperer following the Manchester Arena bombing in 2017 and, most recently, Operation Rescript during the COVID-19 pandemic.

==== Baltic States ====
Since 2016, the British Army has maintained a presence in the Baltic States in support of the NATO Enhanced Forward Presence strategy which responded to the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea. The British Army leads a multinational armoured battlegroup in Estonia under Operation Cabrit and contributes troops to another military battle group in Poland. As part of the NATO plans, Britain has committed a full mechanized infantry brigade to be on a high state of readiness to defend Estonia.

==== Ukraine ====
Between 2015 and 2022, the British Army deployed Short Term Training Teams (STTTs) to Ukraine under Operation Orbital to help train the Armed Forces of Ukraine against further Russian aggression. This operation was succeeded by Operation Interflex in July 2022.

== Modern army ==
=== Personnel ===
The British Army has been a volunteer force since national service ended during the 1960s. Since the creation of the part-time, reserve Territorial Force in 1908 (renamed the Army Reserve in 2014), the full-time British Army has been known as the Regular Army. In July 2020 there were just over 78,800 Regulars, with a target strength of 82,000, and just over 30,000 Army Reservists, with a target strength of 30,000. All former Regular Army personnel may also be recalled to duty in exceptional circumstances during the 6-year period following completion of their Regular service, which creates an additional force known as the Regular Reserve.

The table below illustrates British Army personnel figures from 1710 to 2024.
== Equipment ==
=== Infantry ===
The British Army&#x27;s basic weapon is the 5.56 mm L85A2 or L85A3 assault rifle, with some specialist personnel using the L22A2 carbine variant (pilots and some tank crew). The weapon was traditionally equipped with either iron sights or an optical SUSAT, although other optical sights have been subsequently purchased to supplement these. The weapon can be enhanced further utilising the Picatinny rail with attachments such as the L17A2 under-barrel grenade launcher. In 2023, the Army Special Operations Brigade, which includes the Ranger Regiment, began using the L403A1, an AR-pattern rifle also used by the Royal Marines.

Some soldiers are equipped with the 7.62mm L129A1 sharpshooter rifle, which in 2018 formally replaced the L86A2 Light Support Weapon. Support fire is provided by the L7 general-purpose machine gun (GPMG), and indirect fire is provided by L16 81mm mortars. Sniper rifles include the L118A1 7.62 mm, L115A3 and the AW50F, all manufactured by Accuracy International. The British Army utilises the Glock 17 as its side arm.

Anti tank guided weapons include the Javelin, the medium range anti-tank guided weapon replacement for Milan, with overfly and direct attack modes of operation, and the NLAW. The Next-generation Light Anti-tank Weapon (NLAW) is the first, non-expert, short-range, anti-tank missile that rapidly knocks out any main battle tank in just one shot by striking it from above.

=== Armour ===
The army&#x27;s main battle tank is the Challenger 2, which is being upgraded to Challenger 3. It is supported by the Warrior tracked armoured vehicle as the primary infantry fighting vehicle, (which will soon be replaced by the Boxer 8x8 armoured fighting vehicle) and the Bulldog armoured personnel carrier. Light armoured units often utilise the Supacat &quot;Jackal&quot; MWMIK and Coyote tactical support vehicle for reconnaissance and fire support.

=== Artillery ===
The army has three main artillery systems: the M270 multiple launch rocket system (MLRS), the AS-90 and the L118 light gun. The MLRS, first used in Operation Granby, has an standard range, or with the PrSM, up to 500 km. The AS-90 is a 155 mm self-propelled armoured gun with a range. The L118 light gun is a 105 mm towed gun, which is typically towed by a Pinzgauer all-terrain vehicle. To identify artillery targets, the army operates the TAIPAN artillery detection radar and utilises artillery sound ranging. For air defence it uses the new Sky Sabre system, which in 2021 replaced the Rapier. It also deploys the Very Short-Range Air Defence (VSHORAD) Starstreak HVM (high-velocity missile) launched by a single soldier or from a Stormer HVM vehicle-mounted launcher.

=== Protected mobility ===
Where armour is not required or mobility and speed are favoured the British Army utilises protected patrol vehicles, such as the Panther variant of the Iveco LMV, the Foxhound, and variants of the Cougar family (such as the Ridgeback, Husky and Mastiff). For day-to-day utility work the army commonly uses the Land Rover Wolf, which is based on the Land Rover Defender.

=== Engineers, utility and signals ===
Specialist engineering vehicles include bomb-disposal robots such as the T7 Multi-Mission Robotic System and the modern variants of the Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers, including the Titan bridge-layer, Trojan armoured engineer vehicle, Terrier armoured digger. Day-to-day utility work uses a series of support vehicles, including six-, nine- and fifteen-tonne MAN trucks, Oshkosh heavy-equipment transporters (HET), close-support tankers, quad bikes and ambulances. Tactical communication uses the Bowman radio system, and operational or strategic communication is controlled by the Royal Corps of Signals.

=== Aviation ===
The Army Air Corps (AAC) provides direct aviation support, with the Royal Air Force providing support helicopters. The primary attack helicopter is the Boeing AH-64E Apache which replaced the AgustaWestland Apache AH-1 in the anti-tank, anti-air defence, and anti-armour role. The AgustaWestland AW159 Wildcat is a dedicated intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance (ISTAR) helicopter. The Eurocopter AS 365N Dauphin is used for special operations aviation, primarily counter terrorism operations, within the UK. The army operates two unmanned aerial vehicles in a surveillance role: the small Lockheed Martin Desert Hawk III and the larger Thales Watchkeeper WK450, which will be retired from service in March 2025.

== Current deployments ==

=== Low-intensity operations ===
=== Permanent overseas postings ===
== Structure ==

Army Headquarters is located in Andover, Hampshire, and is responsible for providing forces at operational readiness for employment by the Permanent Joint Headquarters. The command structure is hierarchical, with overall command residing with the Chief of the General Staff (CGS), who is immediately subordinate to The Chief of Defence Staff, the head of the British Armed Services. The CGS is supported by the Deputy Chief of the General Staff. Army Headquarters is further organised into two subordinate commands, Field Army and Home Command, each commanded by a lieutenant general. These two Commands serve distinct purposes and are divided into a structure of divisions and brigades, which themselves consist of a complex mix of smaller units such as Battalions. British Army units are either full-time &#x27;Regular&#x27; units, or part-time Army Reserve units.

=== Allied Rapid Reaction Corps ===

Led by a British Army three-star general, one of NATO&#x27;s High Readiness (Land) Forces based in Gloucestershire, UK, with the following British units under its command:
* 1st Signal Brigade
* 104th Theatre Sustainment Brigade
* 7th Air Defence Group
* 8th Engineer Brigade

=== Field Army ===

Led by Commander Field Army, the Field Army is responsible for generating and preparing forces for current and contingency operations. The Field Army comprises:
* 1st (United Kingdom) Division
* 3rd (United Kingdom) Division
* Field Army Troops

=== Home Command ===

Home Command is the British Army&#x27;s supporting command; a generating, recruiting and training force that supports the Field Army and delivers UK resilience. It comprises
* Army Personnel Centre, which deals with personnel issues and liaises with outside agencies.
* Army Personnel Services Group, which supports personnel administration
* Army Recruiting and Initial Training Command, which is responsible for all recruiting and training of Officers and Soldiers.
* London District Command, which is the main headquarters for all British Army units within the M25 corridor of London. It also provides for London&#x27;s ceremonial events as well as supporting operational deployments overseas.
* Regional Command, which enables the delivery of a secure home front that sustains the Army, notably helping to coordinate the British Army&#x27;s support to the civil authorities, overseeing the British Army&#x27;s Welfare Service, and delivering the British Army&#x27;s civil engagement mission.
* Standing Joint Command, which coordinates defence&#x27;s contribution to UK resilience operations in support of other government departments.

=== Special Forces ===

The British Army contributes two of the three special forces formations to the United Kingdom Special Forces directorate: the Special Air Service (SAS) and Special Reconnaissance Regiment (SRR). The SAS consists of one regular and two reserve regiments. The regular regiment, 22 SAS, has its headquarters at Stirling Lines, Credenhill, Herefordshire. It consists of 5 squadrons (A, B, D, G and Reserve) and a training wing. 22 SAS is supported by 2 reserve regiments, 21 SAS and 23 SAS, which collectively form the Special Air Service (Reserve) (SAS [R]), who in 2020 were transferred back under the command of Director of Special Forces after previously being under the command of the 1st Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Brigade. The SRR, formed in 2005, performs close reconnaissance and special surveillance tasks. The Special Forces Support Group, under the operational control of the Director of Special Forces, provides operational manoeuvring support to the United Kingdom Special Forces.

=== Colonial units ===
The British Army historically included many units from what are now separate Commonwealth realms. When the English Empire was established in North America (including Bermuda), and the West Indies in the early 17th century there was no standing English Army, only the Militia, Yeomanry, and Royal bodyguards, of which the Militia, as the primary home-defence force, was immediately extended to the colonies. Colonial militias defended colonies single-handedly at first against indigenous peoples and European competitors. Once the standing English Army, later the British Army, came into existence and began to garrison the colonies, the colonial militias fought side by side with it in a number of wars, including the Seven Years&#x27; War. Some of the colonial militias rebelled during the American War of Independence. The militia fought alongside the regular British Army (and native allies) in defending British North America from their former countrymen during the War of 1812.
Locally raised units in strategically located Imperial fortress colonies (including: Nova Scotia before the Canadian Confederation; Bermuda – which was treated as part of The Maritimes under the Commander-in-Chief at Nova Scotia until Canadian Confederation; Gibraltar; and Malta) and the Channel Islands were generally maintained from army funds and more fully integrated into the British Army as evident from their placements in British Army lists, unlike units such as the King&#x27;s African Rifles.

The larger colonies (Australia, New Zealand, Canada, South Africa, etc.) mostly achieved Commonwealth Dominion status before or after the First World War and were granted full legislative independence in 1931. While remaining within the British Empire, this placed their governments on a par with the British government, and hence their military units comprised separate armies (e.g. the Australian Army), although Canada retained the term &quot;militia&quot; for its military forces until the Second World War. From the 1940s, these dominions and many colonies chose full independence, usually becoming Commonwealth realms (as member states of the Commonwealth are known today).

Units raised in self-governing and Crown colonies (those without local elected Legislatures, as was the case with British Hong Kong) that are part of the British realm remain under British Government control. As the territorial governments are delegated responsibility only for internal government, the UK Government, as the government of the Sovereign state, retains responsibility for national security and the defence of the fourteen remaining British Overseas Territories, of which six have locally raised regiments:

* Royal Bermuda Regiment
* Royal Gibraltar Regiment
* Falkland Islands Defence Force
* Royal Montserrat Defence Force
* Cayman Islands Regiment
* Turks and Caicos Islands Regiment


=== Levels of Command ===
The structure of the British Army beneath the level of Divisions and Brigades is also hierarchical and command is based on rank. The table below details how many units within the British Army are structured, although there can be considerable variation between individual units:
Whilst many units are organised as Battalions or Regiments administratively, the most common fighting unit is the combined arms unit known as a Battlegroup. This is formed around a combat unit and supported by units (or sub-units) from other capabilities. An example of a battlegroup would be two companies of armoured infantry (e.g. from the 1st Battalion of the Mercian Regiment), one squadron of heavy armour (e.g. A Squadron of the Royal Tank Regiment), a company of engineers (e.g. B Company of the 22nd Engineer Regiment), a Battery of artillery (e.g. D Battery of the 1st Regiment of the Royal Horse Artillery) and smaller attachments from medical, logistic and intelligence units. Typically organised and commanded by a battlegroup headquarters and named after the unit which provided the most combat units, in this example, it would be the 1 Mercian Battlegroup. This creates a self-sustaining mixed formation of armour, infantry, artillery, engineers and support units, commanded by a lieutenant colonel.

== Recruitment ==
The British Army primarily recruits from within the United Kingdom, but accept applications from all British citizens. It also accepts applications from Irish citizens and Commonwealth citizens, with certain restrictions. Since 2018 the British Army has been an equal-opportunity employer (with some legal exceptions due to medical standards), and does not discriminate based on race, religion or sexual orientation. Applicants for the Regular Army must be a minimum age of 16, although soldiers under 18 may not serve in operations, and the maximum age is 36. Applicants for the Army Reserve must be a minimum of 17 years and 9 months, and a maximum age of 43. Different age limits apply for Officers and those in some specialist roles. Applicants must also meet several other requirements, notably regarding medical health, physical fitness, past-criminal convictions, education, and regarding any tattoos and piercings.

Soldiers and officers in the Regular Army now enlist for an initial period of 12 years, with options to extend if they meet certain requirements. Soldiers and officers are normally required to serve for a minimum of 4 years from date of enlistment and must give 12 months&#x27; notice before leaving; soldiers who joined before the age of 18 years old are normally required to serve for a minimum of 6 years.

=== Oath of allegiance ===
All soldiers and commissioned officers must take an oath of allegiance upon joining the Army, a process known as attestation. Those who wish to swear by God use the following words:
Others replace the words &quot;swear by Almighty God&quot; with &quot;solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm&quot;.

=== Training ===
Candidates for the Army undergo common training, beginning with initial military training, to bring all personnel to a similar standard in basic military skills, which is known as Phase 1 training. They then undertake further specialist trade-training for their specific Regiment or Corps, known as Phase 2 training. After completing Phase 1 training a soldier is counted against the Army&#x27;s trained strength, and upon completion of Phase 2 are counted against the Army&#x27;s fully trained trade strength.

Soldiers under the age of 17 and six months will complete Phase 1 training at the Army Foundation College. Infantry Soldiers will complete combined Phase 1 &amp; 2 training at the Infantry Training Centre, Catterick, whilst all other Soldiers will attend Phase 1 training at the Army Training Centre Pirbright or Army Training Regiment, Winchester, and then complete Phase 2 training at different locations depending on their specialism. Officers conduct their initial training at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst (RMAS), before also completing their Phase 2 training at multiple different locations.

== Flags and ensigns ==

The British Army&#x27;s official flag is the Union Jack. The Army also has a non-ceremonial flag that is often seen flying from military buildings and is used at recruiting and military events and exhibitions. Traditionally most British Army units had a set of flags, known as the colours—normally a Regimental Colour and a King&#x27;s Colour (the Union Jack). Historically these were carried into battle as a rallying point for the soldiers and were closely guarded. In modern units the colours are often prominently displayed, decorated with battle honours, and act as a focal point for Regimental pride. A soldier re-joining a regiment (upon recall from the reserve) is described as &quot;re-called to the Colours&quot;.

== Ranks and insignia ==


Most ranks across the British Army are known by the same name regardless of which Regiment they are in. However, the Household Cavalry call many ranks by different names, the Royal Artillery refer to Corporals as Bombardiers, the Rifles spell Sergeant as Serjeant, and Private soldiers are known by a wide variety of titles; notably trooper, gunner, guardsman, kingsman, sapper, signaller, fusilier, craftsman and rifleman dependant on the Regiment they belong to. These names do not affect a soldier&#x27;s pay or role.

==Reserve forces==

The oldest of the Reserve Forces was the Militia Force (also referred to as the &quot;Constitutional Force&quot;), which (in the Kingdom of England, prior to 1707) was originally the main military defensive force (until the 1745 creation of the New Model Army, there otherwise were originally only Royal bodyguards, including the Yeomen Warders and the Yeomen of the Guard, with armies raised only temporarily for expeditions overseas), made up of civilians embodied for annual training or emergencies, which had used various schemes of compulsory service during different periods of its long existence. From the 1850s it recruited volunteers who engaged for terms of service. The Militia was originally an all-infantry force, though Militia coastal artillery, field artillery, and engineers units were introduced from the 1850s.

Volunteer Force units were also frequently raised during wartime and disbanded upon peace. This was re-established as a permanent (i.e., in war and peace) part of the Reserve Forces in 1859. It differed from the Militia in a number of ways, most particularly in that volunteers did not commit to a term service, and were able to resign with fourteen days notice (except while embodied). As volunteer soldiers were originally expected to fund the cost of their own equipment, few tended to come from the labouring class among whom the Militia primarily recruited.

The Yeomanry Force was made up of mounted units, organised similarly to the Volunteer Force, first raised during the two decades of war with France that followed the French Revolution. As with the Volunteers, members of the Yeomanry were expected to foot much of the cost of their own equipment, including their horses, and the make-up of the units tended to be from more affluent classes.

Although Militia regiments were linked with British Army regiments during the course of the Napoleonic Wars to feed volunteers for service abroad into the regular army, and volunteers from the Reserve Forces served abroad either individually or in contingents, service companies, or battalions in a succession of conflicts from the Crimean War to the Second Boer War, personnel did not normally move between forces unless re-attested as a member of the new force, and units did not normally move from the Reserve Forces to become part of the Regular Forces, or vice versa. There were exceptions, however, as with the &quot;New Brunswick Regiment of Fencible Infantry&quot;, raised in 1803, which became the 104th (New Brunswick) Regiment of Foot when it was transferred to the British Army on 13 September 1810.

Another type of reserve force was created during the period between the French Revolution and the end of the Napoleonic Wars. Called Fencibles, these were disbanded after the Napoleonic Wars and not raised again, although the Royal Malta Fencible Regiment, later the &quot;Royal Malta Fencible Artillery&quot;, existed from 1815 until the 1880s when it became the Royal Malta Artillery, and the Royal New Zealand Fencible Corps was formed in 1846.

The Reserve Forces were raised locally (in Britain, under the control of Lords-Lieutenant of counties, and, in British colonies, under the colonial governors, and members originally were obliged to serve only within their locality (which, in the United Kingdom, originally meant within the county or other recruitment area, but was extended to anywhere in Britain, though not overseas). They have consequently also been referred to as &quot;Local Forces&quot;. As they were (and in some cases &quot;are&quot;) considered separate forces from the British Army, though still within the British military, they have also been known as &quot;Auxiliary Forces&quot;. The Militia and Volunteer units of a colony were generally considered to be separate forces from the &quot;Home&quot; Militia Force and Volunteer Force in the United Kingdom, and from the Militia Forces and Volunteer Forces of other colonies. Where a colony had more than one Militia or Volunteer unit, they would be grouped as a Militia or Volunteer Force for that colony, such as the Jamaica Volunteer Defence Force. Officers of the Reserve Forces could not sit on Courts Martial of regular forces personnel. The Mutiny Act did not apply to members of the Reserve Forces. The &quot;Reserve Forces&quot; within the British Isles were increasingly integrated with the British Army through a succession of reforms (beginning with the Cardwell Reforms) of the British military forces over the last two decades of the Nineteenth Century and the early years of the Twentieth Century, whereby the Reserve Forces units mostly lost their own identities and became numbered Militia or Volunteer battalions of regular British Army corps or regiments.

In 1908, the Yeomanry and Volunteer Force were merged to create the Territorial Force (changed to &quot;Territorial Army&quot; after the First World War), with terms of service similar to the army and Militia, and the Militia was renamed the &quot;Special Reserve&quot;, After the First World War the Special Reserve was renamed the Militia, again, but permanently suspended (although a handful of Militia units survived in the United Kingdom, its colonies, and the Crown Dependencies). Although the Territorial Force was nominally still a separate force from the British Army, by the end of the century, at the latest, any unit wholly or partly funded from Army Funds was considered part of the British Army. Outside the United Kingdom-proper, this was generally only the case for those units in the Channel Islands or the Imperial fortress colonies (Nova Scotia, before Canadian confederation; Bermuda; Gibraltar; and Malta).

The Bermuda Militia Artillery, Bermuda Militia Infantry, Bermuda Volunteer Engineers, and the Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps, by example were paid for by the War Office and considered part of the British Army, with their officers appearing as such in the &quot;Army List&quot; unlike those of many other colonial units deemed auxiliaries. Today, the British Army is the only Home British military force, including the various other forces it has absorbed, though British military units organised on Territorial Army lines remain in British Overseas Territories that are still not considered formally part of the British Army, with only the Royal Gibraltar Regiment and the Royal Bermuda Regiment (an amalgam of the old Bermuda Militia Artillery and Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps) appearing on the British Army order-of-precedence and in the Army List, as well as on the Corps Warrant (the official list of those British military forces that are considered corps of the British Army).

In October 2012 the Ministry of Defence announced that the Territorial Army was to be renamed the Army Reserve.

== Uniforms ==
The British Army uniform has sixteen categories, ranging from ceremonial uniforms to combat dress to evening wear. No. 8 Dress, the day-to-day uniform, is known as &quot;Personal Clothing System – Combat Uniform&quot; (PCS-CU) and consists of a Multi-Terrain Pattern (MTP) windproof smock, a lightweight jacket and trousers with ancillary items such as thermals and waterproofs. The army has introduced tactical recognition flashes (TRFs); worn on the right arm of a combat uniform, the insignia denotes the wearer&#x27;s regiment or corps. In addition to working dress, the army has a number of parade uniforms for ceremonial and non-ceremonial occasions. The most-commonly-seen uniforms are No. 1 Dress (full ceremonial, seen at formal occasions such as at the changing of the guard at Buckingham Palace) and No. 2 Dress (Service Dress), a brown khaki uniform worn for non-ceremonial parades.

Working headdress is typically a beret, whose colour indicates its wearer&#x27;s type of regiment. Beret colours are:
* Khaki—Foot Guards, Honourable Artillery Company, Princess of Wales&#x27;s Royal Regiment, Royal Anglian Regiment, Royal Welsh, Royal Yorkshire Regiment
* Light grey—Royal Scots Dragoon Guards
* Brown—King&#x27;s Royal Hussars, Royal Wessex Yeomanry
* Black—Royal Tank Regiment
* Dark (rifle) green—Royal Dragoon Guards, The Rifles, Royal Gurkha Rifles, Small Arms School Corps
* Maroon—Parachute Regiment
* Beige—Special Air Service
* Sky blue—Army Air Corps
* Cypress green—Intelligence Corps
* Scarlet—Royal Military Police
* Green—Adjutant General&#x27;s Corps
* Navy blue—All other units, such as the Household Cavalry, Light Dragoons, Queen&#x27;s Dragoon Guards, Royal Yeomanry, and the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers
* Emerald grey—Special Reconnaissance Regiment
* Gun-metal grey—The Ranger Regiment

== See also ==
* Army 2020 Refine
* Army Cadet Force
* Army Reserve (United Kingdom)
* British Army order of precedence
* British campaign medals
* Corps Warrant
* List of British Army installations
* List of British Army regiments and corps
* List of equipment of the British Army
* List of military weapons of the United Kingdom
* List of roles in the British Army
* List of wars involving England
* List of wars involving Scotland
* List of wars involving the United Kingdom
* Military bands of the United Kingdom
* Military history of the United Kingdom
* Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)
* Red coat (military uniform)
* Royal Air Force
* Royal Navy
* &quot;Rule, Britannia!&quot;
* Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015
* Tommy Atkins
* Uniforms of the British Army
* United Kingdom Special Forces
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* French, David. &quot;Army, Empire, and Cold War: The British Army and Military Policy, 1945–1971&quot; (2012) 
* 
* 

* Linch, Kevin, and Matthew Lord, eds. &quot;Redcoats to Tommies: The Experience of the British Soldier from the Eighteenth Century&quot; (Boydell Press, 2021) Online review of this book.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="4" end="16" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q37726" start="34" end="52" title="Army" label="land warfare force"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="60" end="112" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635167" start="183" end="190" title="Brigade of Gurkhas" label="Gurkhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="199" end="216" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="volunteer reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="336" end="345" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="360" end="384" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="414" end="421" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="426" end="434" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140229" start="442" end="454" title="Political union" label="single state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378171" start="482" end="494" title="English Army" label="English Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374814" start="503" end="513" title="Scots Army" label="Scots Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="539" end="546" title="Parliament of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="547" end="566" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166282" start="571" end="579" title="Convention of the Estates" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407381" start="580" end="603" title="Claim of Right Act 1689" label="Claim of Right Act 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="638" end="647" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="672" end="685" title="standing army" label="standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="739" end="746" title="Charles III" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="756" end="774" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="808" end="827" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="849" end="875" title="Chief of the General Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="1270" end="1285" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="1287" end="1302" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969488" start="1312" end="1336" title="Royal Sappers and Miners" label="Royal Sappers and Miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q887539" start="1345" end="1362" title="Board of Ordnance" label="Board of Ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1405" end="1428" title="Commissariat#19th century" label="Commissariat Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="1661" end="1671" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="1746" end="1757" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="1774" end="1795" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1801" end="1827" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1833" end="1848" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="1854" end="1865" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1874" end="1879" title="World War I" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1884" end="1900" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="2052" end="2060" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="2065" end="2073" title="Economy" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2103" end="2111" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682252" start="2199" end="2218" title="Expeditionary warfare" label="expeditionary force"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="2222" end="2231" title="coalition" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q219575" start="2251" end="2278" title="United Nations peacekeeping" label="United Nations peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="2334" end="2360" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="2400" end="2413" title="standing army" label="standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857892" start="2495" end="2502" title="Militia (English)" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="2623" end="2640" title="later Middle Ages" label="later Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="2747" end="2765" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q188495" start="2804" end="2823" title="Battle of Agincourt" label="Battle of Agincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q535158" start="2976" end="2991" title="Long Parliament" label="Long Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329993" start="3082" end="3101" title="Eastern Association" label="Eastern Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="3268" end="3309" title="Parliamentarians (English Civil War)" label="Parliamentarians (&amp;#x27;Roundheads&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478113" start="3393" end="3415" title="Self-denying Ordinance" label="Self-denying Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="3477" end="3492" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3684" end="3696" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="3834" end="3848" title="Congregational" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q550612" start="3972" end="3986" title="Thomas Fairfax" label="Thomas Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="4014" end="4028" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558636" start="4229" end="4240" title="Interregnum (England)" label="Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="4333" end="4344" title="Restoration (1660)" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="4396" end="4406" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="4474" end="4490" title="the Protectorate" label="the Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="4598" end="4608" title="Whig Party (England)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="4955" end="4970" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="4985" end="4993" title="Cavalier" label="Cavalier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5163" end="5175" title="English Army#Restoration" label="English Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="5223" end="5237" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="5352" end="5362" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374814" start="5369" end="5380" title="Royal Scots Army" label="Royal Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210889" start="5385" end="5397" title="Irish Army (Kingdom of Ireland)" label="Irish Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="5434" end="5442" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="5447" end="5454" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="5501" end="5520" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407381" start="5525" end="5548" title="Claim of Right Act 1689" label="Claim of Right Act 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940446" start="6017" end="6035" title="Monmouth Rebellion" label="Monmouth Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="6067" end="6075" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q646322" start="6207" end="6223" title="Franco-Dutch War" label="Franco-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="6231" end="6241" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="6256" end="6267" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="6299" end="6314" title="House of Orange" label="House of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="6329" end="6343" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary II&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="6612" end="6637" title="War of the Grand Alliance" label="War of the Grand Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6800" end="6814" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="7216" end="7229" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="7346" end="7357" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="7366" end="7395" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="7657" end="7684" title="restoration (England)" label="Restoration of the Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446069" start="7850" end="7872" title="Royal Regiment of Foot" label="Royal Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q776841" start="8300" end="8311" title="Scots Greys" label="Scots Greys"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="9256" end="9271" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="9287" end="9297" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="9345" end="9359" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="9433" end="9445" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="9451" end="9459" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="9468" end="9476" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="9478" end="9484" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="9486" end="9490" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="9492" end="9497" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="9502" end="9513" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="9798" end="9824" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="9830" end="9845" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="9851" end="9856" title="First Opium War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q418151" start="9861" end="9877" title="Second Opium War" label="Second Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="9884" end="9899" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545405" start="9905" end="9921" title="New Zealand Wars" label="New Zealand Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889339" start="9927" end="9951" title="Australian frontier wars" label="Australian frontier wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="9957" end="9980" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Sepoy Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q329203" start="9986" end="9991" title="First Boer War" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="9996" end="10011" title="second Boer War" label="second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996302" start="10018" end="10030" title="Fenian raids" label="Fenian raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="10036" end="10061" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="10080" end="10091" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q587252" start="10116" end="10128" title="buffer state" label="buffer state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="10137" end="10150" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="10159" end="10173" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="10183" end="10194" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="10243" end="10252" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="10286" end="10300" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378171" start="10312" end="10324" title="English Army" label="English Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="10395" end="10414" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="10437" end="10451" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="10470" end="10483" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="10492" end="10503" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="10576" end="10586" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="10594" end="10615" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="10657" end="10678" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="10696" end="10727" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native / Indian North Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="10740" end="10758" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="10770" end="10781" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="10820" end="10846" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="10859" end="10876" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721124" start="10891" end="10902" title="The Canadas" label="The Canadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q731613" start="10907" end="10920" title="The Maritimes" label="The Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="10927" end="10948" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="10960" end="10967" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="10992" end="11010" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="11115" end="11135" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="11140" end="11147" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q108179410" start="11163" end="11180" title="Imperial fortress" label="Imperial fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="11344" end="11349" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="11354" end="11363" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="11396" end="11410" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="11415" end="11432" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="11437" end="11447" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="11728" end="11743" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="11834" end="11848" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="11855" end="11864" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="11883" end="11896" title="War of 1812" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="11934" end="11953" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="11957" end="11975" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="12127" end="12145" title="Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q153522" start="12150" end="12175" title="Field Marshal von Blücher" label="Field Marshal von Blücher"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="12205" end="12213" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="12334" end="12349" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q207223" start="12417" end="12425" title="Drogheda" label="Drogheda"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="12430" end="12437" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="12480" end="12497" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="12731" end="12743" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="13143" end="13149" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q159736" start="13154" end="13162" title="Leinster" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q437962" start="13164" end="13181" title="Theobald Wolfe Tone" label="Wolfe Tone&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="13182" end="13197" title="United Irishmen" label="United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="13206" end="13220" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="1798 rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="13335" end="13355" title="American War of 1812" label="American War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q220984" start="13418" end="13428" title="Opium Wars" label="Opium Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="13437" end="13452" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="13454" end="13459" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998495" start="13505" end="13533" title="Siraj ud-Daulah" label="Nawab Shiraj-ud-Daula&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="13545" end="13571" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="13589" end="13612" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Sepoy Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349762" start="13665" end="13671" title="Fenian" label="Fenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996302" start="13694" end="13706" title="Fenian raids" label="Fenian raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="13711" end="13728" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish separatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="13736" end="13751" title="Anglo-Irish War" label="Anglo-Irish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857898" start="13867" end="13874" title="Militia (United Kingdom)" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517243" start="13901" end="13909" title="Yeomanry" label="Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941026" start="13914" end="13929" title="Volunteer Force (Great Britain)" label="Volunteer Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="14011" end="14022" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="14057" end="14070" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14318" end="14345" title="Regular Reserve (United Kingdom)#Army Reserve (Regular)" label="&amp;quot;Regular Reserve&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q622568" start="14400" end="14426" title="Secretary of State for War" label="Secretary of State for War"/>
<link wikidata="Q337595" start="14427" end="14441" title="Sidney Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Lea" label="Sidney Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345616" start="14470" end="14492" title="Reserve Force Act 1867" label="Reserve Force Act 1867"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16300" end="16306" title="Units of the British Army#British Army units in other areas of the British Armed Forces" label="forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517243" start="16414" end="16422" title="Yeomanry" label="Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857898" start="16424" end="16431" title="Militia (United Kingdom)" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941026" start="16474" end="16489" title="Volunteer Force" label="Volunteer Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038812" start="16616" end="16624" title="Cardwell Reforms" label="Cardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097955" start="16629" end="16645" title="Childers Reforms" label="Childers Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="16695" end="16712" title="regimental system" label="regimental system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641233" start="16723" end="16738" title="Haldane Reforms" label="Haldane Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518834" start="16751" end="16768" title="Territorial Force" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="16978" end="16991" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="16996" end="17008" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="17113" end="17123" title="House of Hanover" label="Hanoverian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46613" start="17194" end="17210" title="northern Germany" label="northern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="17327" end="17341" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="17534" end="17550" title="Entente Cordiale" label="Entente Cordiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="17645" end="17652" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="17680" end="17703" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q919272" start="17783" end="17810" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War I)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="17839" end="17851" title="Standing army" label="regular army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="17863" end="17881" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="France and Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="17920" end="17934" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081722" start="17994" end="18027" title="Mediterranean Expeditionary Force" label="Mediterranean Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="18042" end="18056" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="18061" end="18070" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="18107" end="18121" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="18148" end="18154" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138019" start="18205" end="18229" title="Military history of the United Kingdom" label="British military history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435813" start="18368" end="18378" title="Kitchener&amp;#x27;s Army" label="volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162774" start="18393" end="18402" title="Conscription in the United Kingdom" label="conscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="18442" end="18451" title="Battle of the Somme" label="the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="18456" end="18469" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="18516" end="18520" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421600" start="18546" end="18565" title="Royal Tank Regiment" label="Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="18624" end="18642" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466634" start="18771" end="18787" title="Chemical weapons in World War I" label="chemical weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18848" end="18864" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="18913" end="18924" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="18932" end="18950" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="19025" end="19032" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="19080" end="19083" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="BEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="19135" end="19142" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="19164" end="19213" title="Battle of France" label="swept through the Low Countries and across France"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="19331" end="19358" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="Second Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="19362" end="19374" title="North African Campaign" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="19446" end="19451" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="19601" end="19627" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q524272" start="19697" end="19705" title="South-East Asian theatre of World War II" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="19760" end="19774" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089965" start="19960" end="19976" title="National Service" label="National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="20015" end="20029" title="decolonisation" label="decolonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="20045" end="20054" title="partition of India" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="20059" end="20071" title="Indian independence movement" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q105274370" start="20169" end="20182" title="Corps Warrant" label="Corps Warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159434" start="20374" end="20382" title="Army Act" label="Army Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q492539" start="20694" end="20699" title="1st Commonwealth Division" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="20723" end="20727" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="20836" end="20861" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q519313" start="20877" end="20889" title="I Corps (United Kingdom)" label="I (BR) Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="20953" end="20961" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299864" start="21150" end="21154" title="Aden Emergency" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="21156" end="21165" title="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q847314" start="21167" end="21173" title="EOKA" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q476855" start="21175" end="21180" title="Mau Mau Uprising" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="21185" end="21191" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="21227" end="21240" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="21261" end="21277" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="21289" end="21312" title="Falklands War" label="conflict with Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="21445" end="21461" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q690413" start="21469" end="21485" title="Operation Banner" label="Operation Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482143" start="21501" end="21526" title="Royal Ulster Constabulary" label="Royal Ulster Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482170" start="21538" end="21572" title="Police Service of Northern Ireland" label="Police Service of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q944523" start="21651" end="21674" title="Ulster Defence Regiment" label="Ulster Defence Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445850" start="21727" end="21747" title="The Royal Irish Regiment (27th (Inniskilling) 83rd and 87th and Ulster Defence Regiment)" label="Royal Irish Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="21826" end="21838" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="21864" end="21867" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403459" start="22032" end="22071" title="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment" label="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770409" start="22097" end="22106" title="The Troubles in Bessbrook" label="Bessbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="22108" end="22121" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="22280" end="22284" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="22292" end="22308" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="22340" end="22346" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="22490" end="22500" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="22532" end="22563" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="United Nations Protection Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="22608" end="22628" title="Implementation Force" label="Implementation Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="22652" end="22697" title="Stabilisation Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Stabilisation Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="22805" end="22811" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q690413" start="23203" end="23219" title="Operation Banner" label="Operation Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="23257" end="23265" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="23304" end="23309" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="23314" end="23321" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482143" start="23417" end="23442" title="Royal Ulster Constabulary" label="Royal Ulster Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482170" start="23472" end="23506" title="Police Service of Northern Ireland" label="Police Service of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="23526" end="23559" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="23583" end="23604" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971401" start="24631" end="24649" title="Operation Palliser" label="Operation Palliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989108" start="24813" end="24846" title="West African Ebola virus epidemic" label="West African Ebola virus epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="24947" end="24973" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="25036" end="25047" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="25062" end="25069" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q918160" start="25073" end="25090" title="Operation Herrick" label="Operation Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q223165" start="25096" end="25108" title="3rd Division (United Kingdom)" label="3rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="25122" end="25127" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q173821" start="25312" end="25328" title="Helmand Province" label="Helmand Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="25502" end="25515" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689084" start="25609" end="25629" title="Afghan National Army" label="Afghan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q784017" start="25812" end="25824" title="Camp Bastion" label="Camp Bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19429062" start="25916" end="25931" title="Operation Toral" label="Operation Toral"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="26453" end="26469" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="26608" end="26613" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="26823" end="26843" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207247" start="26880" end="26896" title="Operation Shader" label="Operation Shader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="26912" end="26925" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534315" start="27329" end="27372" title="2001 United Kingdom foot-and-mouth outbreak" label="2001 United Kingdom foot-and-mouth outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q30076339" start="27460" end="27478" title="Operation Temperer" label="Operation Temperer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30015850" start="27493" end="27517" title="Manchester Arena bombing" label="Manchester Arena bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q88216374" start="27546" end="27564" title="Operation Rescript" label="Operation Rescript"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="27576" end="27593" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="27682" end="27695" title="Baltic States" label="Baltic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230631" start="27714" end="27744" title="NATO Enhanced Forward Presence" label="NATO Enhanced Forward Presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="27777" end="27810" title="2014 Russian annexation of Crimea" label="2014 Russian annexation of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="27875" end="27882" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="27965" end="27971" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="28049" end="28056" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="28216" end="28223" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111631791" start="28230" end="28247" title="Operation Orbital" label="Operation Orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q936105" start="28266" end="28289" title="Armed Forces of Ukraine" label="Armed Forces of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q114246281" start="28358" end="28377" title="Operation Interflex" label="Operation Interflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518834" start="28565" end="28582" title="Territorial Force" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="28796" end="28811" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Army Reservists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29058" end="29073" title="Regular Reserve (United Kingdom)#Army Reserve (Regular)" label="Regular Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q749038" start="29239" end="29253" title="SA80" label="L85A2 or L85A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q280136" start="29411" end="29422" title="iron sights" label="iron sights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048920" start="29437" end="29442" title="SUSAT" label="SUSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541833" start="29577" end="29591" title="Picatinny rail" label="Picatinny rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143777" start="29621" end="29626" title="L17A2 UGL" label="L17A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847297" start="29671" end="29702" title="Army Special Operations Brigade" label="Army Special Operations Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q109905774" start="29723" end="29738" title="Ranger Regiment (United Kingdom)" label="Ranger Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q122363645" start="29756" end="29762" title="L403A1" label="L403A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="29767" end="29777" title="M16 rifle" label="AR-pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="29801" end="29814" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29860" end="29885" title="Lewis Machine and Tool Company#L129A1" label="L129A1 sharpshooter rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q749038" start="29923" end="29928" title="L86 LSW" label="L86A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q842066" start="29983" end="30013" title="L7 (machine gun)" label="L7 general-purpose machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q283589" start="30055" end="30070" title="L16 81mm mortar" label="L16 81mm mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q638202" start="30099" end="30105" title="Accuracy International Arctic Warfare" label="L118A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484379" start="30115" end="30121" title="L115A3" label="L115A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066723" start="30130" end="30135" title="AW50F" label="AW50F"/>
<link wikidata="Q339794" start="30157" end="30179" title="Accuracy International" label="Accuracy International"/>
<link wikidata="Q739882" start="30211" end="30219" title="Glock" label="Glock 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q634188" start="30275" end="30282" title="FGM-148 Javelin" label="Javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463375" start="30341" end="30346" title="MILAN" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112988" start="30407" end="30411" title="NLAW" label="NLAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112988" start="30457" end="30461" title="NLAW" label="NLAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="30641" end="30657" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q234676" start="30665" end="30677" title="Challenger 2" label="Challenger 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q107062312" start="30706" end="30718" title="Challenger 3" label="Challenger 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q589212" start="30743" end="30775" title="Warrior tracked armoured vehicle" label="Warrior tracked armoured vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="30791" end="30816" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28216" start="30854" end="30889" title="Boxer (armoured fighting vehicle)" label="Boxer 8x8 armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427315" start="30899" end="30933" title="FV430 series" label="Bulldog armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116050" start="30974" end="31006" title="MWMIK" label="Supacat &amp;quot;Jackal&amp;quot; MWMIK"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31011" end="31017" title="Jackal (vehicle)#Coyote" label="Coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q328978" start="31146" end="31180" title="M270 multiple launch rocket system" label="M270 multiple launch rocket system"/>
<link wikidata="Q297193" start="31193" end="31198" title="AS-90" label="AS-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505342" start="31207" end="31221" title="L118 light gun" label="L118 light gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883966" start="31247" end="31263" title="Operation Granby" label="Operation Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q109041895" start="31300" end="31304" title="Precision Strike Missile" label="PrSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q669831" start="31456" end="31465" title="Steyr-Puch Pinzgauer" label="Pinzgauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416829" start="31586" end="31609" title="artillery sound ranging" label="artillery sound ranging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153280" start="31643" end="31652" title="Sky Sabre" label="Sky Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q665752" start="31688" end="31694" title="Rapier (missile)" label="Rapier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302329" start="31755" end="31769" title="Starstreak (missile)" label="Starstreak HVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q590270" start="31833" end="31844" title="Alvis Stormer" label="Stormer HVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q696730" start="32051" end="32060" title="Iveco LMV" label="Iveco LMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340588" start="32066" end="32074" title="Ocelot (vehicle)" label="Foxhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q869410" start="32096" end="32102" title="Cougar (MRAP)" label="Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709562" start="32209" end="32224" title="Land Rover Wolf" label="Land Rover Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q908027" start="32248" end="32267" title="Land Rover Defender" label="Land Rover Defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053147" start="32382" end="32413" title="L3Harris" label="T7 Multi-Mission Robotic System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793804" start="32445" end="32477" title="Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers" label="Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845101" start="32513" end="32519" title="Trojan Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703702" start="32547" end="32570" title="Terrier armoured digger" label="Terrier armoured digger"/>
<link wikidata="Q708667" start="32671" end="32674" title="MAN Truck &amp;amp; Bus" label="MAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969091" start="32683" end="32690" title="Oshkosh Corporation" label="Oshkosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951291" start="32809" end="32815" title="Bowman (communications system)" label="Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="32894" end="32916" title="Royal Corps of Signals" label="Royal Corps of Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q555871" start="32940" end="32954" title="British Army Air Corps" label="Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="33004" end="33019" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q171468" start="33088" end="33108" title="AH-64E Apache" label="Boeing AH-64E Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q927610" start="33128" end="33154" title="AgustaWestland Apache" label="AgustaWestland Apache AH-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q398898" start="33217" end="33245" title="AgustaWestland AW159 Wildcat" label="AgustaWestland AW159 Wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974529" start="33261" end="33327" title="intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance" label="intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q39663" start="33352" end="33378" title="Eurocopter Dauphin" label="Eurocopter AS 365N Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060062" start="33391" end="33409" title="special operations" label="special operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="33430" end="33447" title="Counterterrorism" label="counter terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="33497" end="33520" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263939" start="33556" end="33587" title="Lockheed Martin Desert Hawk III" label="Lockheed Martin Desert Hawk III"/>
<link wikidata="Q248216" start="33603" end="33627" title="Thales Watchkeeper WK450" label="Thales Watchkeeper WK450"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794150" start="33793" end="33810" title="Army Headquarters (United Kingdom)" label="Army Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q492805" start="33825" end="33843" title="Andover, Hampshire" label="Andover, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169217" start="33932" end="33960" title="Permanent Joint Headquarters" label="Permanent Joint Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="34040" end="34066" title="Chief of the General Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018884" start="34204" end="34237" title="Deputy Chief of the General Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Deputy Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q110078975" start="34309" end="34319" title="Field Army (United Kingdom)" label="Field Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824503" start="34324" end="34336" title="Commander Home Command" label="Home Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544390" start="34358" end="34376" title="Lieutenant-general (United Kingdom)" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="34457" end="34466" title="Division (military)" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="34471" end="34478" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="34548" end="34557" title="Battalion" label="Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="34640" end="34652" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="34747" end="34751" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004203" start="34797" end="34816" title="Imjin Barracks" label="Gloucestershire, UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596609" start="34872" end="34890" title="1st Signal Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="1st Signal Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546542" start="34893" end="34926" title="104 Theatre Sustainment Brigade" label="104th Theatre Sustainment Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087877" start="34929" end="34950" title="7th Air Defence Group" label="7th Air Defence Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018803" start="34953" end="34973" title="8th Engineer Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="8th Engineer Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q110078975" start="35002" end="35022" title="Commander Field Army" label="Commander Field Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q161896" start="35158" end="35187" title="1st (United Kingdom) Division" label="1st (United Kingdom) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q223165" start="35190" end="35219" title="3rd (United Kingdom) Division" label="3rd (United Kingdom) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q109974097" start="35222" end="35239" title="Field Army Troops" label="Field Army Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q109974259" start="35606" end="35650" title="Army Recruiting and Initial Training Command" label="Army Recruiting and Initial Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258950" start="35733" end="35756" title="London District (British Army)" label="London District Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644569" start="35962" end="35978" title="Regional Command (British Army)" label="Regional Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="36474" end="36488" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139184" start="36507" end="36536" title="United Kingdom Special Forces" label="United Kingdom Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="36554" end="36573" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166254" start="36584" end="36615" title="Special Reconnaissance Regiment" label="Special Reconnaissance Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16912556" start="36736" end="36750" title="Stirling Lines" label="Stirling Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q372195" start="36752" end="36762" title="Credenhill" label="Credenhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="36764" end="36777" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778759" start="36896" end="36902" title="Artists Rifles" label="21 SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969990" start="37114" end="37171" title="1st Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Brigade" label="1st Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574573" start="37264" end="37292" title="Special Forces Support Group" label="Special Forces Support Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="37539" end="37557" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q617219" start="37569" end="37583" title="English Empire" label="English Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="37603" end="37616" title="British America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857892" start="37729" end="37736" title="Militia (English)" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517243" start="37738" end="37746" title="Yeomanry" label="Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571571" start="37752" end="37768" title="Sovereign&amp;#x27;s Bodyguard" label="Royal bodyguards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933808" start="37869" end="37886" title="Militia (British Dominions and Crown Colonies)" label="Colonial militias"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="38180" end="38201" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="38253" end="38281" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="38432" end="38443" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q108179410" start="38491" end="38508" title="Imperial fortress" label="Imperial fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="38530" end="38541" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="38553" end="38575" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="38577" end="38584" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q731613" start="38616" end="38629" title="The Maritimes" label="The Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="38704" end="38713" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="38719" end="38724" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="38734" end="38749" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742184" start="38921" end="38947" title="King&amp;#x27;s African Rifles" label="King&amp;#x27;s African Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="39039" end="39060" title="Dominion" label="Commonwealth Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="39338" end="39353" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="39554" end="39572" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448101" start="39647" end="39661" title="Self-governing colony" label="self-governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="39666" end="39680" title="Crown colony" label="Crown colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="39710" end="39722" title="Legislatures" label="Legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="39745" end="39762" title="British Hong Kong" label="British Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="39974" end="39989" title="Sovereign state" label="Sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="40078" end="40106" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892652" start="40155" end="40177" title="Royal Bermuda Regiment" label="Royal Bermuda Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197174" start="40180" end="40204" title="Royal Gibraltar Regiment" label="Royal Gibraltar Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076880" start="40207" end="40237" title="Falkland Islands Defence Force" label="Falkland Islands Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374502" start="40240" end="40270" title="Royal Montserrat Defence Force" label="Royal Montserrat Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751057" start="40273" end="40296" title="Cayman Islands Regiment" label="Cayman Islands Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843675" start="40299" end="40332" title="Turks and Caicos Islands Regiment" label="Turks and Caicos Islands Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818485" start="41004" end="41020" title="Mercian Regiment" label="Mercian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421600" start="41076" end="41095" title="Royal Tank Regiment" label="Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445962" start="41235" end="41256" title="Royal Horse Artillery" label="Royal Horse Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="41846" end="41858" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576009" start="43188" end="43191" title="God in Abrahamic religions" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550460" start="43425" end="43450" title="Recruit training" label="initial military training"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794140" start="43955" end="43978" title="Army Foundation College" label="Army Foundation College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029115" start="44053" end="44088" title="Infantry Training Centre (British Army)" label="Infantry Training Centre, Catterick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821840" start="44152" end="44182" title="Army Training Centre Pirbright" label="Army Training Centre Pirbright"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971036" start="44186" end="44220" title="Army training regiment" label="Army Training Regiment, Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="44358" end="44390" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="44549" end="44559" title="Union Jack" label="Union Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912707" start="44785" end="44792" title="Colours, standards and guidons" label="colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870201" start="45048" end="45062" title="Battle honours of the British and Imperial Armies" label="battle honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631440" start="45373" end="45390" title="Household Cavalry" label="Household Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="45431" end="45446" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933815" start="45839" end="45852" title="Militia (Great Britain)" label="Militia Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="45927" end="45945" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="46043" end="46057" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q597266" start="46128" end="46142" title="Yeomen Warders" label="Yeomen Warders"/>
<link wikidata="Q431122" start="46151" end="46170" title="Yeomen of the Guard" label="Yeomen of the Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q104872360" start="46532" end="46557" title="Militia Artillery units of the United Kingdom and Colonies" label="Militia coastal artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941026" start="46629" end="46644" title="Volunteer Force" label="Volunteer Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517243" start="47197" end="47211" title="Yeomanry" label="Yeomanry Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="47916" end="47927" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="47935" end="47950" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q104875943" start="48291" end="48329" title="104th (New Brunswick) Regiment of Foot" label="104th (New Brunswick) Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404595" start="48530" end="48539" title="Fencibles" label="Fencibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745948" start="48623" end="48652" title="Royal Malta Fencible Regiment" label="Royal Malta Fencible Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384796" start="48761" end="48782" title="Royal Malta Artillery" label="Royal Malta Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374583" start="48792" end="48824" title="Royal New Zealand Fencible Corps" label="Royal New Zealand Fencible Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q914752" start="48919" end="48935" title="Lord-Lieutenant" label="Lords-Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="48957" end="48973" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48985" end="49003" title="Governor#United Kingdom overseas territories" label="colonial governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931740" start="50022" end="50032" title="Mutiny Act" label="Mutiny Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038812" start="50240" end="50256" title="Cardwell Reforms" label="Cardwell Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518834" start="50618" end="50635" title="Territorial Force" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="51351" end="51366" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q108179410" start="51374" end="51391" title="Imperial fortress" label="Imperial fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="51402" end="51413" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="51422" end="51444" title="Canadian confederation" label="Canadian confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="51446" end="51453" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="51455" end="51464" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="51470" end="51475" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892636" start="51483" end="51508" title="Bermuda Militia Artillery" label="Bermuda Militia Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110407" start="51510" end="51534" title="Bermuda Militia Infantry" label="Bermuda Militia Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823094" start="51536" end="51563" title="Bermuda Volunteer Engineers" label="Bermuda Volunteer Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892667" start="51573" end="51602" title="Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps" label="Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197174" start="52118" end="52142" title="Royal Gibraltar Regiment" label="Royal Gibraltar Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892652" start="52151" end="52173" title="Royal Bermuda Regiment" label="Royal Bermuda Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969489" start="52275" end="52307" title="British Army order of precedence" label="British Army order-of-precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969478" start="52319" end="52328" title="Army List" label="Army List"/>
<link wikidata="Q105274370" start="52348" end="52361" title="Corps Warrant" label="Corps Warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390669" start="52836" end="52857" title="Multi-Terrain Pattern" label="Multi-Terrain Pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472769" start="52944" end="52952" title="Long underwear" label="thermals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018769" start="52957" end="52968" title="Raincoat" label="waterproofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674113" start="52994" end="53020" title="tactical recognition flash" label="tactical recognition flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q650770" start="53439" end="53444" title="khaki" label="khaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q14952" start="53495" end="53504" title="Headgear" label="headdress"/>
<link wikidata="Q211718" start="53520" end="53525" title="beret" label="beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465729" start="53613" end="53624" title="Foot Guards" label="Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q219514" start="53626" end="53654" title="Honourable Artillery Company" label="Honourable Artillery Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403459" start="53656" end="53695" title="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment" label="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080459" start="53697" end="53719" title="Royal Anglian Regiment" label="Royal Anglian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374999" start="53721" end="53732" title="Royal Welsh" label="Royal Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963010" start="53734" end="53758" title="Royal Yorkshire Regiment" label="Royal Yorkshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171116" start="53772" end="53798" title="Royal Scots Dragoon Guards" label="Royal Scots Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196985" start="53807" end="53832" title="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Hussars" label="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058187" start="53834" end="53855" title="Royal Wessex Yeomanry" label="Royal Wessex Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421600" start="53864" end="53883" title="Royal Tank Regiment" label="Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19847180" start="53892" end="53897" title="Rifle green" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892355" start="53905" end="53925" title="Royal Dragoon Guards" label="Royal Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920229" start="53927" end="53937" title="The Rifles" label="The Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289772" start="53939" end="53958" title="Royal Gurkha Rifles" label="Royal Gurkha Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542644" start="53960" end="53983" title="Small Arms School Corps" label="Small Arms School Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q58214641" start="53986" end="53992" title="Maroon beret" label="Maroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q197217" start="53993" end="54011" title="Parachute Regiment (United Kingdom)" label="Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="54020" end="54039" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q555871" start="54051" end="54065" title="Army Air Corps (United Kingdom)" label="Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697847" start="54082" end="54100" title="Intelligence Corps (United Kingdom)" label="Intelligence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666334" start="54111" end="54132" title="Royal Military Police" label="Royal Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683223" start="54141" end="54170" title="Adjutant General&amp;#x27;s Corps" label="Adjutant General&amp;#x27;s Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631440" start="54212" end="54229" title="Household Cavalry" label="Household Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545998" start="54231" end="54245" title="Light Dragoons" label="Light Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q209091" start="54247" end="54274" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Dragoon Guards" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375037" start="54276" end="54290" title="Royal Yeomanry" label="Royal Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340951" start="54300" end="54327" title="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers" label="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166254" start="54343" end="54374" title="Special Reconnaissance Regiment" label="Special Reconnaissance Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q109905774" start="54392" end="54411" title="Ranger Regiment (United Kingdom)" label="The Ranger Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510837" start="54430" end="54446" title="Army 2020 Refine" label="Army 2020 Refine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781646" start="54449" end="54465" title="Army Cadet Force" label="Army Cadet Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="54468" end="54497" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969489" start="54500" end="54532" title="British Army order of precedence" label="British Army order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410461" start="54535" end="54558" title="British campaign medals" label="British campaign medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q105274370" start="54561" end="54574" title="Corps Warrant" label="Corps Warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606150" start="54577" end="54611" title="List of British Army installations" label="List of British Army installations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945341" start="54614" end="54654" title="List of British Army regiments and corps" label="List of British Army regiments and corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q779869" start="54657" end="54694" title="List of equipment of the British Army" label="List of equipment of the British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q108237731" start="54697" end="54743" title="List of military weapons of the United Kingdom" label="List of military weapons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q122898554" start="54746" end="54779" title="List of roles in the British Army" label="List of roles in the British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432865" start="54782" end="54812" title="List of wars involving England" label="List of wars involving England"/>
<link wikidata="Q104215898" start="54815" end="54846" title="List of wars involving Scotland" label="List of wars involving Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644955" start="54849" end="54890" title="List of wars involving the United Kingdom" label="List of wars involving the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q92617413" start="54893" end="54929" title="Military bands of the United Kingdom" label="Military bands of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138019" start="54932" end="54970" title="Military history of the United Kingdom" label="Military history of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="54973" end="55009" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196168" start="55012" end="55039" title="Red coat (military uniform)" label="Red coat (military uniform)"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="55042" end="55057" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="55060" end="55070" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215729" start="55079" end="55095" title="Rule, Britannia!" label="Rule, Britannia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909103" start="55104" end="55146" title="Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015" label="Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836057" start="55149" end="55161" title="Tommy Atkins" label="Tommy Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969490" start="55164" end="55192" title="Uniforms of the British Army" label="Uniforms of the British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139184" start="55195" end="55224" title="United Kingdom Special Forces" label="United Kingdom Special Forces"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4888" wikidata="Q992354" url="?curid=4888" title="Bruin">
<text>Bruin, (from Dutch for &quot;brown&quot;), is an English folk term for brown bear.

Bruin, Bruins or BRUIN may also refer to:
==Places==
* Lake Bruin, ox-bow lake of the Mississippi River located in northeastern Louisiana
** Lake Bruin State Park
* Bruin, Kentucky, United States
* Bruin, Pennsylvania, United States
* Bruin&#x27;s Slave Jail, building in Alexandria, Virginia

==Sports team nicknames and mascots==
* Ayr Bruins, a defunct Scottish ice hockey team
* Bellevue University, Bellevue, Nebraska
* Belmont University, Nashville, Tennessee
* Bob Jones University, Greenville, South Carolina
* Boston Bruins, an American NHL hockey team
* UCLA Bruins, a collegiate sports team located in Los Angeles, California
* Chilliwack Bruins, a former Canadian major junior ice hockey team in Chilliwack, British Columbia
* George Fox University, Newberg, Oregon
* Kellogg Community College, Battle Creek, Michigan
* New Westminster Bruins, a former Canadian major junior ice hockey team in New Westminster, British Columbia
* Piedmont International University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina
* Providence Bruins, an American AHL hockey team in Providence, Rhode Island
* Salt Lake Community College, Salt Lake County, Utah
* Sheridan College Brampton,Ontario

==Other uses==
* Bruin (surname)
* Oud bruin, Belgian beer
* Heineken Oud Bruin, Dutch beer
* Yamaha Bruin 350, utility all-terrain vehicle
* Brown University Interactive Language, a programming language
* &quot;Rasmus Klump&quot;, a comic strip published as &quot;Bruin&quot;
* Bruin, a brown bear in the Reynard cycle fables

==See also==
* List of Bruin mascots
* Ursidae</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q992354" start="0" end="5" title="Bruin" label="Bruin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="71" end="81" title="brown bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q992354" start="84" end="89" title="Bruin" label="Bruin"/>
<link wikidata="Q992354" start="91" end="97" title="Bruin" label="Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q992354" start="101" end="106" title="Bruin" label="BRUIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061077" start="225" end="246" title="Lake Bruin State Park" label="Lake Bruin State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978707" start="249" end="264" title="Bruin, Kentucky" label="Bruin, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131803" start="282" end="301" title="Bruin, Pennsylvania" label="Bruin, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978706" start="319" end="342" title="Bruin&amp;#x27;s Slave Jail" label="Bruin&amp;#x27;s Slave Jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q793211" start="418" end="428" title="Ayr Bruins" label="Ayr Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883967" start="467" end="486" title="Bellevue University" label="Bellevue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298359" start="509" end="527" title="Belmont University" label="Belmont University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740389" start="552" end="572" title="Bob Jones University" label="Bob Jones University"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="603" end="616" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753811" start="648" end="659" title="UCLA Bruins" label="UCLA Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072999" start="723" end="740" title="Chilliwack Bruins" label="Chilliwack Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539406" start="823" end="844" title="George Fox University" label="George Fox University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385846" start="864" end="889" title="Kellogg Community College" label="Kellogg Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982998" start="916" end="938" title="New Westminster Bruins" label="New Westminster Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191497" start="1026" end="1059" title="Piedmont International University" label="Piedmont International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442862" start="1093" end="1110" title="Providence Bruins" label="Providence Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405883" start="1170" end="1197" title="Salt Lake Community College" label="Salt Lake Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318523" start="1224" end="1240" title="Sheridan College" label="Sheridan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q20726725" start="1276" end="1291" title="Bruin (surname)" label="Bruin (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790699" start="1294" end="1303" title="Oud bruin" label="Oud bruin"/>
<link wikidata="Q861698" start="1320" end="1338" title="Heineken Oud Bruin" label="Heineken Oud Bruin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158888" start="1353" end="1369" title="Yamaha Bruin 350" label="Yamaha Bruin 350"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976335" start="1401" end="1438" title="Brown University Interactive Language" label="Brown University Interactive Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771634" start="1471" end="1483" title="Rasmus Klump" label="Rasmus Klump"/>
<link wikidata="Q131675513" start="1565" end="1578" title="Reynard cycle" label="Reynard cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097566" start="1602" end="1623" title="List of Bruin mascots" label="List of Bruin mascots"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="1626" end="1633" title="Ursidae" label="Ursidae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4890" wikidata="Q812534" url="?curid=4890" title="Bayesian probability">
<text>Bayesian probability ( or ) is an interpretation of the concept of probability, in which, instead of frequency or propensity of some phenomenon, probability is interpreted as reasonable expectation representing a state of knowledge or as quantification of a personal belief.

The Bayesian interpretation of probability can be seen as an extension of propositional logic that enables reasoning with hypotheses; that is, with propositions whose truth or falsity is unknown. In the Bayesian view, a probability is assigned to a hypothesis, whereas under frequentist inference, a hypothesis is typically tested without being assigned a probability.

Bayesian probability belongs to the category of evidential probabilities; to evaluate the probability of a hypothesis, the Bayesian probabilist specifies a prior probability. This, in turn, is then updated to a posterior probability in the light of new, relevant data (evidence). The Bayesian interpretation provides a standard set of procedures and formulae to perform this calculation.

The term &quot;Bayesian&quot; derives from the 18th-century mathematician and theologian Thomas Bayes, who provided the first mathematical treatment of a non-trivial problem of statistical data analysis using what is now known as Bayesian inference. Mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace pioneered and popularized what is now called Bayesian probability.

==Bayesian methodology==
Bayesian methods are characterized by concepts and procedures as follows:
* The use of random variables, or more generally unknown quantities, to model all sources of uncertainty in statistical models including uncertainty resulting from lack of information (see also aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty).
* The need to determine the prior probability distribution taking into account the available (prior) information.
* The sequential use of Bayes&#x27; theorem: as more data become available, calculate the posterior distribution using Bayes&#x27; theorem; subsequently, the posterior distribution becomes the next prior.
* While for the frequentist, a hypothesis is a proposition (which must be either true or false) so that the frequentist probability of a hypothesis is either 0 or 1, in Bayesian statistics, the probability that can be assigned to a hypothesis can also be in a range from 0 to 1 if the truth value is uncertain.

==Objective and subjective Bayesian probabilities==
Broadly speaking, there are two interpretations of Bayesian probability. For objectivists, who interpret probability as an extension of logic, &quot;probability&quot; quantifies the reasonable expectation that everyone (even a &quot;robot&quot;) who shares the same knowledge should share in accordance with the rules of Bayesian statistics, which can be justified by Cox&#x27;s theorem. For subjectivists, &quot;probability&quot; corresponds to a personal belief. Rationality and coherence allow for substantial variation within the constraints they pose; the constraints are justified by the Dutch book argument or by decision theory and de Finetti&#x27;s theorem. The objective and subjective variants of Bayesian probability differ mainly in their interpretation and construction of the prior probability.

==History==
The term &quot;Bayesian&quot; derives from Thomas Bayes (1702–1761), who proved a special case of what is now called Bayes&#x27; theorem in a paper titled &quot;An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances&quot;. In that special case, the prior and posterior distributions were beta distributions and the data came from Bernoulli trials. It was Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827) who introduced a general version of the theorem and used it to approach problems in celestial mechanics, medical statistics, reliability, and jurisprudence. Early Bayesian inference, which used uniform priors following Laplace&#x27;s principle of insufficient reason, was called &quot;inverse probability&quot; (because it infers backwards from observations to parameters, or from effects to causes). After the 1920s, &quot;inverse probability&quot; was largely supplanted by a collection of methods that came to be called frequentist statistics.

In the 20th century, the ideas of Laplace developed in two directions, giving rise to &quot;objective&quot; and &quot;subjective&quot; currents in Bayesian practice.
Harold Jeffreys&#x27; &quot;Theory of Probability&quot; (first published in 1939) played an important role in the revival of the Bayesian view of probability, followed by works by Abraham Wald (1950) and Leonard J. Savage (1954). The adjective &quot;Bayesian&quot; itself dates to the 1950s; the derived &quot;Bayesianism&quot;, &quot;neo-Bayesianism&quot; is of 1960s coinage. In the objectivist stream, the statistical analysis depends on only the model assumed and the data analysed. No subjective decisions need to be involved. In contrast, &quot;subjectivist&quot; statisticians deny the possibility of fully objective analysis for the general case.

In the 1980s, there was a dramatic growth in research and applications of Bayesian methods, mostly attributed to the discovery of Markov chain Monte Carlo methods and the consequent removal of many of the computational problems, and to an increasing interest in nonstandard, complex applications. While frequentist statistics remains strong (as demonstrated by the fact that much of undergraduate teaching is based on it ), Bayesian methods are widely accepted and used, e.g., in the field of machine learning.

==Justification==
The use of Bayesian probabilities as the basis of Bayesian inference has been supported by several arguments, such as Cox axioms, the Dutch book argument, arguments based on decision theory and de Finetti&#x27;s theorem.

===Axiomatic approach===
Richard T. Cox showed that Bayesian updating follows from several axioms, including two functional equations and a hypothesis of differentiability. The assumption of differentiability or even continuity is controversial; Halpern found a counterexample based on his observation that the Boolean algebra of statements may be finite. Other axiomatizations have been suggested by various authors with the purpose of making the theory more rigorous.

===Dutch book approach===

Bruno de Finetti proposed the Dutch book argument based on betting. A clever bookmaker makes a Dutch book by setting the odds and bets to ensure that the bookmaker profits—at the expense of the gamblers—regardless of the outcome of the event (a horse race, for example) on which the gamblers bet. It is associated with probabilities implied by the odds not being coherent.

However, Ian Hacking noted that traditional Dutch book arguments did not specify Bayesian updating: they left open the possibility that non-Bayesian updating rules could avoid Dutch books. For example, Hacking writes &quot;And neither the Dutch book argument, nor any other in the personalist arsenal of proofs of the probability axioms, entails the dynamic assumption. Not one entails Bayesianism. So the personalist requires the dynamic assumption to be Bayesian. It is true that in consistency a personalist could abandon the Bayesian model of learning from experience. Salt could lose its savour.&quot;

In fact, there are non-Bayesian updating rules that also avoid Dutch books (as discussed in the literature on &quot;probability kinematics&quot; following the publication of Richard C. Jeffrey&#x27;s rule, which is itself regarded as Bayesian). The additional hypotheses sufficient to (uniquely) specify Bayesian updating are substantial and not universally seen as satisfactory.

===Decision theory approach===
A decision-theoretic justification of the use of Bayesian inference (and hence of Bayesian probabilities) was given by Abraham Wald, who proved that every admissible statistical procedure is either a Bayesian procedure or a limit of Bayesian procedures. Conversely, every Bayesian procedure is admissible.

==Personal probabilities and objective methods for constructing priors==
Following the work on expected utility theory of Ramsey and von Neumann, decision-theorists have accounted for rational behavior using a probability distribution for the agent. Johann Pfanzagl completed the &quot;Theory of Games and Economic Behavior&quot; by providing an axiomatization of subjective probability and utility, a task left uncompleted by von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern: their original theory supposed that all the agents had the same probability distribution, as a convenience. Pfanzagl&#x27;s axiomatization was endorsed by Oskar Morgenstern: &quot;Von Neumann and I have anticipated ... [the question whether probabilities] might, perhaps more typically, be subjective and have stated specifically that in the latter case axioms could be found from which could derive the desired numerical utility together with a number for the probabilities (cf. p. 19 of The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior). We did not carry this out; it was demonstrated by Pfanzagl ... with all the necessary rigor&quot;.

Ramsey and Savage noted that the individual agent&#x27;s probability distribution could be objectively studied in experiments. Procedures for testing hypotheses about probabilities (using finite samples) are due to Ramsey (1931) and de Finetti (1931, 1937, 1964, 1970). Both Bruno de Finetti and Frank P. Ramsey acknowledge their debts to pragmatic philosophy, particularly (for Ramsey) to Charles S. Peirce.

The &quot;Ramsey test&quot; for evaluating probability distributions is implementable in theory, and has kept experimental psychologists occupied for a half century.
This work demonstrates that Bayesian-probability propositions can be falsified, and so meet an empirical criterion of Charles S. Peirce, whose work inspired Ramsey. (This falsifiability-criterion was popularized by Karl Popper.)

Modern work on the experimental evaluation of personal probabilities uses the randomization, blinding, and Boolean-decision procedures of the Peirce-Jastrow experiment. Since individuals act according to different probability judgments, these agents&#x27; probabilities are &quot;personal&quot; (but amenable to objective study).

Personal probabilities are problematic for science and for some applications where decision-makers lack the knowledge or time to specify an informed probability-distribution (on which they are prepared to act). To meet the needs of science and of human limitations, Bayesian statisticians have developed &quot;objective&quot; methods for specifying prior probabilities.

Indeed, some Bayesians have argued the prior state of knowledge defines &quot;the&quot; (unique) prior probability-distribution for &quot;regular&quot; statistical problems; cf. well-posed problems. Finding the right method for constructing such &quot;objective&quot; priors (for appropriate classes of regular problems) has been the quest of statistical theorists from Laplace to John Maynard Keynes, Harold Jeffreys, and Edwin Thompson Jaynes. These theorists and their successors have suggested several methods for constructing &quot;objective&quot; priors (Unfortunately, it is not always clear how to assess the relative &quot;objectivity&quot; of the priors proposed under these methods):
* Maximum entropy
* Transformation group analysis
* Reference analysis

Each of these methods contributes useful priors for &quot;regular&quot; one-parameter problems, and each prior can handle some challenging statistical models (with &quot;irregularity&quot; or several parameters). Each of these methods has been useful in Bayesian practice. Indeed, methods for constructing &quot;objective&quot; (alternatively, &quot;default&quot; or &quot;ignorance&quot;) priors have been developed by avowed subjective (or &quot;personal&quot;) Bayesians like James Berger (Duke University) and José-Miguel Bernardo (Universitat de València), simply because such priors are needed for Bayesian practice, particularly in science. The quest for &quot;the universal method for constructing priors&quot; continues to attract statistical theorists.

Thus, the Bayesian statistician needs either to use informed priors (using relevant expertise or previous data) or to choose among the competing methods for constructing &quot;objective&quot; priors.

==See also==
* &quot;An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances&quot;
* Bayesian epistemology
* Bertrand paradox—a paradox in classical probability
* Credal network
* Credence (statistics)
* De Finetti&#x27;s game—a procedure for evaluating someone&#x27;s subjective probability 
* Evidence under Bayes&#x27; theorem
* Monty Hall problem
* QBism—an interpretation of quantum mechanics based on subjective Bayesian probability
* Reference class problem
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* (translation of de Finetti, 1931)
* (translation of de Finetti, 1937, above)
* , , two volumes.
* Goertz, Gary and James Mahoney. 2012. &quot;A Tale of Two Cultures: Qualitative and Quantitative Research in the Social Sciences&quot;. Princeton University Press.
* 
:(Partly reprinted in )
* 
* 
* (
*
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q812534" start="0" end="20" title="Bayesian probability" label="Bayesian probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246880" start="34" end="78" title="Probability interpretations" label="interpretation of the concept of probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455566" start="101" end="110" title="frequentist probability" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112968" start="114" end="124" title="propensity probability" label="propensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="350" end="369" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="398" end="408" title="Hypothesis" label="hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="443" end="459" title="truth value" label="truth or falsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158281" start="551" end="572" title="frequentist inference" label="frequentist inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="802" end="819" title="prior probability" label="prior probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q278079" start="857" end="878" title="posterior probability" label="posterior probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="909" end="913" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q208452" start="1124" end="1136" title="Thomas Bayes" label="Thomas Bayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988917" start="1224" end="1237" title="data analysis" label="data analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="1265" end="1283" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="1299" end="1319" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="1500" end="1515" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649246" start="1580" end="1591" title="uncertainty" label="uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1681" end="1716" title="Uncertainty quantification#Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty" label="aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="1753" end="1777" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q182505" start="1857" end="1876" title="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="2069" end="2079" title="null hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2085" end="2096" title="Proposition#Treatment in logic" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110857" start="2112" end="2132" title="principle of bivalence" label="either true or false"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="2538" end="2543" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054106" start="2770" end="2788" title="Cox&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Cox&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q715108" start="2996" end="3006" title="Dutch book" label="Dutch book"/>
<link wikidata="Q177571" start="3022" end="3037" title="decision theory" label="decision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408070" start="3042" end="3067" title="de Finetti&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="de Finetti&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208452" start="3268" end="3280" title="Thomas Bayes" label="Thomas Bayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182505" start="3342" end="3361" title="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749933" start="3386" end="3447" title="An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances" label="An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances"/>
<link wikidata="Q756254" start="3520" end="3537" title="beta distribution" label="beta distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077800" start="3562" end="3577" title="Bernoulli trial" label="Bernoulli trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="3587" end="3607" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="3704" end="3723" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748" start="3745" end="3756" title="Reliability (statistics)" label="reliability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="3762" end="3775" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661371" start="3854" end="3886" title="principle of insufficient reason" label="principle of insufficient reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060409" start="3905" end="3924" title="inverse probability" label="inverse probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="3943" end="3948" title="Inductive reasoning" label="infer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158281" start="4143" end="4165" title="frequentist statistics" label="frequentist statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q379999" start="4334" end="4349" title="Harold Jeffreys" label="Harold Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q240772" start="4514" end="4526" title="Abraham Wald" label="Abraham Wald"/>
<link wikidata="Q374341" start="4538" end="4555" title="Leonard J. Savage" label="Leonard J. Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191869" start="5120" end="5144" title="Markov chain Monte Carlo" label="Markov chain Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="5483" end="5499" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="5570" end="5588" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054106" start="5638" end="5648" title="Cox&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Cox axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q715108" start="5654" end="5673" title="Dutch book" label="Dutch book argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q177571" start="5694" end="5709" title="decision theory" label="decision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408070" start="5714" end="5739" title="de Finetti&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="de Finetti&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052424" start="5767" end="5781" title="Richard Threlkeld Cox" label="Richard T. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q594452" start="5855" end="5875" title="functional equations" label="functional equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q728322" start="6240" end="6256" title="Bruno de Finetti" label="Bruno de Finetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q664702" start="6317" end="6326" title="bookmaker" label="bookmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q715108" start="6335" end="6345" title="Dutch book" label="Dutch book"/>
<link wikidata="Q515895" start="6361" end="6365" title="odds" label="odds"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="6559" end="6572" title="probability" label="probabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q715108" start="6603" end="6611" title="Coherence (philosophical gambling strategy)" label="coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q188357" start="6623" end="6634" title="Ian Hacking" label="Ian Hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q188357" start="6816" end="6823" title="Ian Hacking" label="Hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q48996493" start="7338" end="7360" title="probability kinematics" label="probability kinematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326846" start="7396" end="7414" title="Richard Jeffrey" label="Richard C. Jeffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q177571" start="7636" end="7654" title="statistical decision theory" label="decision-theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q240772" start="7753" end="7765" title="Abraham Wald" label="Abraham Wald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683801" start="7789" end="7799" title="admissible decision rule" label="admissible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683801" start="7928" end="7938" title="admissible decision rule" label="admissible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319304" start="8036" end="8052" title="expected utility" label="expected utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335500" start="8053" end="8059" title="optimal decision" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q315387" start="8063" end="8069" title="Frank P. Ramsey" label="Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="8074" end="8085" title="John von Neumann" label="von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335500" start="8125" end="8142" title="optimal decision" label="rational behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q392811" start="8184" end="8189" title="Agent-based model" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q102079805" start="8191" end="8206" title="Johann Pfanzagl" label="Johann Pfanzagl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226156" start="8227" end="8264" title="Theory of Games and Economic Behavior" label="Theory of Games and Economic Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q94028" start="8384" end="8401" title="Oskar Morgenstern" label="Oskar Morgenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q374341" start="9047" end="9053" title="Leonard Jimmie Savage" label="Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q210832" start="9178" end="9196" title="statistical hypothesis testing" label="testing hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q315387" start="9251" end="9257" title="Frank P. Ramsey" label="Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q728322" start="9269" end="9279" title="Bruno de Finetti" label="de Finetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q728322" start="9311" end="9327" title="Bruno de Finetti" label="Bruno de Finetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q315387" start="9332" end="9347" title="Frank P. Ramsey" label="Frank P. Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q505820" start="9375" end="9395" title="pragmatic philosophy" label="pragmatic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="9426" end="9443" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles S. Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="9681" end="9690" title="Falsifiability" label="falsified"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="9730" end="9747" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles S. Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="9783" end="9797" title="falsifiability" label="falsifiability"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="9827" end="9838" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q608510" start="9935" end="9943" title="double blind" label="blinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455898" start="10722" end="10740" title="well-posed problem" label="well-posed problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="10925" end="10944" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q379999" start="10946" end="10961" title="Harold Jeffreys" label="Harold Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q711210" start="10967" end="10988" title="Edwin Thompson Jaynes" label="Edwin Thompson Jaynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417473" start="11241" end="11256" title="Principle of maximum entropy" label="Maximum entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162676" start="11259" end="11288" title="Haar measure" label="Transformation group analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291225" start="11291" end="11309" title="José-Miguel Bernardo" label="Reference analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284399" start="11450" end="11467" title="statistical model" label="statistical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129705" start="11790" end="11802" title="James Berger (statistician)" label="James Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="11804" end="11819" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291225" start="11825" end="11845" title="José-Miguel Bernardo" label="José-Miguel Bernardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q383568" start="11847" end="11870" title="University of Valencia" label="Universitat de València"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749933" start="12297" end="12358" title="An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances" label="An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083546" start="12367" end="12388" title="Bayesian epistemology" label="Bayesian epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q828552" start="12391" end="12407" title="Bertrand paradox (probability)" label="Bertrand paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183677" start="12445" end="12459" title="Credal network" label="Credal network"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351567" start="12462" end="12483" title="Credence (statistics)" label="Credence (statistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q715108" start="12486" end="12508" title="De Finetti&amp;#x27;s game" label="De Finetti&amp;#x27;s game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418353" start="12577" end="12611" title="Evidence under Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Evidence under Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q198835" start="12614" end="12632" title="Monty Hall problem" label="Monty Hall problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268978" start="12635" end="12640" title="QBism" label="QBism"/>
<link wikidata="Q899137" start="12644" end="12679" title="interpretation of quantum mechanics" label="interpretation of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307115" start="12723" end="12746" title="Reference class problem" label="Reference class problem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4892" wikidata="Q4894971" url="?curid=4892" title="Bert Bell">
<text>De Benneville &quot;Bert&quot; Bell (February 25, 1895 – October 11, 1959) was an American professional football executive and coach. He was the fifth chief executive and second commissioner of the National Football League (NFL) from 1946 until his death in 1959. As commissioner, he introduced competitive parity into the NFL to improve the league&#x27;s commercial viability and promote its popularity.

Whereas Bell had become the chief executive in a sport that was largely seen as second-rate and heading a league still plagued by franchise instability, by his death the NFL was a financially sound sports enterprise and seriously challenging Major League Baseball for preeminence among sports attractions in the United States. Bell was posthumously inducted into the charter class of the Pro Football Hall of Fame.

Bell played football at the University of Pennsylvania, where as quarterback, he led his team to an appearance in the 1917 Rose Bowl. After being drafted into the US Army during World War I, he returned to complete his collegiate career at Penn and went on to become an assistant football coach with the Quakers in the 1920s. During the Great Depression, he was an assistant coach for the Temple Owls and a co-founder and co-owner of the Philadelphia Eagles.

With the Eagles, Bell led the way in cooperating with the other NFL owners to establish the NFL draft in order to afford the weakest teams the first opportunity to sign the best available players. He subsequently became sole proprietor of the Eagles, but the franchise suffered financially. Eventually, he sold the team and bought a share in the Pittsburgh Steelers. During World War II, Bell argued against the league suspending operations until the war&#x27;s conclusion.

After the war, he was elected NFL commissioner and sold his ownership in the Steelers. As commissioner, he implemented a proactive anti-gambling policy, negotiated a merger with the All-America Football Conference (AAFC), and unilaterally crafted the entire league schedule with an emphasis on enhancing the dramatic effect of late-season matches. During the Golden Age of Television, he tailored the game&#x27;s rules to strengthen its appeal to mass media and enforced a policy of blacking out local broadcasts of home contests to safeguard ticket receipts. Amid criticism from franchise owners and under pressure from Congress, he unilaterally recognized the NFLPA and facilitated in the development of the first pension plan for the players. He survived to oversee the &quot;Greatest Game Ever Played&quot; and to envision what the league would become in the future.

As commissioner, Bell oversaw the integration of the NFL. Although Fritz Pollard was the first African American to play in the NFL, appearing with three teams from 1922 to 1926, a “gentleman’s agreement” among the owners kept the sport segregated for another 20 years. In 1946, four black players began playing in the NFL.

==Early life (1895–1932)==
Bell was born De Benneville Bell, on February 25, 1895, in Philadelphia to John C. Bell and Fleurette de Benneville Myers. His father was an attorney who served a term as the Pennsylvania Attorney General. His older brother, John C. Jr., was born in 1892. Bert&#x27;s parents were very wealthy, and his mother&#x27;s lineage predated the American Revolutionary War. His father, a Quaker of the University of Pennsylvania (class of 1884) during the early days of American football, accompanied him to his first football game when Bell was six years old. Thereafter, Bell regularly engaged in football games with childhood friends.

In 1904, Bell matriculated at the Episcopal Academy, the Delancey School from 1909 to 1911 and then the Haverford School until 1914. About this time, his father was installed as athletics director at Penn and helped form the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). At Haverford, Bell captained the school&#x27;s football, basketball, and baseball teams, and &quot;was awarded The Yale Cup [for being] &#x27;The pupil who has done the most to promote athletics in the school.&#x27;&quot; Although he excelled at baseball, his devotion was to football. His father, who was named a trustee at Penn in 1911, said of Bell&#x27;s plans for college, &quot;Bert will go to Penn or he will go to hell.&quot;

===University of Pennsylvania (1914–1919)===

Bell entered the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia in the fall of 1914. He majored in English and joined the Phi Kappa Sigma fraternity. In a rare accomplishment for a sophomore, he was named the starting quarterback by Penn coach George H. Brooke. He also was a defender, punter, and punt returner. After the team&#x27;s 3–0 start, Bell temporarily shared possession of his quarterbacking duties until he subsequently reclaimed them later in the season, as Penn finished with a record of 3–5–2.

Prior to Penn&#x27;s 1916 season, Bell&#x27;s mother died while he was en route to her bedside. He started the first game for the Quakers under new coach Bob Folwell, but mixed results left him platooned for the rest of the season. Penn finished with a record of 7–2–1. However, the Quakers secured an invitation to the 1917 Rose Bowl against the Oregon Ducks. Bell had the best offensive gain for Penn during their 0–14 loss to Oregon, a 20-yard run, but was replaced late in the game at quarterback after throwing an interception. In the 1917 season, Bell led Penn to a 9–2 record.

Following the 1917 season, Bell registered with a Mobile Hospital Unit of the United States Army for World War I and was deployed to France in May 1918. As a result of his unit participating in hazardous duty, it received a congratulatory letter for bravery from General John J. Pershing, and Bell was promoted to first sergeant. After the war, Bell returned to the United States in March 1919. He returned to Penn as captain of the team in the fall and again performed erratically. The Quakers finished 1919 with a 6–2–1 record. Academically, his aversion to attending classes forced him to withdraw from Penn without a degree in early 1920. His collegiate days ended with his having been a borderline All-American, but this period of his life had proven that he &quot;possessed the qualities of a leader.&quot;

===Early career (1920–1932)===
Bell assembled the Stanley Professionals in Chicago in 1920, but he disbanded it prior to playing any games because of negative publicity received by Chicago due to the Black Sox Scandal. He joined John Heisman&#x27;s staff at Penn as an assistant coach in 1920, where he remained for several years. At Penn, he was well regarded as a football coach, and after its 1924 season, he drew offers for, but declined, head-coaching assignments at other universities. At least as early as 1926, his avocation was socializing and frequenting Saratoga Race Course, where he counted as friends Tim Mara, Art Rooney, and George Preston Marshall. In 1928, Bell tendered his resignation at Penn in protest over the emphasis on in-season scrimmages during practices by Lud Wray, a fellow assistant coach. Bell&#x27;s resignation was accommodated prior to the start of the 1929 season.

Bell was then an employee of the Ritz-Carlton in Philadelphia. At one point, he tried his hand as a stock broker and lost $50,000 () during the Wall Street Crash of 1929. His father bailed him out of his deprivation, and he returned to working at the Ritz. From 1930 until 1932, he was a backfield coach for Temple in Philadelphia. In 1932, Marshall tried to coax Bell into buying the rights to an NFL franchise, but Bell disparaged the league and ridiculed the idea. When Pop Warner was hired to coach Temple for the 1933 season, Warner chose to hire his own assistants, and Bell was let go by Temple.

==NFL career==

===Philadelphia Eagles (1933–1940)===
By early 1933, Bell&#x27;s opinion on the NFL had changed, and he wanted to become an owner of a team based in Philadelphia. After being advised by the NFL that a prerequisite to a franchise being rendered in Philadelphia was that the Pennsylvania Blue Laws would have to be mollified, he was the &quot;force majeure&quot; in lobbying to getting the laws deprecated. He borrowed funds from Frances Upton, partnered with Wray, and he procured the rights to a franchise in Philadelphia, purchasing the Frankford Yellow Jackets which he christened as the Philadelphia Eagles, inspired by Franklin Delano Roosevelt&#x27;s use of the American eagle symbol in choosing that name.

After the inaugural 1933 Philadelphia Eagles season, Bell married Upton at St. Madeleine Sophie Roman Catholic Church in Philadelphia. Days later, his suggestion to bestow the winner of the NFL championship game with the Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy was affirmed. In 1934, the Eagles finished with a 4–7 record, The Eagles&#x27; inability to seriously challenge other teams made it difficult to sell tickets, and his failure to sign a talented college prospect led him to adduce that the only way to bring stability to the league was to institute a draft to ensure the weakest teams had an advantage in signing the preeminent players. In 1935, his proposal for a draft was accepted, and in February 1936, the first draft kicked off, at which he acted as Master of Ceremonies. Later that month, his first child, Bert Jr., was born.

In the Eagles&#x27; first three years, the partners exhausted $85,000 (), and at a public auction, Bell became sole owner of the Eagles with a bid of $4,500 (). Austerity measures forced him to supplant Wray as head coach of the Eagles, wherein Bell led the Eagles to a 1–11 finish, their worst record ever. In December, an application for a franchise in Los Angeles was obstructed by Bell and Pittsburgh Steelers owner Rooney as they deemed it too far of a distance to travel for games. During the Eagles&#x27; 2–8–1 1937 season, his second child, John &quot;Upton&quot;, was born. In the Eagles&#x27; first profitable season, 1938, they posted a 5–6 record. The Eagles finished 1–9–1 in 1939 and 1–10 in 1940.

===Pittsburgh Steelers (1940–1945)===
In December 1940, Bell conciliated the sale of Rooney&#x27;s Steelers to Alexis Thompson, and then Rooney acquired half of Bell&#x27;s interest in the Eagles. In a series of events known as the &quot;Pennsylvania Polka&quot;, Rooney and Bell exchanged their entire Eagles roster and their &quot;territorial rights&quot; in Philadelphia to Thompson for his entire Steelers roster and his rights in Pittsburgh. Ostensibly, Rooney had provided assistance to Bell by rewarding him with a 20% commission on the sale of the Steelers. Bell became the Steelers head coach and Rooney became the general manager.

During the training camp of Pittsburgh&#x27;s inaugural season with the nickname Steelers, Bell was buoyant with optimism about the team&#x27;s prospect, but he became crestfallen after Rooney denigrated the squad and flippantly remarked that they looked like the &quot;[s]ame old Steelers&quot; (SOS). After losing the first two games of the 1941 season, Rooney compelled Bell to resign as head coach. Bell&#x27;s coaching career ended with a 10–46–2 record, his 0.179 winning percentage is second-lowest in NFL history to only Phil Handler&#x27;s 0.105 for coaches with at least five seasons. And at 36 games under .500 he held the record for futility until John McKay passed him in 1983 and Marion Campbell passed him in 1988. His first daughter and last child, Jane Upton, was born several months after the season&#x27;s conclusion.

By 1943, 40% of the NFL rosters had been drafted into the United States Armed Forces for World War II. The resulting difficulty in fielding a full-strength squad led some owners to recommend the league should shut down until the war ended. Bell auspiciously argued against this as he feared they might not be able to resume operations easily after the war, and since Major League Baseball was continuing unabated, then they should also.

Throughout Bell&#x27;s affiliation with the Steelers, he suffered monetarily and Rooney bought an increasing allotment of the franchise from him. Compounding Bell&#x27;s problems, Arch Ward organized the All-America Football Conference (AAFC) in 1944 to displace the NFL&#x27;s sovereignty in professional football. Ward&#x27;s AAFC promptly began luring players to join the league, which resulted in salaries being driven up drastically. In Bill Dudley&#x27;s contract proceedings with the Steelers, he attributed Bell&#x27;s anxiety during the negotiations to the rivalry from the AAFC. Furthermore, by the end of 1945, the Steelers were in their most economically perilous situation in its history.

===NFL commissioner (1946–1959)===

====Election, Hapes-Filchock, and the NFL schedule (1946–1948)====
Elmer Layden was appointed the first NFL commissioner in 1941, but Ward appeared as dictating his hiring. Layden tendered his resignation for personal reasons January 1946. Bell, who was not well respected in Pittsburgh, was elected to replace him. He received a three-year contract at $20,000 per year (), and transacted a sale of his stake in the Steelers to Rooney, albeit for a price Bell did not construe was full-value. He was then immediately placed at the center of a controversy wherein the owners denied Dan Reeves permission to relocate the Cleveland Rams to Los Angeles. Bell moderated a settlement, and, as a result, the Los Angeles Rams were formed. As a precondition to the Rams leasing the Los Angeles Coliseum, they signed Kenny Washington, which marked the beginning of the end of racial segregation on the field, but also caused &quot;&#x27;all hell to break loose&#x27;&quot; amidst the owners.

The drawing up of a regular-season schedule had been a perennial source of contention among the NFL owners since the league&#x27;s inception. The crux of the problem was the scheduling of games meant weighing the interest of owners who, early in the season, wanted their franchises to confront teams that drew the largest crowds, versus owners who wanted to play the weaker franchises to pad their team&#x27;s win–loss record. The resultant impasse coerced the owners, in 1946, to confer upon Bell the sole discretion in developing the league&#x27;s schedule. He utilized this responsibility to, early in the season, pit the weaker teams against other weak teams, and the strong teams against other strong teams. His goal was to augment game attendances by keeping the difference in team standings to a minimum as deep into the season as possible.

On the eve of the 1946 championship game, Bell was notified that Merle Hapes and Frank Filchock of the New York Giants had been implicated in a bribing scandal. Filchock was sanctioned by Bell to play in the game but Hapes was suspended. At the next NFL owners&#x27; meeting, Bell was worried the repercussions from this event would lead to his firing. However, he was pleasantly surprised to learn that his contract would be elevated to five years at $30,000 per year. Reinvigorated with renewed support, he persuaded the owners to allow him to put sudden-death overtime into the playoffs.

Subsequently, he wrote an anti-gambling resolution into the league constitution, which empowered him with the ability to permanently ban any NFL associated personnel for betting on a game or for withholding information on a game being possibly fixed. Furthermore, to obstruct gamblers from getting inside information, he secreted the names of officials he would assign to games, and he directed each team to promulgate a precursory injury report which listed anyone who might not participate in a game. Eventually, he lobbied to get every state in the US to criminalize the fixing of sporting events and put employees on the payroll of the NFL to investigate potential betting scams.

====AAFC–NFL merger (1948–1950)====
The NFL&#x27;s struggle against the AAFC generated stress on wages, attendance, marketing, and by 1949, it had prevented the NFL for showing a profit for three consecutive years. Bell and representatives from both leagues met to attempt a merger, but their efforts were fruitless. In an unrelated matter, he apprised the owners that attendance records had shown televising games locally had a negative impact on the sale of home tickets. Nevertheless, he actualized the NFL&#x27;s first television contract—the 1949 championship game. Simultaneously, he dealt with a lawsuit from Bill Radovich, who had been blacklisted for leaving the Lions and gaining employment with the AAFC. Bell and the owners were advised by John C. Jr. that this lawsuit was potentially not winnable, and the ramifications from the outcome of the case weighed heavily on Bell.

One of the primary impediments in an AAFC–NFL merger was the supposed violation of &quot;territorial rights&quot; claimed by Marshall. Eventually, Bell gathered enough support to effectuate a compromise with the AAFC. In late 1949, the leagues merged, as three AAFC teams (the Cleveland Browns, San Francisco 49ers, and Baltimore Colts) joined the NFL; a fourth AAFC team (Los Angeles Dons) merged with the Los Angeles Rams, and the other AAFC teams disbanded. Bell stayed on as commissioner with his contract extended from five to ten years Seeking to capitalize on the publicity of the residual AAFC–NFL rivalry, he utilized &quot;exquisite dramatic&quot; and business sense and allocated the 1950 opening game to a contest between the 1949 champion Eagles versus the perennial AAFC champion Browns. Feeling financially secure after the merger, he purchased his first home for himself and his family in Narberth, Pennsylvania.

====Marketing of the NFL (1950–1956)====
In 1950, Bell originated a blackout rule into the NFL which forbid all teams to televise their home games within a 75-mile radius of their stadium – except for the Rams. Consequently, the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) opened an investigation into a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. Rams attendance for 1950 dropped off by 50%, and this signaled a potential financial disaster. In 1951, he licensed the DuMont Television Network to air the championship games for the next five years, and he stipulated that teams were free to develop their own television contracts independently.

However, preceding the 1951 season, he reimposed the blackout rule on all teams in the league. The DOJ filed suit over this and Bell publicly retorted, &quot;You can&#x27;t give fans a game for free on TV and also expect them to go to the ballpark&quot;; nevertheless, the suit was ordered to trial for January 1952. After the 1951 season ended, he gained unilateral control over the setting of a television strategy for the NFL. He negotiated a deal with DuMont, which granted it the rights to nationally broadcast one regular-season game every week, and he directed that the income from this contract was to be shared equally between all the teams. In the DOJ&#x27;s case, the judge ruled that the blackout policy was legal, but both Bell, and the franchises collectively, were enjoined from negotiating a TV contract; Bell was ecstatic. Later that year, Bell forced one of the owners of the Cleveland Browns to sell all of his shares in the team after Bell determined the owner had bet on Browns&#x27; football games. Although he hated to fly, at some indeterminate point, he visited the training camps of every team and lectured on the danger gamblers posed to the league.

Bell authorized a Pro Bowl to be held at the end of each season in order to showcase the talents of the best players. But in the early 1950s, on the field activities sometimes denigrated to borderline &quot;assault and battery&quot; with teams&#x27; star players being viciously targeted by opposing players. He answered charges the league was too savage by saying, &quot;&#x27;I have never seen a maliciously dirty football player in my life and I don&#x27;t believe there are any.&#x27;&quot; Nevertheless, he ordered broadcasts to follow a strict rule of conduct whereby TV announcers would not be permitted to criticize the game, and neither fights, nor injuries, could be televised by virtue in his belief that announcers were &quot;&#x27;salesman for professional football [and] we do not want kids believing that engaging in fights is the way to play football.&#x27;&quot;

Bell was criticized for censoring TV broadcasts, a charge he dismissed as not pertinent because he believed he was not impeding the print media but only advertising a product. After CBS and NBC gained the rights to broadcast the games in 1956, he advised the franchises to avoid criticizing the games or the officials, and forewarned that TV would give &quot;&#x27;us our greatest opportunity to sell the NFL and everyone must present to the public the greatest games ... combined with the finest sportsmanship.&#x27;&quot; This relationship with television was the beginning of the NFL&#x27;s rise to becoming America&#x27;s most popular sport.

====Compromise with the NFLPA (1956–1957)====
In Radovich v. National Football League, the Supreme Court ruled in Radovich&#x27;s favor and declared the NFL was subject to antitrust laws, and the implication was that the legality of the draft and reserve clause were dubious. Bell pressed a case in the media that the NFL should be exempted from antitrust regulations and proffered the league was a sport and not a business. He invited an investigation from Congress with respect to the court&#x27;s ruling. The House Judiciary committee, chaired by Emanuel Celler—who believed the draft was illegal and should be abolished, convened in July 1957 to discuss the ramifications of the Radovich decision. Red Grange and Bell testified at the committee&#x27;s solicitation and argued the draft was essential to the sport&#x27;s success. Representatives of the NFLPA contradicted these statements and said the draft and the reserve clause were anti-labor, and it seemed as if Congress was going to accept their position. Faced with Congressional opposition, Bell formally recognized the NFLPA and declared he would negotiate with its representatives.

However, Bell was speaking only for himself and without the auspices of the owners. At the next owners&#x27; meeting, Rooney admonished they either had to recognize the NFLPA or remove Bell as commissioner. In order to do this, they had to agree in a vote that required a &quot;super-majority&quot;. Bell unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the owners to permit the NFLPA to act as a bargaining agent for the players. However, he did reach a compromise with the owners to get them to acquiesce to some of the NFLPA&#x27;s requests for salary standards and health benefits.

====Final days (1958–1959)====
For the 1958 season, the duration of timeouts was extended from 60 to 90 seconds and Bell mandated officials call a few &quot;TV timeouts&quot; during each game — a change which triggered criticism from sportswriters. The 1958 championship game became the first NFL championship game decided in overtime, and it was considered to be the greatest football game ever played. The game further increased football&#x27;s marketability to television advertising, and the drama associated with overtime was the catalyst. Years later, after witnessing Bell openly crying after the game, Raymond Berry attributed it to Bell&#x27;s realization of the impact the game would have on the prevalence of the sport.

The death of Mara in February unsettled Bell and he experienced a heart attack later that month. He converted to Catholicism that summer because of the lifelong urging of his wife, Mara&#x27;s death, and his enduring friendship with Rooney, a practicing Catholic. Bell was advised by his doctor to avoid going to football games, to which he quipped, &quot;I&#x27;d rather die watching football than in my bed with my boots off.&quot; Bell and his children attended an Eagles game on October 11 at Franklin Field against the Steelers (both his old teams). The Eagles held complimentary box seats for him and guests to watch the game, but he preferred to buy his own tickets and sit with the other fans. Sitting towards the end of the field near the end zone during the fourth quarter of the game, he suffered a fatal heart attack and died later that day at the nearby university hospital. League Treasurer Austin Gunsel was named interim NFL commissioner for the rest of the season.

Afterwards, he was remembered as &quot;a man of buoyant joviality, with a rough and ready wit, laughter and genuine humility and honesty, clearly innocent of pretense and [pretension].&quot; His funeral was held at Narberth&#x27;s St. Margaret Roman Catholic Church and Monsignor Cornelius P. Brennan delivered the eulogy, as close friends and admirers attended the mass. Dominic Olejniczak and all the extant owners of the NFL franchises were pallbearers. Bell was interred at Calvary Cemetery in West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania, northwest of Philadelphia.

Bell had named Baltimore Colts owner Carroll Rosenbloom as his executor. Bell had been Rosenbloom&#x27;s backfield coach at Penn in the early 1950s, and later had convinced Rosenbloom to purchase the Colts after becoming commissioner. Rosenbloom owned the Colts in 1958 when they won the greatest game ever played, and brought greater national attention to the NFL. After Bell&#x27;s death, Rosenbloom hired Bell&#x27;s sons Upton and Bert Jr. to work for the Colts. 

==Legacy and honors==

Bell was inducted into the Professional Football Hall of Fame, the Penn Athletics Hall of Fame, the Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame, and Haverford&#x27;s Athletic Hall of Fame. The Maxwell Football Club, which he founded in 1937, has presented the best NFL player of the year with the Bert Bell Award since 1959. The Bert Bell Benefit Bowl was exhibited in his honor from 1960 through 1969. A statue of Bell will be unveiled on October 25, 2024, at the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s Franklin Field. The historical maker to Bell in Narberth, Pennsylvania is within blocks of his family&#x27;s home at 323 Haverford Avenue. 

Although he did not have the wherewithal to prevent the wholesale betting on games, he was proactive in ensuring games were not tampered with by gamblers, and he created the foundation of the contemporary NFL anti-gambling policy.

Bell was criticized as being too strict with his refusal to let sold-out games to be televised locally. Nevertheless, his balancing of television broadcasts against protecting game attendance made the NFL the &quot;healthiest professional sport in America&quot;, and he was the &quot;leading protagonist in pro football&#x27;s evolution into America&#x27;s major sport.&quot; He had understood that the league needed a cooperative television contract with revenue-sharing, but he failed to overcome the obstacles to achieve it. He was portrayed by sportswriters as ensuring the owners treated the players fairly, and his decision to recognize the NFLPA in the face of adversity from owners was a &quot;master stroke&quot; in thwarting Congressional intervention. After he initiated terms for a pension plan with the players in 1959, little progress was made with the NFLPA, however, the first players&#x27; pension plan – the Bert Bell National Football League Retirement Plan – was approved in 1962.

Bell&#x27;s implementation of the draft did not show immediate results, but it was &quot;the single greatest contributor to the [league]&#x27;s prosperity&quot; in its first eighty-four years. His original version of the draft was later ruled unconstitutional, but his anchoring of the success of the league to competitive balance has been &quot;hailed by contemporaries and sports historians&quot;.

Bell&#x27;s belief in the efficacy of parity for the financial health of the league is best summarized by his most famous quotation, made to the press in November 1952 to explain an uptick in stadium attendance:

:&quot;The teams are so closely matched that on any given Sunday, any one team can beat any other team. Professional football has come down to the point where the psychological edge is the determining factor. Physically these teams are even, so it depends on the mental outlook of the squads to determine the winner. It&#x27;s this factor that has made the game close and is bringing fans out to the ball parks.&quot;

==Head coaching record==

===NFL===
==Published works==
* Bell, Bert, &quot;The Money Game.&quot; &quot;Liberty Magazine&quot;, XIII (November 28, 1936), pp. 59–60.
* Bell, Bert, &quot;Offensive Football.&quot; &quot;Popular Football&quot;, (Winter 1941), p. 111.
* Bell, Bert, &quot;This is Commissioner Bell Speaking.&quot; &quot;Pro Football Illustrated&quot;, XII (1952), pp. 60–63.
* Bell, Bert; with Martin, Paul, &quot;Do the Gamblers Make a Sucker Out of You?.&quot; &quot;Saturday Evening Post&quot;, CCXXI (November 6, 1948), p. 28.
* Bell, Bert; with Pollock, Ed, &quot;Let&#x27;s Throw Out the Extra Point.&quot; &quot;Sport&quot;, XV (October 1953), p. 24–25.
* Bell, Bert (1957). &quot;The Story of Professional Football in Summary&quot;. Bala Cynwyd, PA: National Football League.

==References==
==Bibliography==

===Primary materials===
* Lyons, Robert S. (2010). &quot;On Any Given Sunday, A Life of Bert Bell&quot;. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 

===Secondary materials===
* &quot;When Pride Still Mattered, A Life of Vince Lombardi&quot;, by David Maraniss, 1999, 
* &quot;Organized Professional Team Sports: Part 1&quot;. United States House Committee on the Judiciary I, Subcommittee on Antitrust (1957).
* &quot;Organized Professional Team Sports: Part 3&quot;. United States House Committee on the Judiciary III, Subcommittee on Antitrust (1957).
* Algeo, Matthew (2006). &quot;Last Team Standing&quot;. Philadelphia: Da Capo Press. 
* Berry, Robert C.; with Gould, William B. and Staudohar, Paul D. (1986). &quot;Labor Relations in Professional Sports&quot;. Dover, MA: Auburn House Pub. Co. 
* Brown, Paul; with Clary, Jack (1979). &quot;PB, the Paul Brown Story&quot;. New York: Atheneum.
* Carroll, Bob; with Gershman, Michael, Neft, David, and Thorn, John (1999). &quot;Total Football:The Official Encyclopedia of the National Football League&quot;. New York: HarperCollins. 
* Carroll, John M. (1999). &quot;Red Grange and the Rise of Modern Football&quot;. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. 
* Claassen, Harold (Spike) (1963). &quot;The History of Professional Football&quot;. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
* Coenen, Craig R. (2005). &quot;From Sandlots to the Super Bowl: The National Football League, 1920–1967&quot;. Knoxville, TN: The University of Tennessee Press. 
* Daley, Arthur (1963). &quot;Pro Football&#x27;s Hall of Fame&quot;. New York: Grosset and Dunlap.
* Danzig, Allison (1956). &quot;The History of American Football: Its Great Teams, Players, and Coaches&quot;. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
* Davis, Jeff (2005). &quot;Papa Bear, The Life and Legacy of George Halas&quot;. New York: McGraw-Hill 
* DeVito, Carlo (2006). &quot;Wellington: the Maras, the Giants, and the City of New York&quot;. Chicago: Triumph Books. 
* Didinger, Ray; with Lyons, Robert S. (2005). &quot;The Eagles Encyclopedia&quot;. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
* Gifford, Frank; with Richmond, Peter (2008). &quot;The Glory Game: How the 1958 NFL Championship Changed Football Forever&quot;. New York: HarperCollins. 
* Herskowitz, Mickey (1990). &quot;The Golden Age of Pro Football&quot;. Dallas: Taylor Publishing Company. 
* Hession, Joseph (1987). &quot;The Rams: Five Decades of Football&quot;. San Francisco: Foghorn Press. 
* Hibner, John Charles (1993). &quot;The Rose Bowl, 1902–1929&quot;. Jefferson, NC: McFarland &amp; Company, Inc. Publishers. 
* King, Joe (1958). &quot;Inside Pro Football&quot;. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
* Layden, Elmer; with Snyder, Ed (1969). &quot;It Was a Different Game: The Elmer Layden Story&quot;. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice-Hall, Inc.
* LaBlanc, Michael L.; with Ruby, Mary K. (1994). &quot;Professional Sports Team Histories: Football&quot;. Detroit: Gale Research Inc. 
* Levy, Alan H. (2003). &quot;Tackling Jim Crow, Racial Segregation in Professional Football&quot;. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Co., Inc. 
* Littlewood, Thomas B. (1990). &quot;Arch: A Promoter, not a Poet: The Story of Arch Ward&quot;. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press. 
* MacCambridge, Michael (2005). &quot;America&#x27;s Game&quot;. New York: Anchor Books. 
* MacCambridge, Michael (2009). &quot;ESPN College Football Encyclopedia: The Complete History of the Game&quot;. New York: ESPN Books, Inc. 
* Marquis, Albert Nelson (1934). &quot;Who&#x27;s Who in America: A Biographical Dictionary of Notable Living Men and Women of the United States, Vol., 18, 1934–1935, Two Years&quot;. Chicago: The A. N. Marquis Company.
* Maule, Tex (1964). &quot;The Game; The Official Picture History of the National Football League&quot;. New York: Random House
* Oriard, Michael (2007). &quot;Brand NFL: Making and Selling America&#x27;s Favorite Sport&quot;. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. 
* Patton, Phil (1984). &quot;Razzle-Dazzle: The Curious Marriage of Television and Professional Football&quot;. Garden City, NY: The Dial Press. 
* Paul, William Henry (1974). &quot;The Gray-Flannel Pigskin: Movers and Shakers of Pro Football&quot;. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
* Pervin, Lawrence A. (2009). &quot;Football&#x27;s New York Giants&quot;. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company, Inc. 
* Peterson, Robert W. (1997). &quot;Pigskin: The Early Years of Pro Football&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press. 
* Piascik, Andy (2007). &quot;The Best Show in Football: The 1946–1955 Cleveland Browns&quot;. Lanham, MD: Taylor Trade Publishing. 
* Powers, Ron (1984). &quot;Supertube: The Rise of Television Sports&quot;. New York: Coward-McCann. 
* Rader, Benjamin G. (1984). &quot;In its Own Image: How Television Has Transformed Sports&quot;. New York: The Free Press. 
* Rathet, Mike; with Smith, Don R. (1984). &quot;Their Deeds and Dogged Faith&quot;. New York: Balsam Press. 
* Ratterman, George; with Deindorfer, Robert G. (1962). &quot;Confessions of a Gypsy Quarterback; Inside the Wacky World of Pro Football&quot;. New York: Coward-McCann, Inc.
* Riger, Robert; with Maule, Tex (1960). &quot;The Pros&quot;. New York: Simon and Schuster.
* Rooney, Dan; with Halaas, David F. and Masich, Andrew E. (2007). &quot;My 75 Years with the Pittsburgh Steelers and the NFL&quot;. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press. 
* Rothe, Anna; with Prodrick, Elizabeth (1951). &quot;Bert Bell&quot; in &quot;Current Biography: Who&#x27;s News and Why 1950&quot;. New York: The H.W. Wilson Company.
* Ruck, Rob; with Patterson, Maggie Jones and Weber, Michael P. (2010). &quot;Rooney: A Sporting Life&quot;. Lincoln, Neb.: University of Nebraska Press. 
* Smith, Myron J. Jr. (1993). &quot;Professional Football: The Official Pro Football Hall of Fame Bibliography&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 
* Staudohar, Paul D. (1986). &quot;The Sports Industry and Collective Bargaining&quot;. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press. 
* Sullivan, George (1968). &quot;Pro Football&#x27;s All Time Greats&quot;. New York: G. P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons.
* Summerall, Pat; with Levin, Michael (2010). &quot;Giants: What I Learned about Life from Vince Lombardi and Tom Landry&quot;. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc. 
* Umphlett, Wiley Lee (1992). &quot;Creating the Big Game: John W. Heisman and the Invention of American Football&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 
* Westcott, Rich (2001). &quot;A Century of Philadelphia Sports&quot;. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
* Whittingham, Richard (2002). &quot;What a Game They Played: An Inside Look at the Golden Era of Pro Football&quot;. Lincoln, Neb.: University of Nebraska Press, Inc. 
* Williams, Pete (2006). &quot;The Draft: A Year Inside the NFL&#x27;s Search for Talent&quot;. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press. 
* Willis, Chris (2010). &quot;The Man Who Built the National Football League: Joe F. Carr&quot;. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, Inc. 
* Yost, Mark (2006). &quot;Tailgating, Sacks and Salary Caps.&quot; Chicago: Kaplan Publishing. 

==Further reading==

* Lower Merion Historical Society (2000). &quot;The first 300 : the amazing and rich history of Lower Merion&quot;. Ardmore, Pa. : The Society

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4894971" start="0" end="13" title="Bert Bell" label="De Benneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894971" start="20" end="24" title="Bert Bell" label="Bert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894971" start="31" end="35" title="Bert Bell" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="104" end="112" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="198" end="222" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="648" end="669" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="794" end="819" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="850" end="876" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="887" end="898" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560376" start="940" end="954" title="1917 Rose Bowl" label="1917 Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163212" start="1126" end="1133" title="Penn Quakers football" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1159" end="1175" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698629" start="1211" end="1222" title="Temple Owls football" label="Temple Owls"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="1260" end="1279" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750919" start="1374" end="1383" title="NFL draft" label="NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="1628" end="1647" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1656" end="1668" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q389307" start="1939" end="1970" title="All-America Football Conference" label="All-America Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579123" start="2116" end="2140" title="Golden Age of Television" label="Golden Age of Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2378" end="2386" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336879" start="2419" end="2424" title="National Football League Players Association" label="NFLPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960121" start="2530" end="2567" title="1958 NFL Championship Game" label="&amp;quot;Greatest Game Ever Played&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="2663" end="2674" title="Desegregation in the United States" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q920035" start="2696" end="2709" title="Fritz Pollard" label="Fritz Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046626" start="2810" end="2831" title="gentleman’s agreement" label="gentleman’s agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="3039" end="3051" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16026117" start="3055" end="3067" title="John C. Bell (lawyer)" label="John C. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163643" start="3155" end="3184" title="Pennsylvania Attorney General" label="Pennsylvania Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q373201" start="3205" end="3216" title="John C. Bell Jr." label="John C. Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3318" end="3344" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q616428" start="3360" end="3366" title="Penn Quakers" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="3374" end="3400" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q441968" start="3428" end="3459" title="History of American football" label="early days of American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383283" start="3645" end="3662" title="Episcopal Academy" label="Episcopal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3668" end="3683" title="Delancey School" label="Delancey School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739047" start="3715" end="3731" title="Haverford School" label="Haverford School"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="3836" end="3876" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="4383" end="4409" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="4413" end="4425" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181539" start="4484" end="4499" title="Phi Kappa Sigma" label="Phi Kappa Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539997" start="4606" end="4622" title="George H. Brooke" label="George H. Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932445" start="5026" end="5037" title="Bob Folwell" label="Bob Folwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560376" start="5192" end="5206" title="1917 Rose Bowl" label="1917 Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q200410" start="5219" end="5231" title="Oregon Ducks" label="Oregon Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101185" start="5301" end="5307" title="Oregon Ducks football" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="5535" end="5553" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5558" end="5569" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5590" end="5596" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="5720" end="5727" title="General officer" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="5728" end="5744" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711404" start="5771" end="5785" title="first sergeant" label="first sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="6160" end="6171" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="6346" end="6353" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349597" start="6471" end="6488" title="Black Sox Scandal" label="Black Sox Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303281" start="6500" end="6512" title="John Heisman" label="John Heisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423370" start="6836" end="6856" title="Saratoga Race Course" label="Saratoga Race Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434138" start="6886" end="6894" title="Tim Mara" label="Tim Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745557" start="6896" end="6906" title="Art Rooney" label="Art Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032368" start="6912" end="6935" title="George Preston Marshall" label="George Preston Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698672" start="7057" end="7065" title="Lud Wray" label="Lud Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q782200" start="7207" end="7219" title="Ritz-Carlton" label="Ritz-Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="7223" end="7235" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="7318" end="7343" title="Wall Street Crash of 1929" label="Wall Street Crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698629" start="7482" end="7488" title="Temple Owls football" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="7572" end="7575" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569101" start="7647" end="7657" title="Glenn Scobey Warner" label="Pop Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="8067" end="8089" title="Blue law" label="Pennsylvania Blue Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478985" start="8222" end="8235" title="Frances Upton" label="Frances Upton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444816" start="8332" end="8356" title="Frankford Yellow Jackets" label="Frankford Yellow Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="8384" end="8403" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="8417" end="8442" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285378" start="8527" end="8558" title="1933 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="1933 Philadelphia Eagles season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335492" start="8728" end="8752" title="Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy" label="Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460944" start="8770" end="8774" title="1934 NFL season" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563833" start="9212" end="9223" title="1936 NFL draft" label="first draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="9257" end="9277" title="Master of Ceremonies" label="Master of Ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="9729" end="9748" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425733" start="9853" end="9864" title="1937 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="1937 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899373" start="9884" end="9906" title="Upton Bell" label="John &amp;quot;Upton&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547901" start="9963" end="9967" title="1938 NFL season" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984133" start="10024" end="10028" title="1939 NFL season" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984110" start="10041" end="10045" title="1940 NFL season" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721538" start="10159" end="10174" title="Alexis Thompson (American football owner)" label="Alexis Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984308" start="11033" end="11044" title="1941 NFL season" label="1941 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181963" start="11219" end="11231" title="Phil Handler" label="Phil Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247949" start="11350" end="11360" title="John McKay (American football)" label="John McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765111" start="11384" end="11399" title="Marion Campbell" label="Marion Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="11586" end="11612" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11617" end="11629" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="11895" end="11916" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785330" start="12146" end="12155" title="Arch Ward" label="Arch Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q389307" start="12170" end="12201" title="All-America Football Conference" label="All-America Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q454521" start="12408" end="12419" title="Bill Dudley" label="Bill Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q248876" start="12772" end="12784" title="Elmer Layden" label="Elmer Layden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214266" start="13286" end="13296" title="Dan Reeves (NFL owner)" label="Dan Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418611" start="13324" end="13338" title="History of the Cleveland Rams" label="Cleveland Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="13342" end="13353" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="13406" end="13422" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="13478" end="13498" title="Los Angeles Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195242" start="13512" end="13528" title="Kenny Washington (American football)" label="Kenny Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565759" start="14555" end="14577" title="1946 NFL Championship Game" label="1946 championship game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819691" start="14602" end="14613" title="Merle Hapes" label="Merle Hapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486614" start="14618" end="14632" title="Frank Filchock" label="Frank Filchock"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="14640" end="14655" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774055" start="15948" end="15952" title="1949 NFL season" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566574" start="16361" end="16383" title="1949 NFL Championship Game" label="1949 championship game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910577" start="16430" end="16443" title="Bill Radovich" label="Bill Radovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864771" start="16458" end="16469" title="Hollywood blacklist" label="blacklisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="16980" end="16996" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="16998" end="17017" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q614724" start="17023" end="17038" title="Baltimore Colts (1947–1950)" label="Baltimore Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589616" start="17076" end="17092" title="Los Angeles Dons" label="Los Angeles Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757208" start="17398" end="17402" title="1950 NFL season" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661146" start="17441" end="17461" title="1949 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="1949 champion Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186079" start="17608" end="17630" title="Narberth, Pennsylvania" label="Narberth, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="17862" end="17897" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="17952" end="17973" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262316" start="18095" end="18120" title="DuMont Television Network" label="DuMont Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="19469" end="19477" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281673" start="21028" end="21064" title="Radovich v. National Football League" label="Radovich v. National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="21070" end="21083" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="21226" end="21240" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131462" start="21491" end="21506" title="United States House Committee on the Judiciary" label="House Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052621" start="21529" end="21543" title="Emanuel Celler" label="Emanuel Celler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399654" start="21681" end="21691" title="Red Grange" label="Red Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960121" start="22954" end="22976" title="1958 NFL Championship Game" label="1958 championship game"/>
<link wikidata="Q459051" start="23311" end="23324" title="Raymond Berry" label="Raymond Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="23499" end="23511" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23546" end="23557" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877867" start="23901" end="23907" title="1959 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491503" start="23930" end="23944" title="Franklin Field" label="Franklin Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877896" start="23957" end="23965" title="1959 Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908783" start="24300" end="24319" title="Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania" label="university hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823110" start="24338" end="24351" title="Austin Gunsel" label="Austin Gunsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869995" start="24370" end="24386" title="History of the NFL Commissioner" label="NFL commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q740497" start="24788" end="24806" title="Dominic Olejniczak" label="Dominic Olejniczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181890" start="24914" end="24945" title="West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania" label="West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="24960" end="24972" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046610" start="25012" end="25030" title="Carroll Rosenbloom" label="Carroll Rosenbloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q654437" start="25038" end="25046" title="executor" label="executor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839616" start="25080" end="25095" title="backfield coach" label="backfield coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="25494" end="25528" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Professional Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182819" start="25567" end="25599" title="Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame" label="Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796098" start="25649" end="25670" title="Maxwell Football Club" label="Maxwell Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q827312" start="25753" end="25768" title="Bert Bell Award" label="Bert Bell Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066253" start="25785" end="25807" title="Playoff Bowl" label="Bert Bell Benefit Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398744" start="28467" end="28483" title="Liberty (1924–1950)" label="Liberty Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237116" start="29435" end="29449" title="David Maraniss" label="David Maraniss"/>
<link wikidata="Q933101" start="30797" end="30812" title="Allison Danzig" label="Danzig, Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297401" start="31177" end="31190" title="Ray Didinger" label="Didinger, Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261570" start="31301" end="31315" title="Frank Gifford" label="Gifford, Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838661" start="31458" end="31476" title="Mickey Herskowitz" label="Herskowitz, Mickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707265" start="32904" end="32914" title="Tex Maule" label="Maule, Tex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364277" start="33833" end="33844" title="Ron Powers" label="Powers, Ron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543736" start="34170" end="34187" title="George Ratterman" label="Ratterman, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436165" start="34344" end="34357" title="Robert Riger" label="Riger, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214310" start="34437" end="34448" title="Dan Rooney" label="Rooney, Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247792" start="35299" end="35313" title="Pat Summerall" label="Summerall, Pat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="4893" wikidata="Q2458861" url="?curid=4893" title="Bob Costas">
<text>Robert Quinlan Costas (born March 22, 1952) is an American sportscaster who is known for his long tenure with NBC Sports, from 1980 through 2019. He has received 28 Emmy awards for his work and was the prime-time host of 12 Olympic Games from 1988 until 2016. He is currently employed by TNT Sports, where he does play-by-play and studio work for MLB on TBS and commentary on CNN. He is also employed by MLB Network, where he does play-by-play and once hosted an interview show called &quot;Studio 42 with Bob Costas&quot;.

==Early life and education==
Costas is the son of a Greek father, John George Costas, and an Irish mother, Jayne Costas (née Quinlan). He grew up in Commack, New York, and attended Commack High School South.

He attended the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University, but dropped out in 1974. Costas got his first radio experience as a freshman at WAER, a student run radio station. In the mid-1980s, he established the Robert Costas Scholarship at the Newhouse School, of which the first recipient was Mike Tirico in 1987.

==Broadcasting career==
===Early career===
While studying communications in college, Costas began his professional career in 1973, at WSYR-TV (now WSTM-TV) and WSYR-FM radio in Syracuse. He called for the minor league Syracuse Blazers of the Eastern Hockey League.

After leaving school in 1974, he joined KMOX radio in St. Louis. He covered games of the American Basketball Association (ABA). Costas would call Missouri Tigers basketball and co-host KMOX&#x27;s &quot;Open Line&quot; call-in program. He did play-by-play for Chicago Bulls broadcasts on WGN-TV during the 1979–1980 NBA season.

===NBC Sports===

In 1980, Costas was hired by NBC. Don Ohlmeyer, who at the time ran NBC&#x27;s sports division, told 28-year-old Costas he looked like a 14-year-old. 

For many years, Costas hosted NBC&#x27;s National Football League (NFL) coverage and National Basketball Association (NBA) coverage. He also did play-by-play for NBA and Major League Baseball (MLB) coverage. With the introduction of the NBC Sports Network, Costas also became the host of the new monthly interview program &quot;Costas Tonight&quot;.

====Boxing====
On March 30, 2015, it was announced that Costas would join forces with Marv Albert (blow-by-blow) and Al Michaels (host) on the April 11, 2015, edition of NBC&#x27;s primetime &quot;PBC on NBC&quot; boxing series. Costas was added to serve as a special contributor for the event from Barclays Center in Brooklyn. He would narrate and write a feature on the storied history of boxing in New York City.

====Golf====
Costas hosted NBC&#x27;s coverage of the U.S. Open golf tournament from 2003 to 2014.

====Major League Baseball====
For baseball telecasts, Costas teamed with Sal Bando (1982), Tony Kubek (from 1983 to 1989), and Joe Morgan and Bob Uecker (from 1994 to 2000). One of his most memorable broadcasts occurred on June 23, 1984 (in what would go down in baseball lore as &quot;The Sandberg Game&quot;). Costas, along with Tony Kubek, was calling the Saturday baseball &quot;Game of the Week&quot; from Chicago&#x27;s Wrigley Field. The game between the Chicago Cubs and St. Louis Cardinals in particular was cited for putting Ryne Sandberg (as well as the 1984 Cubs in general, who would go on to make their first postseason appearance since 1945) &quot;on the map&quot;. In the ninth inning, the Cubs, trailing 9–8, faced the premier relief pitcher of the time, Bruce Sutter. Sandberg, then not known for his power, slugged a home run to left field against the Cardinals&#x27; ace closer. Despite this dramatic act, the Cardinals scored two runs in the top of the tenth. Sandberg came up again in the tenth inning, facing a determined Sutter with one man on base. Sandberg then shocked the national audience by hitting a second home run, even farther into the left field bleachers, to tie the game again. The Cubs went on to win in the 11th inning. When Sandberg hit that second home run, Costas said, &quot;Do you believe it?!&quot; The Cardinals&#x27; Willie McGee also hit for the cycle in the same game.

While hosting Game 4 of the 1988 World Series between the Los Angeles Dodgers and Oakland Athletics on NBC, Costas angered many members of the Dodgers (especially the team&#x27;s manager, Tommy Lasorda) by commenting before the start of the game that the Dodgers quite possibly were about to put up the weakest-hitting lineup in World Series history. That comment ironically fired up the Dodgers&#x27; competitive spirit, to the point where a chant of &quot;Kill Costas!&quot; began among the clubhouse, while the Dodgers eventually rolled to a 4–1 series victory.

Besides calling the 1989 American League Championship Series for NBC, Costas also filled in for a suddenly ill Vin Scully, who had come down with laryngitis, for Game2 of the 1989 National League Championship Series alongside Tom Seaver. Game2 of the NLCS took place on Thursday, October 5, which was an off day for the ALCS. NBC then decided to fly Costas from Toronto to Chicago to substitute for Scully on Thursday night. Afterward, Costas flew back to Toronto, where he resumed work on the ALCS the next night.

Costas anchored NBC&#x27;s pre- and post-game shows for NFL broadcasts and the pre and post-game shows for numerous World Series and Major League Baseball All-Star Games during the 1980s (the first being for the 1982 World Series). Costas did not get a shot at doing play-by-play (as the games on NBC were previously called by Vin Scully) for an All-Star Game until 1994 and a World Series until 1995 (when NBC split the coverage with ABC under &quot;The Baseball Network&quot; umbrella), when NBC regained Major League Baseball rights after a four-year hiatus (when the broadcast network television contract moved over to CBS, exclusively). It was not until 1997 when Costas finally got to do play-by-play for a World Series from start to finish. Costas ended up winning a Sports Emmy Award for Outstanding Sports Personality, Play-by-Play.

In 1999, Costas teamed with his then-NBC colleague Joe Morgan to call two weekday night telecasts for ESPN. The first was on Wednesday, August 25 with the Detroit Tigers playing against the Seattle Mariners.

On August 3, 2019, Costas alongside Paul O&#x27;Neill and David Cone called both games of a double-header between the New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox for the YES Network. Costas was filling in for Michael Kay, who was recovering from vocal cord surgery.

On August 20, 2021, reports emerged that TBS was nearing an agreement with Costas to host their coverage of that year&#x27;s NLCS This became true when TBS announce his role on October 7, 2021.

On October 31, 2024, Costas announced that he was officially retiring from Major League Baseball play-by-play calling after 44 years. This means that his final Major League Baseball broadcast as a play-by-play announcer was Game 4 of the 2024 American League Division Series between the New York Yankees and Kansas City Royals, airing on TBS.

====NASCAR====
In November 2017, it was announced that Costas would co-anchor alongside Krista Voda on NBC&#x27;s pre-race coverage leading into the NASCAR Cup Series finale from Homestead. In addition to hosting pre-race coverage, Costas would conduct a live interview with incoming NBC broadcaster Dale Earnhardt Jr., who was running his final race.

====National Basketball Association====
Costas served as NBC&#x27;s lead play-by-play announcer for their National Basketball Association (NBA) broadcasts from 1997-2000. In that time frame, Costas called three NBA Finals including the 1998 installment (which set an all-time ratings record for the NBA) between the Chicago Bulls and Utah Jazz. Costas was paired with Isiah Thomas and Doug Collins on NBC&#x27;s NBA telecast. Following the 2000 NBA Finals, he was replaced by Marv Albert as the lead play-by-play announcer, who incidentally, the man he directly replaced on the &quot;NBA on NBC&quot; in the first place.

Costas had previously presided as host of NBC&#x27;s pre-game show, &quot;NBA Showtime&quot;, while also providing play-by-play as a fill-in when necessary. Costas later co-anchored (with Hannah Storm) NBC&#x27;s NBA Finals coverage in 2002, which was their last to-date (before the NBA&#x27;s network television contract moved to ABC).

====Professional football====
Costas began as a play-by-play announcer, working with analyst Bob Trumpy. In 1984, he would replace Len Berman as studio host. Among his NFL colleagues was O.J. Simpson, who had called 30 Rockefeller Plaza asking to speak to Costas during Simpson&#x27;s infamous police chase through the freeways of Los Angeles. However, Costas was several blocks away at Madison Square Garden covering Game 5 of the 1994 NBA Finals. Costas learned of the attempted contact when visiting Simpson in prison later that year. Costas remained NFL studio host until 1992, when he was replaced by Jim Lampley.

NBC Sports allowed Costas to opt out from having to cover the XFL. He publicly denigrated the league throughout its existence and remains a vocal critic of the XFL and its premise.

In 2006, Costas returned to NFL studio hosting duties for NBC&#x27;s new &quot;Sunday Night Football&quot;, hosting its pre-game show &quot;Football Night in America&quot;.

Costas is nicknamed &quot;Rapping Roberto&quot; by New York City&#x27;s &quot;Daily News&quot; sports media columnist Bob Raissman. Al Michaels also called him &quot;Rapping Roberto&quot; during the telecast between the Indianapolis Colts and the New York Giants on September 10, 2006, in response to Costas calling him &quot;Alfalfa&quot;.

====Olympics (1988–2016)====
Costas has frontlined many Olympics broadcasts for NBC. They include Seoul in 1988, Barcelona in 1992, Atlanta in 1996, Sydney in 2000, Salt Lake City in 2002, Athens in 2004, Torino in 2006, Beijing in 2008, Vancouver in 2010, London in 2012, Sochi in 2014 and Rio in 2016. He discusses his work on the Olympic telecasts extensively in a book by Andrew Billings entitled &quot;Olympic Media: Inside the Biggest Show on Television&quot;. A personal influence on Costas has been legendary ABC Sports broadcaster Jim McKay, who hosted many Olympics for ABC from the 1960s to the 1980s.

During the 1992 Barcelona and 1996 Atlanta Opening Ceremonies, Costas&#x27;s remarks on China&#x27;s teams&#x27; possible drug use caused an uproar among the American Chinese and international communities. Thousands of dollars were raised to purchase ads in &quot;The Washington Post&quot; and Sunday &quot;The New York Times&quot;, featuring an image of the head of a statue of Apollo and reading: &quot;Costas Poisoned Olympic Spirit, Public Protests NBC&quot;. However, Costas&#x27;s comments were made subsequent to the suspension of Chinese coach Zhou Ming after seven of his swimmers were caught using steroids in 1994. Further evidence of Chinese athletes&#x27; drug use came in 1997 when Australian authorities confiscated 13 vials of Somatropin, a human growth hormone, from the bag of Chinese swimmer Yuan Yuan upon her arrival for the 1997 World Swimming Championships. At the World Championships, four Chinese swimmers tested positive for the banned substance Triamterene, a diuretic used to dilute urine samples to mask the presence of anabolic steroids. Including these failed drug tests, 27 Chinese swimmers were caught using performance-enhancing drugs from 1990 through 1997; more than the rest of the world combined.

Along with co-host Meredith Vieira and Matt Lauer, Costas&#x27;s commentary of the 2012 Summer Olympics Opening Ceremonies came under fierce criticism, with Costas being described as making &quot;a series of jingoistic remarks, including a joke about dictator Idi Amin when Uganda&#x27;s team appeared&quot; and the combined commentary as being &quot;ignorant&quot; and &quot;banal&quot;.

Following the Olympics, Costas appeared on Conan O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s talk show and jokingly criticized his employer for its decision to air a preview of the upcoming series &quot;Animal Practice&quot; over a performance by The Who during the London closing ceremonies. &quot;So here is the balance NBC has to consider: The Who, &#x27;Animal Practice&#x27;. Roger Daltrey, Pete Townshend—monkey in a lab coat. I&#x27;m sure you&#x27;d be the first to attest, Conan, that when it comes to the tough calls, NBC usually gets &#x27;em right,&quot; Costas said, alluding at the end to O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s involvement in the 2010 &quot;Tonight Show&quot; conflict.

An eye infection Costas had at the start of the 2014 Winter Olympics forced him, on February 11, 2014, to cede his Olympic hosting duties to Matt Lauer (four nights) and Meredith Vieira (two nights), the first time Costas had not done so at all since the 1998 Winter Olympics (as the rights were not held by NBC).

====Thoroughbred racing====
From 2001 until 2018, Costas co-hosted the Kentucky Derby. In 2009, he hosted Bravo&#x27;s coverage of the 2009 Kentucky Oaks. After Costas officially departed from NBC Sports, his role on NBC&#x27;s thoroughbred racing coverage was essentially filled-in by Rebecca Lowe, beginning with the 2019 Kentucky Derby.

====Departure from NBC Sports====
On February 9, 2017, Costas announced during &quot;Today&quot; that he had begun the process of stepping down from his main on-air roles at NBC Sports, announcing in particular that he would cede his role as primetime host for NBC&#x27;s Olympics coverage to Mike Tirico (who joined the network from ESPN in 2016), and that he would host Super Bowl LII as his final Super Bowl. However, Costas ultimately dropped out of the coverage entirely.

&quot;USA Today&quot; reported that he would similarly step down from &quot;Football Night in America&quot; in favor of Tirico. Costas explained that he was not outright retiring and expected to take on a role at NBC Sports similar to that of Tom Brokaw, being an occasional special correspondent to the division. He explained that his decision &quot;opens up more time to do the things that I feel I&#x27;m most connected to; there will still be events, features, and interviews where I can make a significant contribution at NBC, but it will also leave more time for baseball (on MLB Network), and then, at some point down the road, I&#x27;ll have a chance to do more of the long-form programming I enjoy.&quot; Costas told &quot;USA Today&quot; his gradual retirement was planned in advance, and that he did not want to announce it during the 2016 Summer Olympics or the NFL season because it would be too disruptive, and joked: &quot;I&#x27;m glad that Sochi wasn&#x27;t the last one. You wouldn&#x27;t want your pink-eye Olympics to be your last Olympics.&quot;

Costas&#x27;s final major on-air broadcast for NBC was hosting the 2018 Belmont Stakes, where Justify won the Triple Crown.

On January 15, 2019, it was announced that Costas had officially departed from NBC Sports after 40 years.

On August 11, 2024, Costas made a rare guest appearance on NBC&#x27;s coverage of the 2024 Summer Olympics for a segment previewing the 2028 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, joining Tirico and Al Michaels in a discussion of notable moments from past Olympics hosted by the United States.

===Talk show hosting===
Costas hosted the syndicated radio program &quot;Costas Coast to Coast&quot; from 1986 to 1996, which was revived as &quot;Costas on the Radio&quot;. &quot;Costas on the Radio&quot;, which ended its three-year run on May 31, 2009, aired on 200 stations nationwide each weekend and syndicated by the Clear Channel–owned Premiere Radio Networks. During that period, Costas also served as the imaging voice of Clear Channel–owned KLOU in St. Louis, Missouri, during that station&#x27;s period as &quot;My 103.3&quot;. Like &quot;Later&quot;, Costas&#x27;s radio shows have focused on a wide variety of topics and have not been limited to sports discussion.

Later with Bob Costas aired on NBC from 1988 to 1994. Costas decided to leave &quot;Later&quot; after six seasons, having grown tired of the commute to New York City from his home in St. Louis and wishing to lighten his workload in order to spend more time with his family. He also turned down an offer from David Letterman, who moved to CBS in 1995, to follow him there and become the first host of &quot;The Late Late Show&quot;, which was being developed by Letterman&#x27;s company to air at 12:30 after the &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot;.

In June 2005, Costas was named by CNN president Jonathan Klein as a regular substitute anchor for Larry King&#x27;s &quot;Larry King Live&quot; for one year. Costas, as well as Klein, made clear that Costas was not trying out for King&#x27;s position on a permanent basis. Nancy Grace was also named a regular substitute host for the show. On August 18, 2005, Costas refused to host a &quot;Larry King Live&quot; broadcast where the subject was missing teenager Natalee Holloway. Costas said that because there were no new developments in the story, he felt it had no news value, and he was uncomfortable with television&#x27;s drift in the direction of tabloid-type stories.

Beginning in October 2011, Costas was a correspondent for &quot;Rock Center with Brian Williams&quot;. He gained acclaim for his November 2011 live interview of former Pennsylvania State University assistant coach Jerry Sandusky concerning charges of sexual abuse of minors, in which Sandusky called in to deny the charges.

Costas hosted a monthly talk show &quot;Costas Tonight&quot; on NBC Sports Network.

===HBO Sports===
In 2001, Costas was hired by HBO to host a 12-week series called &quot;On the Record with Bob Costas&quot;.

In 2002, Costas began a stint as co-host of HBO&#x27;s long-running series &quot;Inside the NFL&quot;. Costas remained host of &quot;Inside the NFL&quot; through the end of the 2007 NFL season. He hosted the show with Cris Collinsworth and former NFL legends Dan Marino and Cris Carter. The program aired each week during the NFL season.

Costas left HBO to sign with MLB Network in February 2009.

On April 23, 2021, it was announced that Costas would be returning to HBO to host a quarter-yearly interview show called &quot;Back on the Record&quot;.

===MLB Network===
At the channel&#x27;s launch on January 1, 2009, Costas hosted the premiere episode of &quot;All Time Games&quot;, a presentation of the recently discovered kinescope of Game5 of the 1956 World Series. During the episode, he held a forum with Don Larsen, who pitched MLB&#x27;s only postseason perfect game during that game, and Yogi Berra, who caught the game.

Costas joined the network full-time on February 3, 2009. He hosted a regular interview show titled &quot;MLB Network Studio 42 with Bob Costas&quot; as well as special programming and provides play-by-play for select live baseball game telecasts. In 2017, Costas called Game1 of the American League Division Series between the Boston Red Sox and the Houston Astros on MLB Network. The Astros went on to win 8–2. Costas and his color commentator Jim Kaat received criticism for their &quot;bantering about minutia&quot; and misidentification of plays. Costas also went on to become an internet meme after using the term the &quot;sacks were juiced&quot; to describe the bases being loaded.

===NFL Network===
As aforementioned, Costas hosted &quot;Thursday Night Football&quot; on NBC and NFL Network in 2016, having returned to broadcasting after a brief absence. He was replaced by Liam McHugh in 2017.

===CNN and TNT Sports===
In July 2020, it was announced that Costas would join CNN as a contributor. According to CNN, Costas would provide commentary &quot;on a wide range of sports-related issues as the industry adapts to new challenges posed by the coronavirus and the frequent intersection of sports with larger societal issues.&quot; Costas, who would continue working on MLB Network, said of joining CNN: “CNN’s willingness to devote time and attention to sports related topics, makes it a good fit for me.”

On August 20, 2021, Andrew Marchand of the &quot;New York Post&quot; reported that TBS — a sister property via CNN parent WarnerMedia — was nearing an agreement with Costas which would have him hosting the network&#x27;s National League Championship Series coverage. On October 7, 2021, Turner Sports announced that Costas would be joining TBS for their postseason baseball coverage starting on October 16.

As of the 2022 MLB season, Costas provided play-by-play for TBS&#x27;s Tuesday night baseball package during the regular season. He was the studio host for TBS&#x27;s ALCS postseason coverage and also provided play-by-play for TBS&#x27;s ALDS postseason coverage between the Cleveland Guardians and New York Yankees. This marked the first time since the 2000 ALCS on NBC that Costas provided play-by-play for a postseason baseball series in its entirety.

Costas provided the play-by-play commentary on TBS for the 2024 American League Division Series between the New York Yankees and Kansas City Royals, receiving criticism for his monotonic delivery and perceived lack of interest in the events on the field.

===Other appearances===
Costas provided significant contributions to the Ken Burns, PBS miniseries &quot;Baseball&quot; as well as its follow-up &quot;The 10th Inning&quot;. He also appears in another PBS film, &quot;A Time for Champions&quot;, produced by St. Louis&#x27;s Nine Network of Public Media.

==Notable calls==
June 23, 1984: Costas called NBC&#x27;s &quot;Game of the Week&quot; with Tony Kubek, where Ryne Sandberg hit two separate home runs in the 9th and 10th innings against Bruce Sutter to tie the game. This game is known as &quot;The Sandberg Game&quot;.

Costas&#x27;s call of the first home run:

Into left center field, and deep. This is a tie ball game!
Costas&#x27;s call of the second home run:

Costas: 1–1 pitch. [Sandberg swings]
Kubek: OHHH BOY!
Costas: [Over Kubek] And he hits it to deep left center! Look out! Do you believe it, it&#x27;s gone! We will go to the 11th, tied at 11.
October 28, 1995: Costas called Game 6 of the 1995 World Series, where the Atlanta Braves finally won their first ever World Series championship since moving to Atlanta in 1966.

Left-center field, Grissom on the run. The team of the &#x27;90s has its World Championship!
October 26, 1997: Costas called Game 7 of the 1997 World Series, where Édgar Rentería hit a walk off single to give the Florida Marlins their first World Series championship. Costas&#x27;s call:

The 0–1 pitch. A liner, off Nagy&#x27;s glove, into center field! The Florida Marlins, have won the World Series!
June 14, 1998: Costas called Game 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals, Michael Jordan and Phil Jackson&#x27;s final game with the Chicago Bulls where Jordan hit a 20-foot jumpshot to put the Bulls up 87–86 with 5.2 seconds remaining. The Bulls would win the game by that score, giving them their sixth championship and third consecutive. Costas&#x27;s call:
Jordan with 43. Malone is doubled. They swat at him and steal it! Here comes Chicago. 17 seconds. 17 seconds, from Game 7, or from championship #6. Jordan, open, CHICAGO WITH THE LEAD! Timeout Utah, 5.2 seconds left. Michael Jordan, running on fumes, with 45 points.
June 4, 2000: Costas called Game 7 of the 2000 Western Conference Finals for NBC&#x27;s NBA coverage. Kobe Bryant threw an alley oop pass to Shaquille O&#x27;Neal to give the Lakers a six-point lead with 41.3 seconds remaining. Costas&#x27;s call of the play:

Portland has three timeouts left, the Lakers have two. Bryant... TO SHAQ!
September 25, 2014: Costas called Derek Jeter&#x27;s final game at Yankee Stadium for MLB Network, where he hit an RBI single to win the game. Costas&#x27;s call:

A base hit to right! Here comes Richardson, they&#x27;re waving him home! The throw, it&#x27;s close but he scores! On a walk off hit by Derek Jeter!
==Interests==
===Love of baseball===
Costas is a devoted baseball fan. He&#x27;s been suggested as a potential commissioner and wrote &quot;Fair Ball: A Fan&#x27;s Case for Baseball&quot; in 2000. For his 40th birthday, then Oakland Athletics manager Tony La Russa allowed Costas to manage the club during a spring training game. The first time Costas visited baseball legend Stan Musial&#x27;s St. Louis eatery, he left a $3.31 tip on a ten dollar tab in homage to Musial&#x27;s lifetime batting average (.331). Costas delivered the eulogy at Mickey Mantle&#x27;s funeral. In eulogizing Mantle, Costas described the baseball legend as &quot;&quot;a fragile hero to whom we had an emotional attachment so strong and lasting that it defied logic&quot;.&quot; Costas has even carried a 1958 Mickey Mantle baseball card in his wallet. Costas also delivered the eulogy for Musial after his death in early 2013.

Costas was outspoken about his disdain for Major League Baseball instituting a playoff wild card. Costas believed it diminishes the significance and drama of winning a divisional championship. He prefers a system in which winning the wild card puts a team at some sort of disadvantage, as opposed to an equal level with teams who outplayed them over a 162-game season. Or, as explained in his book &quot;Fair Ball&quot;, have only the three division winners in each league go to the postseason, with the team with the best record receiving a bye to the League Championship Series. Once, on the air on HBO&#x27;s &quot;Inside the NFL&quot;, he mentioned that the NFL regular season counted for something, but baseball&#x27;s was beginning to lose significance. With the advent of the second wild card, Costas has said he feels the format has improved, since there is now a greater premium placed on finishing first. He has suggested a further tweak: Make the wild card round a best two of three, instead of a single game, with all three games, if necessary, on the homefield of the wild card of the better record.

He also has disdained the Designated Hitter rule, saying baseball would be a better game without it.

Costas serves as a member of the advisory board of the Baseball Assistance Team, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization dedicated to helping former Major League, Minor League, and Negro league players through financial and medical difficulties.

===Political views===
Costas considers himself left of center but has said that he has voted for Republican candidates at times as well. On May 26, 2007, Costas discussed the presidency of George W. Bush on his radio show, stating he liked Bush personally, and had been optimistic about his presidency, but said the course of the Iraq War, and other mis-steps have led him to conclude Bush&#x27;s presidency had &quot;tragically failed&quot; and considered it &quot;overwhelmingly evident, even if you&#x27;re a conservative Republican, if you&#x27;re honest about it, this is a failed administration.&quot; The following summer, Costas interviewed Bush during the president&#x27;s appearance at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing.

==Controversies==
===Fastest man in the world===
On August 1, 1996, the night of Michael Johnson&#x27;s 200 m Olympic win, Costas stated on-air during Olympics coverage of the 1996 Olympics that Johnson&#x27;s gold-medal performance in the 200 m (19.32 seconds) was faster than Donovan Bailey&#x27;s 100 m performance (9.84 seconds) five days earlier in that 19.32 divided by two is 9.66. Bailey later dismissed Costas&#x27; comments as &quot;a person who knew nothing about track talking about it with a lot of people listening&quot;; nonetheless, the sportscaster&#x27;s remarks touched a nerve. 

The unofficial &quot;world&#x27;s fastest man&quot; title typically goes to the Olympic 100 metre champion.
The 200 metre time almost always yields a &quot;faster&quot; average speed than a 100-metre race time, since the initial slow speed at the start is spread out over the longer distance. In other words, the second 100 metres is run with a &quot;flying start&quot;, without the slow acceleration phase of the first 100 metres and without the greater than 0.10 s reaction time of the start. In fact, each 200 metre gold medalist from 1968, when fully electronic timing was introduced, to 1996 had a &quot;faster&quot; average speed at the Olympics, save one, yet there had been no controversy over the title of &quot;world&#x27;s fastest man&quot; previously, until Bob Costas&#x27; remarks during the 1996 Olympics. 

Amid continuous verbal sparring between the pair of athletes, this led to an unsanctioned 150-metre race between Bailey and Johnson in Toronto.

===Gun culture controversy===
During a segment on the &quot;Sunday Night Football&quot; halftime show on December 2, 2012, Costas paraphrased Fox Sports columnist Jason Whitlock in regard to Jovan Belcher&#x27;s murder-suicide the day prior, saying the United States&#x27; gun culture was causing more domestic disputes to result in death, and that it was likely Belcher and his girlfriend would not have died had he not possessed a gun.

Critics interpreted his remarks as support for gun control. Many (including former Republican presidential candidates Mike Huckabee and Herman Cain) felt Costas should not have used a program typically viewed as entertainment to publicize political views on sensitive topics. Lou Dobbs criticized his remarks for supporting the abolition of the Second Amendment by quoting a sports writer, while Andrew Levy remarked that he had been given a civics lecture by someone who had &quot;gotten rich thanks in part to a sport that destroys men&#x27;s bodies and brains&quot;. However, reporter Erik Wemple of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; praised Costas for speaking out for gun control on the broadcast, commenting that the incident&#x27;s connection to the NFL provided him with an obligation to acknowledge the incident during the halftime show, stating that &quot;the things that [NFL players] do affect the public beyond whether their teams cover the point spread. And few cases better exemplify that dynamic as powerfully as the Belcher incident.&quot;

During the following week, Costas defended his remarks in an appearance on MSNBC&#x27;s program &quot;The Last Word with Lawrence O&#x27;Donnell&quot;, where he said the remarks were related to the country&#x27;s gun culture, and not about gun control as critics had inferred. Costas did suggest that more regulation be placed on America&#x27;s gun culture:

Now, do I believe that we need more comprehensive and more sensible gun control legislation? Yes I do. That doesn&#x27;t mean repeal the Second Amendment. That doesn&#x27;t mean a prohibition on someone having a gun to protect their home and their family. It means sensible and more comprehensive gun control legislation. But even if you had that, you would still have the problem of what Jason Whitlock wrote about, and what I agree with. And that is a gun culture in this country.

===2014 Winter Olympics===
During his coverage of the 2014 Winter Olympics, Costas was criticized by some conservative members of the media, including Michelle Malkin and Glenn Beck, for allegedly praising Russian president Vladimir Putin&#x27;s role in defusing tensions surrounding Syria and Iran. Other conservative media commentators, including Bill O&#x27;Reilly and Bernard Goldberg, defended Costas&#x27;s remarks as factually correct and pointed out that Costas had also voiced considerable criticism of both Russia and Putin while broadcasting from Sochi. During an interview on Fox News, Goldberg said &quot;...the idea that Costas somehow portrayed Vladimir Putin as a benign figure is ridiculous.&quot; Costas defended himself on O&#x27;Reilly&#x27;s broadcast on March 3, reiterating that he criticized Putin immediately preceding and following the statements that were questioned. O&#x27;Reilly then aired a portion of an Olympic commentary in which Costas was pointedly critical of the Russian leader. Costas also indicated that Senator John McCain, who had been among those who had initially criticized Costas, had called Costas to apologize after hearing the full segment in context.

===Football&#x27;s future===
While visiting the University of Maryland in November 2017 for a roundtable discussion on various sports topics, Costas said the sport of football was in a decline, with evidence mounting that the repetition of concussions &quot;destroys people&#x27;s brains&quot; and he would not allow a son with athletic talent to play it. Costas had been scheduled to work Super Bowl LII, his eighth as a host (despite stepping down from &quot;Football Night in America&quot; in favor of his successor Mike Tirico, Costas was to return while Tirico prepped to lead NBC&#x27;s coverage of the 2018 Winter Olympics, set to begin a few days later). However, the network announced shortly before the game that Liam McHugh would instead join Dan Patrick as a co-host, leading to speculation that NBC removed Costas from the NFL&#x27;s biggest game over his comments. Costas originally denied such, saying it made more sense for McHugh, who had been hosting Thursday night games on NBC, to serve in that capacity. However, he later admitted in an interview with ESPN&#x27;s &quot;Outside the Lines&quot; that the comments were indeed the basis of his removal, ultimately resulting in his departure from the network after forty years.

==Personal life==
Costas was married from 1983 to 2001 to Carole &quot;Randy&quot; Randall Krummenacher. They had two children, son Keith (born 1986) and daughter Taylor (born 1989). Costas once jokingly promised Minnesota Twins center fielder Kirby Puckett that, if he was batting over .350 by the time his child was born, he would name the baby Kirby. Kirby was hitting better than .350, but Bob&#x27;s son initially was not given a first (or second) name of Kirby. After Puckett reminded Costas of the agreement, the birth certificate was changed to &quot;Keith Michael Kirby Costas&quot;.

On March 12, 2004, Costas married his second wife, Jill Sutton. Costas and his wife now reside primarily in Newport Beach, California. Although Costas was born and raised in the New York area, he has often said he thinks of St. Louis as his hometown.

Costas&#x27;s children have also won Sports Emmys: Keith has won two as an associate producer on MLB Network&#x27;s &quot;MLB Tonight&quot;, and Taylor as an associate producer on NBC&#x27;s coverage of the 2012 Summer Olympics.

==Awards and honors==
*29-time Emmy Award winner (the only person in television history to have won Emmys for sports, news and entertainment) 
*Eight-time NSMA National Sportscaster of the Year
*Four-time American Sportscasters Association Sportscaster of the Year 
*Star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame.
*1999 Curt Gowdy Media Award – Basketball Hall of Fame
*2000 &quot;TV Guide&quot; Award for Favorite Sportscaster. 
*2001 George Arents Award from Syracuse University (&quot;Excellence in Sports Broadcasting&quot;)
*2004 Dick Schaap Award for Outstanding Journalism 
*NSMA Hall of Fame inductee (class of 2012).
*2012 Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism.
*2013 S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications Marty Glickman Award for Leadership in Sports Media.
*2015 WAER Hall of Fame inductee
*2017 Ford C. Frick Award – National Baseball Hall of Fame.
*2018 Sports Broadcasting Hall of Fame inductee
*2019 Suffolk Sports Hall of Fame inductee

==In popular culture==
===Films===
In 1994, Costas appeared as the play-by-play announcer for the World Series (working alongside Tim McCarver) in the movie &quot;The Scout&quot;. In 1998, he appeared as himself along with his rival/counterpart Al Michaels from ABC in the movie &quot;BASEketball&quot;. Costas voiced an animated car version of himself named Bob Cutlass in the movies &quot;Cars&quot; (2006) and &quot;Cars 3&quot; (2017). He also appeared as himself in the 2001 movie &quot;Pootie Tang&quot;, where he remarks that he saw &quot;the longest damn clip ever&quot;.

Costas&#x27;s voice appeared in the 2011 documentary film &quot;Legendary: When Baseball Came to the Bluegrass&quot;, which detailed the humble beginnings of the Lexington Legends, a minor league baseball team located in Lexington, Kentucky.

In 2021, Costas played himself in &quot;Here Today&quot; directed by Billy Crystal.

===Popular culture===
Costas has been alluded to several times in popular music. The songs &quot;Mafioso&quot; by Mac Dre, &quot;We Major&quot; by Domo Genesis and &quot;The Last Huzzah&quot; by Mr. Muthafuckin&#x27; eXquire, all refer to Costas. He was also mentioned in a Ludacris song after Costas mentioned the rapper on the late night talk show &quot;Last Call with Carson Daly&quot;.

In June 2013, Costas provided the voice of God in the Monty Python musical &quot;Spamalot&quot; at The Muny Repertory in St. Louis.

===Television guest roles===
Apart from his normal sportscasting duties, Costas has also presented periodic sports blooper reels, and announced dogsled and elevator races, on &quot;Late Night with David Letterman&quot;.

In 1985, Costas appeared on &quot;The War to Settle the Score&quot;, a pre-&quot;WrestleMania&quot; program that the World Wrestling Federation aired on MTV.

In 1993, Costas hosted the &quot;pregame&quot; show for the final episode of &quot;Cheers&quot;. Costas once appeared on the television program &quot;NewsRadio&quot; as himself. He hosted an award show and later had some humorous encounters with the crew of WNYX. He also had a recurring guest role as himself on the HBO series &quot;Arli$$&quot;.

Costas has been impersonated several times by Darrell Hammond on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. Costas was &quot;supposed&quot; to appear in the fourth-season premiere of &quot;Celebrity Deathmatch&quot; (ironically titled &quot;Where is Bob Costas?&quot;) as a guest-commentator, but about halfway through the episode it was revealed that John Tesh had killed him before the show to take his place. This was likely in response for Tesh not being invited back to NBC for its gymnastics coverage at the 2000 Olympics.

In 1999, Costas appeared as a guest on &quot;Space Ghost Coast to Coast&quot; during its sixth season.

On June 13, 2008, Costas appeared on MSNBC&#x27;s commercial-free special coverage of &quot;Remembering Tim Russert (1950–2008)&quot;.

On January 30, 2009, Costas guest-starred as himself on the television series &quot;Monk&quot; in an episode titled &quot;Mr. Monk Makes the Playoffs&quot;&#x27;. He mentions to Captain Stottlemeyer about how Adrian Monk once helped him out of a problem several years ago with regards to a demented cat salesman. He apparently sold Costas a cat that allegedly tried to kill him with a squeeze toy. (In fact when he signs off he says, &quot;The cat was definitely trying to kill me.&quot;)

Costas guest-voiced as himself in 2010 &quot;Simpsons&quot; episode, &quot;Boy Meets Curl&quot;, when Homer and Marge make the U.S. Olympic curling team. Costas also guest-voiced as himself on the &quot;Family Guy&quot; episode &quot;Turban Cowboy&quot; in an interview with Peter after he wins the Boston Marathon by hitting everyone with his car.

On February 11, 2010, Stephen Colbert jokingly expressed his desire to stab Costas with an ice pick at the upcoming 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver so Colbert could take over as host. Costas later made a cameo appearance on the February 25, 2010, edition of Colbert&#x27;s show.

In January 2013, Costas appeared as himself in the &quot;Go On&quot; episode &quot;Win at All Costas&quot; with Matthew Perry, wherein Ryan King auditions with him for a TV show.

Real footage of Costas from NBC&#x27;s pregame show before Game5 of the 1994 NBA Finals was used in the second episode of &quot;The People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story&quot;.

Costas appeared on the September 22, 2017, episode of &quot;Real Time with Bill Maher&quot; to discuss issues such as concussions and the role of political activism in professional sports (namely by Colin Kaepernick).

===Video games===
In 2002, Costas was the play-by-play announcer, alongside Harold Reynolds, for &quot;Triple Play 2002&quot; during the ballgame for PlayStation 2 and Xbox.

==Career timeline==
*1974–1976: Spirits of St. Louis Play-by-play, KMOX radio
*1976–1981: Missouri Tigers men&#x27;s basketball Play-by-play, KMOX radio
*1976–1979: &quot;NFL on CBS&quot; Play-by-play
*1979–1980: Chicago Bulls Play-by-play, WGN-TV
*1980–2018: NBC Sports Play-by-play &amp; studio host
*1980–1983: &quot;NFL on NBC&quot; Play-by-play
*1983–1989: &quot;MLB on NBC&quot; #2 play-by-play
*1984–1992, 2006–2016: &quot;NFL on NBC&quot; Studio Host
*1988–1994: &quot;Later&quot; Host
*1990–1997, 2002: &quot;NBA on NBC&quot; Studio Host
*1992–2016: Summer Olympics Primetime Host
*1993: &quot;Notre Dame Football on NBC&quot; Alternate play-by-play
*1994–2000: &quot;MLB on NBC&quot; Lead play-by-play
*1997–2000: &quot;NBA on NBC&quot; Lead play-by-play
*2001–2018: &quot;Thoroughbred Racing on NBC&quot; Lead host
*2001–2009: &quot;On the Record with Bob Costas&quot; and &quot;Costas Now&quot; Host
*2002–2014: Winter Olympics Primetime Host
*2002–2008: &quot;Inside the NFL&quot; Host
*2003–2014: U.S. Open host, NBC Sports
*2008–2012: NHL Winter Classic Host
*2009–present: MLB Network &quot;Studio 42 with Bob Costas&quot; Host (2009–2014), &quot;Thursday Night Baseball&quot; Play-by-play
*2016: NBC/NFL Network Host, &quot;Thursday Night Football&quot;
*2017–present: MLB Network play-by-play, &quot;MLB Postseason&quot;
*2020–present: CNN Sports contributor
*2021–present: TBS baseball studio host, 2021 NLCS

==See also==
*New Yorkers in journalism

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*
* 
*Bob Costas Ford C. Frick Award biography at the National Baseball Hall of Fame
*Costas on the ‘’Cuse Conversations’ Podcast

 
 
 
 
 
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2458861" start="0" end="21" title="Bob Costas" label="Robert Quinlan Costas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046048" start="110" end="120" title="NBC Sports" label="NBC Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="165" end="175" title="Emmy award" label="Emmy award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="224" end="237" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="243" end="247" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="254" end="258" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855963" start="288" end="298" title="TNT Sports (United States)" label="TNT Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738177" start="347" end="357" title="MLB on TBS" label="MLB on TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="376" end="379" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="404" end="415" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="577" end="582" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459193" start="674" end="691" title="Commack, New York" label="Commack, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152068" start="706" end="731" title="Commack School District" label="Commack High School South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387536" start="750" end="796" title="S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications" label="S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="800" end="819" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707620" start="901" end="905" title="WAER" label="WAER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849054" start="1056" end="1067" title="Mike Tirico" label="Mike Tirico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955942" start="1225" end="1232" title="WSTM-TV" label="WSTM-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956031" start="1238" end="1245" title="WSYR-FM" label="WSYR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="1255" end="1263" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q379261" start="1296" end="1312" title="Syracuse Blazers" label="Syracuse Blazers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278186" start="1320" end="1341" title="Eastern Hockey League" label="Eastern Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333790" start="1384" end="1388" title="KMOX" label="KMOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1398" end="1407" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q463486" start="1433" end="1464" title="American Basketball Association" label="American Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879753" start="1490" end="1516" title="Missouri Tigers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Missouri Tigers basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="1604" end="1617" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="1632" end="1638" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667604" start="1650" end="1670" title="1979–80 Chicago Bulls season" label="1979–1980 NBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1720" end="1723" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035871" start="1725" end="1737" title="Don Ohlmeyer" label="Don Ohlmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046048" start="1770" end="1785" title="NBC Sports" label="sports division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953776" start="1884" end="1908" title="NFL on NBC" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952714" start="1928" end="1959" title="NBA on NBC" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738172" start="2013" end="2034" title="Major League Baseball on NBC" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334262" start="2080" end="2098" title="NBCSN" label="NBC Sports Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778062" start="2280" end="2291" title="Marv Albert" label="Marv Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q978633" start="2311" end="2322" title="Al Michaels" label="Al Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="2375" end="2384" title="Prime time" label="primetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951975" start="2391" end="2401" title="Boxing on NBC" label="PBC on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q807966" start="2493" end="2508" title="Barclays Center" label="Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="2512" end="2520" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580574" start="2638" end="2641" title="Golf Channel on NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39089688" start="2649" end="2657" title="List of U.S. Open (golf) broadcasters" label="coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="2665" end="2674" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601923" start="2696" end="2700" title="2003 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q16034019" start="2704" end="2708" title="2014 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738172" start="2745" end="2763" title="Major League Baseball on NBC" label="baseball telecasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403258" start="2784" end="2793" title="Sal Bando" label="Sal Bando"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273482" start="2795" end="2799" title="1982 Major League Baseball season" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822737" start="2802" end="2812" title="Tony Kubek" label="Tony Kubek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649894" start="2819" end="2823" title="1983 Major League Baseball season" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273491" start="2827" end="2831" title="1989 Major League Baseball season" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176269" start="2838" end="2848" title="Joe Morgan" label="Joe Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q888295" start="2853" end="2863" title="Bob Uecker" label="Bob Uecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392480" start="2870" end="2874" title="1994 Major League Baseball season" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q516947" start="2878" end="2882" title="2000 Major League Baseball season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953751" start="2997" end="3014" title="The Sandberg Game" label="The Sandberg Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738172" start="3094" end="3110" title="Major League Baseball on NBC" label="Game of the Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052807" start="3137" end="3150" title="Wrigley Field" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581630" start="3173" end="3185" title="1984 Chicago Cubs season" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244484" start="3190" end="3209" title="1984 St. Louis Cardinals season" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453949" start="3246" end="3259" title="Ryne Sandberg" label="Ryne Sandberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581630" start="3276" end="3285" title="1984 Chicago Cubs season" label="1984 Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565535" start="3362" end="3366" title="1945 Chicago Cubs season" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926482" start="3483" end="3495" title="Bruce Sutter" label="Bruce Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569093" start="4075" end="4087" title="Willie McGee" label="Willie McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526568" start="4158" end="4175" title="1988 World Series" label="1988 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584519" start="4188" end="4207" title="1988 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584601" start="4212" end="4229" title="1988 Oakland Athletics season" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="4233" end="4236" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071896" start="4318" end="4331" title="Tommy Lasorda" label="Tommy Lasorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511193" start="4716" end="4756" title="1989 American League Championship Series" label="1989 American League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422581" start="4807" end="4817" title="Vin Scully" label="Vin Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194557" start="4842" end="4852" title="laryngitis" label="laryngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q927672" start="4871" end="4911" title="1989 National League Championship Series" label="1989 National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287084" start="4922" end="4932" title="Tom Seaver" label="Tom Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="5345" end="5380" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="Major League Baseball All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984672" start="5424" end="5441" title="1982 World Series" label="1982 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298325" start="5578" end="5582" title="1994 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q636375" start="5608" end="5612" title="1995 World Series" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="5647" end="5650" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715735" start="5663" end="5683" title="The Baseball Network" label="The Baseball Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738164" start="5835" end="5838" title="Major League Baseball on CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317331" start="5871" end="5875" title="1997 World Series" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494164" start="5986" end="6003" title="Sports Emmy Award" label="Sports Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113049" start="6008" end="6052" title="Outstanding Sports Personality, Play-by-Play" label="Outstanding Sports Personality, Play-by-Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273496" start="6058" end="6062" title="1999 Major League Baseball season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="6092" end="6095" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324256" start="6157" end="6161" title="ESPN Major League Baseball" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979238" start="6180" end="6189" title="Wednesday Night Baseball" label="Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594631" start="6210" end="6224" title="1999 Detroit Tigers season" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595078" start="6245" end="6261" title="1999 Seattle Mariners season" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q865424" start="6300" end="6317" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (baseball)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136890" start="6322" end="6332" title="David Cone" label="David Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077036" start="6356" end="6369" title="Doubleheader (baseball)" label="double-header"/>
<link wikidata="Q60525889" start="6382" end="6398" title="2019 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q60525819" start="6403" end="6417" title="2019 Boston Red Sox season" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q903249" start="6426" end="6437" title="YES Network" label="YES Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928311" start="6465" end="6476" title="Michael Kay (sports broadcaster)" label="Michael Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738177" start="6564" end="6567" title="Major League Baseball on TBS" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q108857031" start="6648" end="6652" title="2021 National League Championship Series" label="NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q130362431" start="6956" end="6992" title="2024 American League Division Series" label="2024 American League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q122898191" start="7005" end="7021" title="2024 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q122898145" start="7026" end="7044" title="2024 Kansas City Royals season" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077498" start="7150" end="7161" title="Krista Voda" label="Krista Voda"/>
<link wikidata="Q612944" start="7165" end="7168" title="NASCAR on NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534770" start="7211" end="7228" title="2017 Monster Energy NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436736" start="7229" end="7235" title="Ford EcoBoost 400" label="finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626077" start="7241" end="7250" title="Homestead-Miami Speedway" label="Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="7362" end="7380" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="7521" end="7552" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952714" start="7559" end="7569" title="NBA on NBC" label="broadcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q925570" start="7575" end="7579" title="1997-98 NBA season" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132641" start="7580" end="7584" title="1999-2000 NBA season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591002" start="7626" end="7636" title="List of NBA Finals broadcasters" label="NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593827" start="7651" end="7667" title="1998 NBA Finals" label="1998 installment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087111" start="7675" end="7678" title="Game 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970938" start="7691" end="7698" title="NBA television ratings" label="ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667625" start="7731" end="7744" title="1997-98 Chicago Bulls season" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006713" start="7749" end="7758" title="1997-98 Utah Jazz season" label="Utah Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q298512" start="7783" end="7795" title="Isiah Thomas" label="Isiah Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q919954" start="7800" end="7812" title="Doug Collins (basketball)" label="Doug Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597667" start="7855" end="7870" title="2000 NBA Finals" label="2000 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778062" start="7891" end="7902" title="Marv Albert" label="Marv Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955397" start="8111" end="8123" title="NBA Showtime" label="NBA Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648959" start="8225" end="8237" title="Hannah Storm" label="Hannah Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600307" start="8273" end="8277" title="2002 NBA Finals" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101077" start="8368" end="8371" title="NBA on ABC" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934229" start="8468" end="8478" title="Bob Trumpy" label="Bob Trumpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521679" start="8506" end="8516" title="Len Berman" label="Len Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="8562" end="8574" title="O.J. Simpson" label="O.J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q680614" start="8591" end="8611" title="30 Rockefeller Plaza" label="30 Rockefeller Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8669" end="8681" title="Murder trial of O. J. Simpson#Bronco chase" label="police chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="8706" end="8717" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="8762" end="8783" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589592" start="8807" end="8822" title="1994 NBA Finals" label="1994 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196281" start="8981" end="8992" title="Jim Lampley" label="Jim Lampley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358492" start="9057" end="9060" title="XFL (2001)" label="XFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q385964" start="9180" end="9184" title="2006 NFL season" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952794" start="9256" end="9277" title="NBC Sunday Night Football" label="Sunday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465891" start="9317" end="9342" title="Football Night in America" label="Football Night in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="9429" end="9439" title="Daily News (New York)" label="Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q978633" start="9483" end="9494" title="Al Michaels" label="Al Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200757" start="9571" end="9589" title="2006 Indianapolis Colts season" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606705" start="9598" end="9613" title="2006 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089093" start="9773" end="9776" title="Olympics on NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="9791" end="9804" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="Seoul in 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="9806" end="9823" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="Barcelona in 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="9825" end="9840" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="Atlanta in 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="9842" end="9856" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="Sydney in 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="9858" end="9880" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="Salt Lake City in 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="9882" end="9896" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="Athens in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672" start="9898" end="9912" title="2006 Winter Olympics" label="Torino in 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="9914" end="9929" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="Beijing in 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="9931" end="9948" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="Vancouver in 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="9950" end="9964" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="London in 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="9966" end="9979" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="Sochi in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="9984" end="9995" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="Rio in 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q903850" start="10210" end="10220" title="ESPN on ABC" label="ABC Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387173" start="10233" end="10242" title="Jim McKay" label="Jim McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089174" start="10273" end="10276" title="Olympics on ABC" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="10571" end="10590" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10614" end="10632" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="10686" end="10692" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="11050" end="11060" title="Growth hormone" label="Somatropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q654479" start="11153" end="11186" title="1998 World Aquatics Championships" label="1997 World Swimming Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q221520" start="11279" end="11290" title="Triamterene" label="Triamterene"/>
<link wikidata="Q434497" start="11562" end="11577" title="Meredith Vieira" label="Meredith Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100609" start="11582" end="11592" title="Matt Lauer" label="Matt Lauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q168545" start="11626" end="11665" title="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="2012 Summer Olympics Opening Ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689591" start="11751" end="11761" title="jingoistic" label="jingoistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="11803" end="11811" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="11817" end="11823" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q486740" start="11976" end="11994" title="Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814593" start="12002" end="12011" title="Conan (talk show)" label="talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q217902" start="12112" end="12127" title="Animal Practice" label="Animal Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="12156" end="12163" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q311672" start="12290" end="12303" title="Roger Daltrey" label="Roger Daltrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="12305" end="12319" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618592" start="12551" end="12589" title="2010 Tonight Show conflict" label="2010 &amp;quot;Tonight Show&amp;quot; conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="12640" end="12660" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100609" start="12733" end="12743" title="Matt Lauer" label="Matt Lauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q434497" start="12762" end="12777" title="Meredith Vieira" label="Meredith Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q9664" start="12847" end="12867" title="1998 Winter Olympics" label="1998 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598834" start="12940" end="12944" title="2001 Kentucky Derby" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141795" start="12978" end="12992" title="Kentucky Derby" label="Kentucky Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="13013" end="13018" title="Bravo (American TV network)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195325" start="13047" end="13060" title="Kentucky Oaks" label="Kentucky Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796640" start="13135" end="13163" title="Thoroughbred Racing on NBC" label="thoroughbred racing coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301815" start="13193" end="13205" title="Rebecca Lowe" label="Rebecca Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q62668896" start="13226" end="13245" title="2019 Kentucky Derby" label="2019 Kentucky Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="13333" end="13338" title="Today (American TV program)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849054" start="13541" end="13552" title="Mike Tirico" label="Mike Tirico"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633579" start="13620" end="13634" title="Super Bowl LII" label="Super Bowl LII"/>
<link wikidata="Q919527" start="13969" end="13979" title="Tom Brokaw" label="Tom Brokaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="14572" end="14592" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q54953884" start="14861" end="14880" title="2018 Belmont Stakes" label="2018 Belmont Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q52720027" start="14888" end="14895" title="Justify (horse)" label="Justify"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892243" start="14904" end="14916" title="Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing (United States)" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="15112" end="15132" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451505" start="15162" end="15182" title="2028 Summer Olympics" label="2028 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175064" start="15461" end="15480" title="Costas on the Radio" label="Costas on the Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="15637" end="15650" title="iHeartMedia" label="Clear Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240379" start="15657" end="15680" title="Premiere Networks" label="Premiere Radio Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332924" start="15765" end="15769" title="KLOU" label="KLOU"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="15773" end="15792" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495515" start="15993" end="16014" title="Later (talk show)" label="Later with Bob Costas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="16024" end="16027" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q217298" start="16301" end="16316" title="David Letterman" label="David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="16331" end="16334" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107990" start="16399" end="16417" title="The Late Late Show (American TV series)" label="The Late Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="16511" end="16541" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="16584" end="16587" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273585" start="16598" end="16612" title="Jonathan Klein (CNN)" label="Jonathan Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q213430" start="16648" end="16658" title="Larry King" label="Larry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423559" start="16672" end="16687" title="Larry King Live" label="Larry King Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q451839" start="16823" end="16834" title="Nancy Grace" label="Nancy Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q51722302" start="16995" end="17028" title="Disappearance of Natalee Holloway" label="missing teenager Natalee Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437746" start="17291" end="17322" title="Rock Center with Brian Williams" label="Rock Center with Brian Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="17395" end="17424" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184378" start="17441" end="17455" title="Jerry Sandusky" label="Jerry Sandusky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163307" start="17467" end="17500" title="Penn State child sex abuse scandal" label="charges of sexual abuse of minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334262" start="17616" end="17634" title="NBC Sports Network" label="NBC Sports Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="17683" end="17686" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091481" start="17725" end="17754" title="On the Record with Bob Costas" label="On the Record with Bob Costas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960114" start="17766" end="17770" title="2002 NFL season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251882" start="17844" end="17858" title="Inside the NFL" label="Inside the NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q254029" start="17940" end="17955" title="2007 NFL season" label="2007 NFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185866" start="17981" end="17998" title="Cris Collinsworth" label="Cris Collinsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q195367" start="18022" end="18032" title="Dan Marino" label="Dan Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140141" start="18037" end="18048" title="Cris Carter" label="Cris Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="18131" end="18142" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630352" start="18491" end="18500" title="kinescope" label="kinescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q845599" start="18517" end="18534" title="1956 World Series" label="1956 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q919907" start="18577" end="18587" title="Don Larsen" label="Don Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q606639" start="18628" end="18640" title="Perfect game (baseball)" label="perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q367566" start="18663" end="18673" title="Yogi Berra" label="Yogi Berra"/>
<link wikidata="Q38164953" start="18980" end="19011" title="2017 American League Division Series" label="American League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q28035218" start="19024" end="19038" title="2017 Boston Red Sox season" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q28035225" start="19047" end="19061" title="2017 Houston Astros season" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195984" start="19142" end="19150" title="Jim Kaat" label="Jim Kaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="19281" end="19294" title="internet meme" label="internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799408" start="19444" end="19467" title="Thursday Night Football" label="Thursday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285806" start="19485" end="19496" title="NFL Network" label="NFL Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q21993818" start="19500" end="19504" title="2016 NFL season" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539711" start="19580" end="19591" title="Liam McHugh" label="Liam McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="19681" end="19684" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="19854" end="19865" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352237" start="20137" end="20152" title="Andrew Marchand" label="Andrew Marchand"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="20166" end="20179" title="New York Post" label="New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738177" start="20200" end="20203" title="Major League Baseball on TBS" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="20239" end="20250" title="WarnerMedia" label="WarnerMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108857031" start="20338" end="20373" title="2021 National League Championship Series" label="National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855963" start="20404" end="20417" title="Turner Sports" label="Turner Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q108864847" start="20535" end="20550" title="2022 Major League Baseball season" label="2022 MLB season"/>
<link wikidata="Q107144234" start="20596" end="20618" title="Tuesday Night Baseball" label="Tuesday night baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q113621787" start="20692" end="20696" title="2022 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q113648871" start="20763" end="20767" title="2022 American League Division Series" label="ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146587" start="20800" end="20819" title="2022 Cleveland Guardians season" label="Cleveland Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q108940214" start="20824" end="20840" title="2022 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001831" start="20879" end="20888" title="2000 American League Championship Series" label="2000 ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738172" start="20892" end="20895" title="Major League Baseball on NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q130362431" start="21040" end="21076" title="2024 American League Division Series" label="2024 American League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q122898191" start="21089" end="21105" title="2024 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q122898145" start="21110" end="21128" title="2024 Kansas City Royals season" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q616886" start="21310" end="21319" title="Ken Burns" label="Ken Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="21321" end="21324" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137787" start="21342" end="21350" title="Baseball (TV series)" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137787" start="21388" end="21403" title="Baseball (TV series)" label="The 10th Inning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660141" start="21454" end="21474" title="A Time for Champions" label="A Time for Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="21494" end="21503" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328672" start="21511" end="21539" title="KETC" label="Nine Network of Public Media"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21589" end="21628" title="Major League Baseball Game of the Week#NBC&amp;#x27;s Game of the Week" label="NBC&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Game of the Week&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822737" start="21634" end="21644" title="Tony Kubek" label="Tony Kubek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453949" start="21652" end="21665" title="Ryne Sandberg" label="Ryne Sandberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926482" start="21729" end="21741" title="Bruce Sutter" label="Bruce Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953751" start="21787" end="21804" title="Chicago Cubs–St. Louis Cardinals game on June 23, 1984" label="The Sandberg Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q636375" start="22197" end="22214" title="1995 World Series" label="1995 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072120" start="22226" end="22240" title="1995 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572230" start="22323" end="22327" title="1966 Atlanta Braves season" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294778" start="22349" end="22356" title="Marquis Grissom" label="Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317331" start="22469" end="22486" title="1997 World Series" label="1997 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q168880" start="22494" end="22508" title="Édgar Rentería" label="Édgar Rentería"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491156" start="22543" end="22558" title="1997 Florida Marlins season" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959890" start="22647" end="22651" title="Charles Nagy" label="Nagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087111" start="22762" end="22791" title="Game 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals" label="Game 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="22793" end="22807" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316246" start="22812" end="22824" title="Phil Jackson" label="Phil Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="22852" end="22865" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952714" start="23424" end="23447" title="NBA on NBC" label="NBC&amp;#x27;s NBA coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25369" start="23449" end="23460" title="Kobe Bryant" label="Kobe Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q655670" start="23470" end="23484" title="Alley-oop (basketball)" label="alley oop pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="23488" end="23509" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q353511" start="23716" end="23727" title="Derek Jeter" label="Derek Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q753529" start="23749" end="23763" title="Yankee Stadium" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968779" start="23768" end="23779" title="MLB Network Showcase" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051088" start="24107" end="24119" title="Commissioner of Baseball" label="commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425219" start="24187" end="24191" title="2000 in literature" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="24221" end="24238" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696934" start="24247" end="24260" title="Tony La Russa" label="Tony La Russa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328142" start="24372" end="24383" title="Stan Musial" label="Stan Musial"/>
<link wikidata="Q345004" start="24540" end="24553" title="Mickey Mantle" label="Mickey Mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569354" start="24780" end="24784" title="1958 New York Yankees season" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190417" start="24799" end="24812" title="baseball card" label="baseball card"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24991" end="25000" title="Wild card (sports)#Major League Baseball" label="wild card"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="25505" end="25508" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251882" start="25522" end="25536" title="Inside the NFL" label="Inside the NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="26044" end="26061" title="Designated Hitter" label="Designated Hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866432" start="26175" end="26199" title="Baseball Assistance Team" label="Baseball Assistance Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="26552" end="26566" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="26693" end="26701" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="26875" end="26887" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="26888" end="26898" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="27063" end="27083" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190924" start="27178" end="27193" title="Michael Johnson (athlete)" label="Michael Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089093" start="27248" end="27265" title="Olympics on NBC" label="Olympics coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="27273" end="27286" title="1996 Olympics" label="1996 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q311048" start="27375" end="27389" title="Donovan Bailey" label="Donovan Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q764787" start="27777" end="27803" title="100 metres at the Olympics" label="Olympic 100 metre champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848429" start="28610" end="28624" title="Bailey–Johnson 150-metre race" label="150-metre race"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952794" start="28725" end="28746" title="NBC Sunday Night Football" label="Sunday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q75776" start="28807" end="28817" title="Fox Sports (USA)" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197439" start="28828" end="28842" title="Jason Whitlock" label="Jason Whitlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q275279" start="28856" end="28869" title="Jovan Belcher" label="Jovan Belcher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28938" end="28949" title="Gun culture#Present-day gun culture in the United States" label="gun culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="28967" end="28983" title="domestic violence" label="domestic dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="29151" end="29162" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q158813" start="29222" end="29235" title="Mike Huckabee" label="Mike Huckabee"/>
<link wikidata="Q491019" start="29240" end="29251" title="Herman Cain" label="Herman Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287852" start="29380" end="29389" title="Lou Dobbs" label="Lou Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="29449" end="29465" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q650483" start="29479" end="29492" title="sports writer" label="sports writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757748" start="29500" end="29511" title="Andrew Levy" label="Andrew Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388906" start="29692" end="29703" title="Erik Wemple" label="Erik Wemple"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="29713" end="29732" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="30235" end="30240" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746206" start="30262" end="30304" title="The Last Word with Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="The Last Word with Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="31057" end="31077" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q454388" start="31154" end="31169" title="Michelle Malkin" label="Michelle Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310618" start="31174" end="31184" title="Glenn Beck" label="Glenn Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="31227" end="31241" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="31287" end="31292" title="Syrian civil war" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q329891" start="31297" end="31301" title="Nuclear program of Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q310953" start="31352" end="31370" title="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly (political commentator)" label="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504943" start="31375" end="31391" title="Bernard Goldberg" label="Bernard Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q39420" start="31561" end="31566" title="Sochi" label="Sochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="31591" end="31599" title="Fox News Channel" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="32055" end="32066" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="32253" end="32275" title="University of Maryland" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159122" start="32445" end="32456" title="Concussions in American football" label="concussions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633579" start="32595" end="32609" title="Super Bowl LII" label="Super Bowl LII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465891" start="32666" end="32691" title="Football Night in America" label="Football Night in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="32814" end="32834" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539711" start="32928" end="32939" title="Liam McHugh" label="Liam McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214175" start="32959" end="32970" title="Dan Patrick (sportscaster)" label="Dan Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799408" start="33174" end="33194" title="Thursday Night Football" label="Thursday night games"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="33278" end="33282" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112996" start="33296" end="33313" title="Outside the Lines" label="Outside the Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="33664" end="33679" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q955278" start="33695" end="33708" title="Kirby Puckett" label="Kirby Puckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="34153" end="34178" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282637" start="34372" end="34390" title="associate producer" label="associate producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716560" start="34419" end="34430" title="MLB Tonight" label="MLB Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="34504" end="34524" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="34558" end="34568" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978656" start="34682" end="34686" title="National Sports Media Association" label="NSMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745157" start="34732" end="34766" title="American Sportscasters Association" label="American Sportscasters Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34767" end="34791" title="American Sportscasters Association#Recognizing sportcasters and notable individuals" label="Sportscaster of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589721" start="34806" end="34828" title="St. Louis Walk of Fame" label="St. Louis Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699667" start="34836" end="34858" title="Curt Gowdy Media Award" label="Curt Gowdy Media Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="34861" end="34884" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="34897" end="34905" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273342" start="35051" end="35095" title="Dick Schaap Award for Outstanding Journalism" label="Dick Schaap Award for Outstanding Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405617" start="35148" end="35198" title="Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism" label="Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777422" start="35252" end="35266" title="Marty Glickman" label="Marty Glickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707620" start="35311" end="35315" title="WAER" label="WAER"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404596" start="35344" end="35363" title="Ford C. Frick Award" label="Ford C. Frick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="35366" end="35396" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119009" start="35452" end="35479" title="Suffolk Sports Hall of Fame" label="Suffolk Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="35588" end="35600" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803927" start="35620" end="35632" title="Tim McCarver" label="Tim McCarver"/>
<link wikidata="Q785267" start="35653" end="35662" title="The Scout (1994 film)" label="The Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q978633" start="35735" end="35746" title="Al Michaels" label="Al Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="35752" end="35755" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q266027" start="35775" end="35786" title="BASEketball" label="BASEketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q182153" start="35881" end="35885" title="Cars (film)" label="Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079862" start="35909" end="35915" title="Cars 3" label="Cars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698939" start="35982" end="35993" title="Pootie Tang" label="Pootie Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q73552408" start="36354" end="36364" title="Here Today (film)" label="Here Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="36383" end="36396" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368449" start="36513" end="36520" title="Mac Dre" label="Mac Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4249819" start="36546" end="36558" title="Domo Genesis" label="Domo Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18057240" start="36594" end="36623" title="Mr. Muthafuckin&amp;#x27; eXquire" label="Mr. Muthafuckin&amp;#x27; eXquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193676" start="36673" end="36681" title="Ludacris" label="Ludacris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075533" start="36755" end="36781" title="Last Call with Carson Daly" label="Last Call with Carson Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="36844" end="36856" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q939143" start="36871" end="36879" title="Spamalot" label="Spamalot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752645" start="36889" end="36907" title="The Muny Repertory" label="The Muny Repertory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806831" start="37104" end="37135" title="Late Night with David Letterman" label="Late Night with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773528" start="37178" end="37205" title="The War to Settle the Score" label="The War to Settle the Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q50805" start="37225" end="37237" title="WrestleMania I" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="37257" end="37287" title="WWE" label="the World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="37297" end="37300" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093485" start="37363" end="37376" title="One for the Road (Cheers)" label="final episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q732063" start="37386" end="37392" title="Cheers" label="Cheers"/>
<link wikidata="Q427583" start="37453" end="37462" title="NewsRadio" label="NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861662" start="37637" end="37643" title="Arli$$" label="Arli$$"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755894" start="37698" end="37713" title="Darrell Hammond" label="Darrell Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="37723" end="37742" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052829" start="37831" end="37851" title="Celebrity Deathmatch" label="Celebrity Deathmatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182586" start="37994" end="38003" title="John Tesh" label="John Tesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667921" start="38217" end="38243" title="Space Ghost Coast to Coast" label="Space Ghost Coast to Coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38261" end="38273" title="List of Space Ghost Coast to Coast episodes#Season 6 (1999)" label="sixth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="38313" end="38318" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q370747" start="38380" end="38391" title="Tim Russert" label="Tim Russert"/>
<link wikidata="Q189068" start="38496" end="38500" title="Monk (TV series)" label="Monk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38534" end="38561" title="Monk (season 7)#Episodes" label="Mr. Monk Makes the Playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q367237" start="38590" end="38610" title="Leland Stottlemeyer" label="Captain Stottlemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088981" start="38621" end="38632" title="Adrian Monk" label="Adrian Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="38947" end="38955" title="The Simpsons" label="Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560645" start="38977" end="38991" title="Boy Meets Curl" label="Boy Meets Curl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="39004" end="39009" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828" start="39014" end="39019" title="Marge Simpson" label="Marge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="39105" end="39115" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853731" start="39136" end="39149" title="Turban Cowboy" label="Turban Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28465" start="39177" end="39182" title="Peter Griffin" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q826038" start="39201" end="39216" title="Boston Marathon" label="Boston Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212886" start="39274" end="39289" title="Stephen Colbert" label="Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="39368" end="39388" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130799" start="39527" end="39531" title="The Colbert Report" label="show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304135" start="39591" end="39596" title="Go On (TV series)" label="Go On"/>
<link wikidata="Q171758" start="39646" end="39659" title="Matthew Perry" label="Matthew Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589592" start="39786" end="39801" title="1994 NBA Finals" label="1994 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39842" end="39890" title="The People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story" label="The People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030903" start="39959" end="39984" title="Real Time with Bill Maher" label="Real Time with Bill Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="40017" end="40027" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82496" start="40098" end="40114" title="Colin Kaepernick" label="Colin Kaepernick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082417" start="40139" end="40143" title="2002 in video gaming" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662152" start="40194" end="40209" title="Harold Reynolds" label="Harold Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="40268" end="40281" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="40286" end="40290" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q768907" start="40325" end="40345" title="Spirits of St. Louis" label="Spirits of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333790" start="40360" end="40364" title="KMOX" label="KMOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879753" start="40383" end="40420" title="Missouri Tigers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Missouri Tigers men&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953770" start="40464" end="40474" title="NFL on CBS" label="NFL on CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="40506" end="40519" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="40534" end="40540" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046048" start="40553" end="40563" title="NBC Sports" label="NBC Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953776" start="40613" end="40623" title="NFL on NBC" label="NFL on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738172" start="40661" end="40671" title="Major League Baseball on NBC" label="MLB on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953776" start="40723" end="40733" title="NFL on NBC" label="NFL on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495515" start="40770" end="40775" title="Later (talk show)" label="Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952714" start="40811" end="40821" title="NBA on NBC" label="NBA on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="40852" end="40867" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063412" start="40896" end="40922" title="Notre Dame Football on NBC" label="Notre Dame Football on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738172" start="40970" end="40980" title="Major League Baseball on NBC" label="MLB on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952714" start="41023" end="41033" title="NBA on NBC" label="NBA on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796640" start="41076" end="41102" title="Thoroughbred Racing on NBC" label="Thoroughbred Racing on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091481" start="41137" end="41166" title="On the Record with Bob Costas" label="On the Record with Bob Costas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175057" start="41183" end="41193" title="Costas Now" label="Costas Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="41217" end="41232" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251882" start="41266" end="41280" title="Inside the NFL" label="Inside the NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="41304" end="41313" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418168" start="41343" end="41361" title="NHL Winter Classic" label="NHL Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="41382" end="41393" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q85809465" start="41456" end="41479" title="Thursday Night Baseball" label="Thursday Night Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952794" start="41506" end="41521" title="NBC Sunday Night Football" label="NBC/NFL Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799408" start="41534" end="41557" title="Thursday Night Football" label="Thursday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="41579" end="41590" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738184" start="41611" end="41625" title="Major League Baseball postseason" label="MLB Postseason"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="41647" end="41650" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738177" start="41685" end="41688" title="Major League Baseball on TBS" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q108857031" start="41711" end="41720" title="2021 National League Championship Series" label="2021 NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q56724095" start="41736" end="41761" title="New Yorkers in journalism" label="New Yorkers in journalism"/>
</links>
</doc>
