<doc id="3708" wikidata="Q240" url="?curid=3708" title="Brussels">
<text>Brussels, officially the Brussels-Capital Region, is a region of Belgium comprising 19 municipalities, including the City of Brussels, which is the capital of Belgium. The Brussels-Capital Region is located in the central portion of the country and is a part of both the French Community of Belgium and the Flemish Community, but is separate from the Flemish Region (Flanders), within which it forms an enclave, and the Walloon Region (Wallonia), located less than to the south.

Brussels grew from a small rural settlement on the river Senne to become an important city-region in Europe. Since the end of the Second World War, it has been a major centre for international politics and home to numerous international organisations, politicians, diplomats and civil servants. Brussels is the &quot;de facto&quot; capital of the European Union, as it hosts a number of principal EU institutions, including its administrative-legislative, executive-political, and legislative branches (though the judicial branch is located in Luxembourg, and the European Parliament meets for a minority of the year in Strasbourg).&lt;ref name=&quot;12010E/PRO/06&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Because of this, its name is sometimes used metonymically to describe the EU and its institutions. The secretariat of the Benelux and the headquarters of NATO are also located in Brussels.

Brussels is the most densely populated region in Belgium, and although it has the highest GDP per capita, it has the lowest available income per household. The Brussels Region covers and has a population of over 1.2 million. Its five times larger metropolitan area comprises over 2.5 million people, which makes it the largest in Belgium. It is also part of a large conurbation extending towards the cities of Ghent, Antwerp, and Leuven, known as the Flemish Diamond, as well as the province of Walloon Brabant, in total home to over 5 million people. As Belgium&#x27;s economic capital and a top financial centre in Western Europe with Euronext Brussels, Brussels is classified as an &quot;Alpha&quot; global city. It is also a national and international hub for rail, road and air traffic, and is sometimes considered, together with Belgium, as Europe&#x27;s geographic, economic and cultural crossroads. The Brussels Metro is the only rapid transit system in Belgium. In addition, both its airport and railway stations are the largest and busiest in the country.

Historically Dutch-speaking, Brussels saw a language shift to French from the late 19th century. Since its creation in 1989, the Brussels-Capital Region has been officially bilingual in French and Dutch, although French is the majority language and &quot;lingua franca&quot;. Brussels is also increasingly becoming multilingual. English is spoken widely and many migrants and expatriates speak other languages as well.
Brussels is known for its cuisine and gastronomic offer (including its local waffle, its chocolate, its French fries and its numerous types of beers), as well as its historical and architectural landmarks; some of them are registered as UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Principal attractions include its historic Grand-Place/Grote Markt (main square), &quot;Manneken Pis&quot;, the Atomium, and cultural institutions such as La Monnaie/De Munt and the Museums of Art and History. Due to its long tradition of Belgian comics, Brussels is also hailed as a capital of the comic strip.

==Toponymy==
===Etymology===
The most common theory of the origin of the name &quot;Brussels&quot; is that it derives from the Old Dutch , or , meaning ( / ) and ( / / ) or . Saint Vindicianus, the Bishop of Cambrai, made the first recorded reference to the place in 695, when it was still a hamlet. The names of all the municipalities in the Brussels-Capital Region are also of Dutch origin, except for Evere, which is possibly Celtic or Old Frankish.

===Pronunciation===
In French, is pronounced (the &quot;x&quot; is pronounced , as in English, and the final &quot;s&quot; is silent) and in Dutch, is pronounced . Inhabitants of Brussels are known in French as (pronounced ) and in Dutch as (pronounced ). In the Brabantian dialect of Brussels (known as Brusselian, and also sometimes referred to as Marols or Marollien), they are called &quot;Brusseleers&quot; or &quot;Brusseleirs&quot;.

Originally, the written &quot;x&quot; noted the group . In the Belgian French pronunciation as well as in Dutch, the &quot;k&quot; eventually disappeared and &quot;z&quot; became &quot;s&quot;, as reflected in the current Dutch spelling, whereas in the more conservative French form, the spelling remained. The pronunciation in French only dates from the 18th century, but this modification did not affect the traditional Brussels usage. In France, the pronunciations and (for ) are often heard, but are rather rare in Belgium.

==History==
===Early history===
The history of Brussels is closely linked to that of Western Europe. Traces of human settlement go back to the Stone Age, with vestiges and place-names related to the civilisation of megaliths, dolmens and standing stones (Plattesteen near the Grand-Place/Grote Markt and Tomberg in Woluwe-Saint-Lambert, for example). During late antiquity, the region was home to Roman occupation, as attested by archaeological evidence discovered on the current site of Tour &amp; Taxis, north-west of the Pentagon (Brussels&#x27; city centre). Following the decline of the Western Roman Empire, it was incorporated into the Frankish Empire.

According to local legend, the origin of the settlement which was to become Brussels lies in Saint Gaugericus&#x27; construction of a chapel on an island in the river Senne around 580. The official founding of Brussels is usually said to be around 979, when Charles, Duke of Lower Lorraine, transferred the relics of the martyr Saint Gudula from Moorsel (located in today&#x27;s province of East Flanders) to Saint Gaugericus&#x27; chapel. When Otto II, Holy Roman Emperor, appointed the same Charles to become Duke of Lower Lotharingia in 977, Charles ordered the construction of the city&#x27;s first permanent fortification, doing so on that same island.

===Middle Ages===
Lambert I, Count of Louvain, gained the County of Brussels around 1000 by marrying Charles&#x27; daughter. Because of its location on the banks of the Senne, on an important trade route between the Flemish cities of Bruges and Ghent, and Cologne in the Kingdom of Germany, Brussels became a commercial centre specialised in the textile trade. The town grew quite rapidly and extended towards the upper town (Treurenberg, Coudenberg and Sablon/Zavel areas), where there was a reduced risk of floods. As the town grew to a population of around 30,000, the surrounding marshes were drained to allow for further expansion. In 1183, the Counts of Leuven became Dukes of Brabant. Brabant, unlike the county of Flanders, was not fief of the king of France but was incorporated into the Holy Roman Empire.

In the early 13th century, the first walls of Brussels were built and after this, the city grew significantly. Around this time, work began on what is now the Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula (1225), replacing an older Romanesque church. To let the city expand, a second set of walls was erected between 1356 and 1383. Traces of these walls can still be seen; the Small Ring, a series of boulevards bounding the historical city centre, follows their former course.

===Early modern===
In the 14th century, the marriage between heiress Margaret III, Countess of Flanders, and Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, produced a new Duke of Brabant of the House of Valois, namely Anthony, their son. In 1477, the Burgundian duke Charles the Bold perished in the Battle of Nancy. Through the marriage of his daughter Mary of Burgundy (who was born in Brussels) to Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I, the Low Countries fell under Habsburg sovereignty. Brabant was integrated into this composite state, and Brussels flourished as the Princely Capital of the prosperous Burgundian Netherlands, also known as the Seventeen Provinces. After the death of Mary in 1482, her son Philip the Handsome succeeded as Duke of Burgundy and Brabant.

Philip died in 1506, and he was succeeded by his son Charles V who then also became King of Spain (crowned in the Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula) and even Holy Roman Emperor at the death of his grandfather Maximilian I in 1519. Charles was now the ruler of a Habsburg Empire &quot;on which the sun never sets&quot; with Brussels serving as one of his main capitals. It was in the Coudenberg Palace that Charles V was declared of age in 1515, and it was there in 1555 that he abdicated all of his possessions and passed the Habsburg Netherlands to King Philip II of Spain. This palace, famous all over Europe, had greatly expanded since it had first become the seat of the Dukes of Brabant, but it was destroyed by fire in 1731.

In the 16th and 17th centuries, Brussels was a centre for the lace industry. In addition, Brussels tapestry hung on the walls of castles throughout Europe. In 1695, during the Nine Years&#x27; War, King Louis XIV of France sent troops to bombard Brussels with artillery. Together with the resulting fire, it was the most destructive event in the entire history of Brussels. The Grand-Place was destroyed, along with 4,000 buildings—a third of all the buildings in the city. The reconstruction of the city centre, effected during subsequent years, profoundly changed its appearance and left numerous traces still visible today.

During the War of the Spanish Succession in 1708, Brussels again sustained a French attack, which it repelled. Following the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, Spanish sovereignty over the Southern Netherlands was transferred to the Austrian branch of the House of Habsburg. This event started the era of the Austrian Netherlands. Brussels was captured by France in 1746, during the War of the Austrian Succession, but was handed back to Austria three years later. It remained with Austria until 1795, when the Southern Netherlands were captured and annexed by France, and the city became the chef-lieu of the department of the Dyle. The French rule ended in 1815, with the defeat of Napoleon on the battlefield of Waterloo, located south of today&#x27;s Brussels-Capital Region. With the Congress of Vienna, the Southern Netherlands joined the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, under King William I of Orange. The former Dyle department became the province of South Brabant, with Brussels as its capital.

===Late modern===
In 1830, the Belgian Revolution began in Brussels, after a performance of Auber&#x27;s opera &quot;La Muette de Portici&quot; at the Royal Theatre of La Monnaie. The city became the capital and seat of government of the new nation. South Brabant was renamed simply Brabant, with Brussels as its administrative centre. On 21 July 1831, Leopold I, the first King of the Belgians, ascended the throne, undertaking the destruction of the city walls and the construction of many buildings.

Following independence, Brussels underwent many more changes. It became a financial centre, thanks to the dozens of companies launched by the &quot;Société Générale de Belgique&quot;. The Industrial Revolution and the opening of the Brussels–Charleroi Canal in 1832 brought prosperity to the city through commerce and manufacturing. The Free University of Brussels was established in 1834 and Saint-Louis University in 1858. In 1835, the first passenger railway built outside England linked the municipality of Molenbeek-Saint-Jean with Mechelen.

During the 19th century, the population of Brussels grew considerably; from about 80,000 to more than 625,000 people for the city and its surroundings. The Senne had become a serious health hazard, and from 1867 to 1871, under the tenure of the city&#x27;s then-mayor, Jules Anspach, its entire course through the urban area was completely covered over. This allowed urban renewal and the construction of modern buildings of &quot;Haussmann-esque&quot; style along grand central boulevards, characteristic of downtown Brussels today. Buildings such as the Brussels Stock Exchange (1873), the Palace of Justice (1883) and Saint Mary&#x27;s Royal Church (1885) date from this period. This development continued throughout the reign of King Leopold II. The International Exposition of 1897 contributed to the promotion of the infrastructure. Among other things, the Palace of the Colonies, today&#x27;s Royal Museum for Central Africa, in the suburb of Tervuren, was connected to the capital by the construction of an grand alley.

Brussels became one of the major European cities for the development of the Art Nouveau style in the 1890s and early 1900s. The architects Victor Horta, Paul Hankar, and Henry van de Velde, among others, were known for their designs, many of which survive today.

===20th century===
During the 20th century, the city hosted various fairs and conferences, including the Solvay Conference on Physics and on Chemistry, and three world&#x27;s fairs: the Brussels International Exposition of 1910, the Brussels International Exposition of 1935 and the 1958 Brussels World&#x27;s Fair (Expo 58). During World War I, Brussels was an occupied city, but German troops did not cause much damage. During World War II, it was again occupied by German forces, and spared major damage, before it was liberated by the British Guards Armoured Division on 3 September 1944. Brussels Airport, in the suburb of Zaventem, dates from the occupation.

After World War II, Brussels underwent extensive modernisation. The construction of the North–South connection, linking the main railway stations in the city, was completed in 1952, while the first &quot;premetro&quot; (underground tram) service was launched in 1969, and the first Metro line was opened in 1976. Starting from the early 1960s, Brussels became the &quot;de facto&quot; capital of what would become the European Union (EU), and many modern offices were built. Development was allowed to proceed with little regard to the aesthetics of newer buildings, and numerous architectural landmarks were demolished to make way for newer buildings that often clashed with their surroundings, giving name to the process of Brusselisation.

===Contemporary===
The Brussels-Capital Region was formed on 18 June 1989, after a constitutional reform in 1988. It is one of the three federal regions of Belgium, along with Flanders and Wallonia, and has bilingual status. The yellow iris is the emblem of the region (referring to the presence of these flowers on the city&#x27;s original site) and a stylised version is featured on its official flag.

In recent years, Brussels has become an important venue for international events. In 2000, it was named European Capital of Culture alongside eight other European cities. In 2013, the city was the site of the Brussels Agreement. In 2014, it hosted the 40th G7 summit, and in 2017, 2018 and 2021 respectively the 28th, 29th and 31st NATO Summits.

On 22 March 2016, three coordinated nail bombings were detonated by ISIL in Brussels—two at Brussels Airport in Zaventem and one at Maalbeek/Maelbeek metro station—resulting in 32 victims and three suicide bombers killed, and 330 people were injured. It was the deadliest act of terrorism in Belgium.

==Geography==

===Location and topography===

Brussels lies in the north-central part of Belgium, about from the Belgian coast and about from Belgium&#x27;s southern tip. It is located in the heartland of the Brabantian Plateau, about south of Antwerp (Flanders), and north of Charleroi (Wallonia). Its average elevation is above sea level, varying from a low point in the valley of the almost completely covered Senne, which cuts the Brussels-Capital Region from east to west, up to high points in the Sonian Forest, on its southeastern side. In addition to the Senne, tributary streams such as the Maalbeek and the Woluwe, to the east of the region, account for significant elevation differences. Brussels&#x27; central boulevards are above sea level. Contrary to popular belief, the highest point (at ) is not near the / in Forest, but at the / in the Sonian Forest.

===Climate===
Brussels experiences an oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;) with warm summers and cool winters. Proximity to coastal areas influences the area&#x27;s climate by sending marine air masses from the Atlantic Ocean. Nearby wetlands also ensure a maritime temperate climate. On average (based on measurements in the period 1981–2010), there are approximately 135 days of rain per year in the Brussels-Capital Region. Snowfall is infrequent, averaging 24 days per year. The city also often experiences violent thunderstorms in summer months.
==Brussels as a capital==
Despite its name, the Brussels-Capital Region is not the capital of Belgium. Article 194 of the Belgian Constitution establishes that the capital of Belgium is the City of Brussels, the municipality in the region that is the city&#x27;s core.

The City of Brussels is the location of many national institutions. The Royal Palace of Brussels, where the King of the Belgians exercises his prerogatives as head of state, is situated alongside Brussels Park (not to be confused with the Royal Palace of Laeken, the official home of the Belgian royal family). The Palace of the Nation is located on the opposite side of this park, and is the seat of the Belgian Federal Parliament. The office of the Prime Minister of Belgium, colloquially called &quot;Law Street 16&quot; (, ), is located adjacent to this building. It is also where the Council of Ministers holds its meetings. The Court of Cassation, Belgium&#x27;s main court, has its seat in the Palace of Justice. Other important institutions in the City of Brussels are the Constitutional Court, the Council of State, the Court of Audit, the Royal Belgian Mint and the National Bank of Belgium.

The City of Brussels is also the capital of both the French Community of Belgium and the Flemish Community. The Flemish Parliament and Flemish Government have their seats in Brussels, and so do the Parliament of the French Community and the Government of the French Community.

==Municipalities==


The 19 municipalities (, ) of the Brussels-Capital Region are political subdivisions with individual responsibilities for the handling of local level duties, such as law enforcement and the upkeep of schools and roads within its borders. Municipal administration is also conducted by a mayor, a council, and an executive.

In 1831, Belgium was divided into 2,739 municipalities, including the 19 currently located in the Brussels-Capital Region. Unlike most of the municipalities in Belgium, the ones now located in the Brussels-Capital Region were not merged with others during mergers occurring in 1964, 1970, and 1975. However, a few neighbouring municipalities have been merged into the City of Brussels, including Laeken, Haren and Neder-Over-Heembeek in 1921. These comprise the northern bulge in the municipality. To the south-east is a strip of land along the Avenue Louise/Louizalaan that, in addition to the Bois de la Cambre/Ter Kamerenbos, was annexed from Ixelles in 1864. Part of the (ULB)&#x27;s Solbosch campus is also part of the City of Brussels, partially accounting for the bulge in the south-eastern end.

The largest municipality in area and population is the City of Brussels, covering and with 145,917 inhabitants; the least populous is Koekelberg with 18,541 inhabitants. The smallest in area is Saint-Josse-ten-Noode, which is only , but still has the highest population density in the region, with . Watermael-Boitsfort has the lowest population density in the region, with .

There is much controversy on the division of 19 municipalities for a highly urbanised region, which is considered as (half of) one city by most people. Some politicians mock the &quot;19 baronies&quot; and want to merge the municipalities under one city council and one mayor. That would lower the number of politicians needed to govern Brussels, and centralise the power over the city to make decisions easier, thus reduce the overall running costs. The current municipalities could be transformed into districts with limited responsibilities, similar to the current structure of Antwerp or to structures of other capitals like the boroughs in London or &quot;arrondissements&quot; in Paris, to keep politics close enough to the citizen.

In the 2010s, Molenbeek-Saint-Jean gained international attention as the base for Islamist terrorists who carried out attacks in both Paris and Brussels.

==Brussels-Capital Region==
===Political status===
The Brussels-Capital Region is one of the three federated regions of Belgium, alongside the Walloon Region and the Flemish Region. Geographically and linguistically, it is a bilingual enclave in the monolingual Flemish Region. Regions are one component of Belgium&#x27;s institutions; the three communities being the other component. Brussels&#x27; inhabitants deal with either the French Community or the Flemish Community for matters such as culture and education, as well as a Common Community for competencies which do not belong exclusively to either Community, such as healthcare and social welfare.

Since the split of Brabant in 1995, the Brussels Region does not belong to any of the provinces of Belgium, nor is it subdivided into provinces itself. Within the Region, 99% of the areas of provincial jurisdiction are assumed by the Brussels regional institutions and community commissions. Remaining is only the governor of Brussels-Capital and some aides, analogously to provinces. Its status is roughly akin to that of a federal district.

===Institutions===

The Brussels-Capital Region is governed by a parliament of 89 members (72 French-speaking, 17 Dutch-speaking—parties are organised on a linguistic basis) and an eight-member regional cabinet consisting of a minister-president, four ministers and three state secretaries. By law, the cabinet must comprise two French-speaking and two Dutch-speaking ministers, one Dutch-speaking secretary of state and two French-speaking secretaries of state. The minister-president does not count against the language quota, but in practice every minister-president has been a bilingual francophone. The regional parliament can enact ordinances (, ), which have equal status as a national legislative act.

Nineteen of the 72 French-speaking members of the Brussels Parliament are also members of the Parliament of the French Community of Belgium, and, until 2004, this was also the case for six Dutch-speaking members, who were at the same time members of the Flemish Parliament. Now, people voting for a Flemish party have to vote separately for 6 directly elected members of the Flemish Parliament.

===Agglomeration of Brussels===
Before the creation of the Brussels-Capital Region, regional competences in the 19 municipalities were performed by the Brussels Agglomeration. The Brussels Agglomeration was an administrative division established in 1971. This decentralised administrative public body also assumed jurisdiction over areas which, elsewhere in Belgium, were exercised by municipalities or provinces.

The Brussels Agglomeration had a separate legislative council, but the by-laws enacted by it did not have the status of a legislative act. The only election of the council took place on 21 November 1971. The working of the council was subject to many difficulties caused by the linguistic and socio-economic tensions between the two communities.

After the creation of the Brussels-Capital Region, the Brussels Agglomeration was never formally abolished, although it no longer has a purpose.

==French and Flemish communities==

The French Community and the Flemish Community exercise their powers in Brussels through two community-specific public authorities: the French Community Commission ( or COCOF) and the Flemish Community Commission ( or VGC). These two bodies each have an assembly composed of the members of each linguistic group of the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region. They also have a board composed of the ministers and secretaries of state of each linguistic group in the Government of the Brussels-Capital Region.

The French Community Commission also has another capacity: some legislative powers of the French Community have been devolved to the Walloon Region (for the French language area of Belgium) and to the French Community Commission (for the bilingual language area). The Flemish Community, however, did the opposite; it merged the Flemish Region into the Flemish Community. This is related to different conceptions in the two communities, one focusing more on the Communities and the other more on the Regions, causing an asymmetrical federalism. Because of this devolution, the French Community Commission can enact decrees, which are legislative acts.

===Common Community Commission===
A bi-communitarian public authority, the Common Community Commission (, COCOM, , GGC) also exists. Its assembly is composed of the members of the regional parliament, and its board are the ministers—not the secretaries of state—of the region, with the minister-president not having the right to vote. This commission has two capacities: it is a decentralised administrative public body, responsible for implementing cultural policies of common interest. It can give subsidies and enact by-laws. In another capacity, it can also enact ordinances, which have equal status as a national legislative act, in the field of the welfare powers of the communities: in the Brussels-Capital Region, both the French Community and the Flemish Community can exercise powers in the field of welfare, but only in regard to institutions that are unilingual (for example, a private French-speaking retirement home or the Dutch-speaking hospital of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel). The Common Community Commission is responsible for policies aiming directly at private persons or at bilingual institutions (for example, the centres for social welfare of the 19 municipalities). Its ordinances have to be enacted with a majority in both linguistic groups. Failing such a majority, a new vote can be held, where a majority of at least one third in each linguistic group is sufficient.

==Brussels and the European Union==

Brussels serves as &quot;de facto&quot; capital of the European Union (EU), hosting the major political institutions of the Union. The EU has not declared a capital formally, though the Treaty of Amsterdam formally gives Brussels the seat of the European Commission (the executive branch of government) and the Council of the European Union (a legislative institution made up from executives of member states). It locates the formal seat of European Parliament in Strasbourg, where votes take place, with the council, on the proposals made by the commission. However, meetings of political groups and committee groups are formally given to Brussels, along with a set number of plenary sessions. Three quarters of Parliament sessions now take place at its Brussels hemicycle. Between 2002 and 2004, the European Council also fixed its seat in the city. In 2014, the Union hosted a G7 summit in the city.

Brussels, along with Luxembourg and Strasbourg, began to host European institutions in 1957, soon becoming the centre of activities, as the Commission and Council based their activities in what has become the European Quarter, in the east of the city. Early building in Brussels was sporadic and uncontrolled, with little planning. The current major buildings are the Berlaymont building of the commission, symbolic of the quarter as a whole, the Europa building of the Council and the Espace Léopold of the Parliament. In recent years, the presence has increased considerably, with the Commission alone occupying within the European Quarter (a quarter of the total office space in Brussels). The concentration and density has caused concern that the presence of the institutions has created a &quot;ghetto effect&quot; in that part of the city. However, the European presence has contributed significantly to the importance of Brussels as an international centre.
==International institutions==
Brussels has, since World War II, become the administrative centre of many international organisations. The city is the political and administrative centre of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). NATO&#x27;s Brussels headquarters houses 29 embassies and brings together over 4,500 staff from allied nations, their militaries, and civil service personnel. Many other international organisations such as the World Customs Organization and Eurocontrol, as well as international corporations, have their main institutions in the city. In addition, the main international trade union confederations have their headquarters there: the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC), the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and the World Confederation of Labour (WCL).

Brussels is third in the number of international conferences it hosts, also becoming one of the largest convention centres in the world. The presence of the EU and the other international bodies has, for example, led to there being more ambassadors and journalists in Brussels than in Washington, D.C. The city hosts 120 international institutions, 181 embassies () and more than 2,500 diplomats, making it the second centre of diplomatic relations in the world (after New York City). International schools have also been established to serve this presence. The &quot;international community&quot; in Brussels numbers at least 70,000 people. In 2009, there were an estimated 286 lobbying consultancies known to work in Brussels. Finally, Brussels has more than 1,400 NGOs.

===North Atlantic Treaty Organization===

The Treaty of Brussels, which was signed on 17 March 1948 between Belgium, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, was a prelude to the establishment of the intergovernmental military alliance which later became the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). , the alliance consists of 32 independent member countries across North America and Europe. Several countries also have diplomatic missions to NATO through embassies in Belgium. Since 1949, a number of NATO Summits have been held in Brussels, the most recent taking place in June 2021. The organisation&#x27;s political and administrative headquarters are located on the / in Haren, on the north-eastern perimeter of the City of Brussels. A new €750 million headquarters building begun in 2010 and was completed in 2017.

===Eurocontrol===
The European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation, commonly known as Eurocontrol, is an international organisation which coordinates and plans air traffic control across European airspace. The corporation was founded in 1960 and has 41 member states. Its headquarters are located in Haren, Brussels.

==Demographics==
===Population===
Brussels is located in one of the most urbanised regions of Europe, between Paris, London, the Rhine-Ruhr (Germany), and the Randstad (Netherlands). The Brussels-Capital Region has a population of around 1.2 million and has witnessed, in recent years, a remarkable increase in its population. In general, the population of Brussels is younger than the national average, and the gap between rich and poor is wider.

Brussels is the core of a built-up area that extends well beyond the region&#x27;s limits. Sometimes referred to as the urban area of Brussels (, ) or Greater Brussels (, ), this area extends over a large part of the two Brabant provinces, including much of the surrounding arrondissement of Halle-Vilvoorde and some small parts of the arrondissement of Leuven in Flemish Brabant, as well as the northern part of Walloon Brabant.

The metropolitan area of Brussels is divided into three levels. Firstly, the central agglomeration (within the regional borders), with a population of 1,218,255 inhabitants. Adding the closest suburbs (, ) gives a total population of 1,831,496. Including the outer commuter zone (Brussels Regional Express Network (RER/GEN) area), the population is 2,676,701. Brussels is also part of a wider diamond-shaped conurbation, with Ghent, Antwerp and Leuven, which has about 4.4 million inhabitants (a little more than 40% of the Belgium&#x27;s total population).
===Nationalities===
There have been numerous migrations towards Brussels since the end of the 18th century, when the city acted as a common destination for political refugees from neighbouring or more distant countries, particularly France. From 1871, many of the Paris Communards fled to Brussels, where they received political asylum. Other notable international exiles living in Brussels at the time included Victor Hugo, Karl Marx, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Georges Boulanger, Paul Verlaine, Arthur Rimbaud, and Léon Daudet, to name a few. Attracted by the industrial opportunities, many workers moved in, first from the other Belgian provinces (mainly rural residents from Flanders) and France, then from Southern European, and more recently from Eastern European and African countries.

Since the second half of the 20th century, Brussels has been home to a large number of immigrants and émigré communities, as well as labour migrants, former foreign students or expatriates, and many Belgian families in Brussels can claim at least one foreign grandparent. At the last Belgian census in 1991, 63.7% of inhabitants in Brussels-Capital Region answered that they were Belgian citizens, born as such in Belgium, indicating that more than a third of residents had not been born in the country. According to Statbel (the Belgian Statistical Office), in 2020, taking into account the nationality of birth of the parents, 74.3% of the population of the Brussels-Capital Region was of foreign origin and 41.8% was of non-European origin (including 28.7% of African origin). Among those aged under 18, 88% were of foreign origin and 57% of non-European origin (including 42.4% of African origin).

This large concentration of immigrants and their descendants includes many of Moroccan (mainly Riffian and other Berbers) and Turkish ancestry, together with French-speaking black Africans from former Belgian colonies, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi. Many immigrants were naturalised following the great 1991 reform of the naturalisation process. In 2012, about 32% of city residents were of non-Belgian European origin (mainly expatriates from France, Romania, Italy, Spain, Poland, and Portugal) and 36% were of another background, mostly from Morocco, Turkey and Sub-Saharan Africa. Among all major migrant groups from outside the EU, a majority of the permanent residents have acquired Belgian nationality.

===Languages===

Brussels was historically Dutch-speaking, using the Brabantian dialect, but since the 19th century French has become the predominant language of the city. The main cause of this transition was the rapid assimilation of the local Flemish population, amplified by immigration from France and Wallonia. The rise of French in public life gradually began by the end of the 18th century, quickly accelerating after Belgian independence. Dutch — of which standardisation in Belgium was still very weak — could not compete with French, which was the exclusive language of the judiciary, the administration, the army, education, cultural life and the media, and thus necessary for social mobility. The value and prestige of the French language was universally acknowledged to such an extent that after 1880, and more particularly after the turn of the 20th century, proficiency in French among Dutch-speakers in Brussels increased spectacularly.

Although a majority of the population remained bilingual until the second half of the 20th century, family transmission of the historic Brabantian dialect declined, leading to an increase of monolingual French-speakers from 1910 onwards. From the mid-20th century, the number of monolingual French-speakers surpassed the number of mostly bilingual Flemish inhabitants. This process of assimilation weakened after the 1960s, as the language border was fixed, the status of Dutch as an official language of Belgium was reinforced, and the economic centre of gravity shifted northward to Flanders. However, with the continuing arrival of immigrants and the post-war emergence of Brussels as a centre of international politics, the relative position of Dutch continued to decline. Furthermore, as Brussels&#x27; urban area expanded, a further number of Dutch-speaking municipalities in the Brussels periphery also became predominantly French-speaking. This phenomenon of expanding Francisation — dubbed &quot;oil slick&quot; by its opponents — is, together with the future of Brussels, one of the most controversial topics in Belgian politics.

Since its creation in 1989, the Brussels-Capital Region has been legally bilingual, with both French and Dutch having official status, as is the administration of the 19 municipalities. The creation of this bilingual, full-fledged region, with its own competencies and jurisdiction, had long been hampered by different visions of Belgian federalism. Nevertheless, some communitarian issues remain. Flemish political parties demanded, for decades, that the Flemish part of Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde (BHV) &quot;arrondissement&quot; be separated from the Brussels Region (which made Halle-Vilvoorde a monolingual Flemish electoral and judicial district). BHV was divided mid-2012. The French-speaking population regards the language border as artificial and demands the extension of the bilingual region to at least all six municipalities with language facilities in the surroundings of Brussels. Flemish politicians have strongly rejected these proposals.

Owing to migration and to its international role, Brussels is home to a large number of native speakers of languages other than French or Dutch. Currently, about half of the population speaks a home language other than these two. In 2013, academic research showed that approximately 17% of families spoke none of the official languages in the home, while in a further 23% a foreign language was used alongside French. The share of unilingual French-speaking families had fallen to 38% and that of Dutch-speaking families to 5%, while the percentage of bilingual Dutch-French families reached 17%. At the same time, French remains widely spoken: in 2013, French was spoken &quot;well to perfectly&quot; by 88% of the population, while for Dutch this percentage was only 23% (down from 33% in 2000); the other most commonly known languages were English (30%), Arabic (18%), Spanish (9%), German (7%) and Italian and Turkish (5% each). Meanwhile, surveys from 2023–24 suggest that 29% of the population speaks only languages other than French and Dutch in the home, while residents speak a total of 104 languages, up from 72 in 2001. Despite the rise of English as a second language in Brussels, including as an unofficial compromise language between French and Dutch, as well as the working language for some of its international businesses and institutions, French remains the &quot;lingua franca&quot; and all public services are conducted exclusively in French or Dutch.

The original dialect of Brussels (known as Brusselian, and also sometimes referred to as Marols or Marollien), a form of Brabantic (the variant of Dutch spoken in the ancient Duchy of Brabant) with a significant number of loanwords from French, still survives among a small minority of inhabitants called &quot;Brusseleers&quot; (or &quot;Brusseleirs&quot;), many of them quite bi- and multilingual, or educated in French and not writing in Dutch. The ethnic and national self-identification of Brussels&#x27; inhabitants is nonetheless sometimes quite distinct from the French and Dutch-speaking communities. For the French-speakers, it can vary from Francophone Belgian, (French demonym for an inhabitant of Brussels), Walloon (for people who migrated from the Walloon Region at an adult age); for Flemings living in Brussels, it is mainly either Dutch-speaking Belgian, Flemish or (Dutch demonym for an inhabitant), and often both. For the &quot;Brusseleers&quot;, many simply consider themselves as belonging to Brussels.

===Religions===

Historically, Brussels has been predominantly Catholic, especially since the expulsion of Protestants in the 16th century. This is clear from the large number of historical churches in the region, particularly in the City of Brussels. The pre-eminent Catholic cathedral in Brussels is the Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula, serving as the co-cathedral of the Archdiocese of Mechelen–Brussels. On the north-western side of the region, the National Basilica of the Sacred Heart is a Minor Basilica and parish church, as well as one of the largest churches by area in the world. The Church of Our Lady of Laeken holds the tombs of many members of the Belgian royal family, including all the former Belgian monarchs, within the Royal Crypt.

In reflection of its multicultural makeup, Brussels hosts a variety of religious communities, as well as large numbers of atheists and agnostics. Minority faiths include Islam, Anglicanism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Judaism, and Buddhism. According to a 2016 survey, approximately 40% of residents of Brussels declared themselves Catholics (12% were practising Catholics and 28% were non-practising Catholics), 30% were non-religious, 23% were Muslim (19% practising, 4% non-practising), 3% were Protestants and 4% were of another religion.

As guaranteed by Belgian law, recognised religions and non-religious philosophical organisations (, ) enjoy public funding and school courses. It was once the case that every pupil in an official school from 6 to 18 years old had to choose two hours per week of compulsory religious—or non-religious-inspired morals—courses. However, in 2015, the Belgian Constitutional Court ruled religious studies could no longer be required in the primary and secondary educational systems.

Brussels has a large concentration of Muslims, mostly of Moroccan, Turkish, Syrian and Guinean ancestry. The Great Mosque of Brussels, located in the Parc du Cinquantenaire/Jubelpark, is the oldest mosque in Brussels and the former seat of the Islamic and Cultural Centre of Belgium. Belgium does not collect statistics by ethnic background or religious beliefs, so exact figures are unknown. It was estimated that, in 2005, people of Muslim background living in the Brussels Region numbered 256,220 and accounted for 25.5% of the city&#x27;s population, a much higher concentration than those of the other regions of Belgium.
==Architecture==
The architecture in Brussels is diverse, and spans from the clashing combination of Gothic, Baroque, and Louis XIV styles on the Grand-Place to the postmodern buildings of the EU institutions.

Very little medieval architecture is preserved in Brussels. Buildings from that period are mostly found in the historical centre (called the ), Saint Géry/Sint-Goriks and / neighbourhoods. The Brabantine Gothic Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula remains a prominent feature in the skyline of downtown Brussels. Isolated portions of the first city walls were saved from destruction and can be seen to this day. One of the only remains of the second walls is the Halle Gate. The Grand-Place is the main attraction in the city centre and has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1998. The square is dominated by the 15th century Flamboyant Town Hall, the neo-Gothic &quot;Breadhouse&quot; and the Baroque guildhalls of the former Guilds of Brussels. &quot;Manneken Pis&quot;, a fountain containing a small bronze sculpture of a urinating youth, is a tourist attraction and symbol of the city.

The neoclassical style of the 18th and 19th centuries is represented in the Royal Quarter/Coudenberg area, around Brussels Park and the Place Royale/Koningsplein. Examples include the Royal Palace, the Church of St. James on Coudenberg, the Palace of the Nation (Parliament building), the Academy Palace, the Palace of Charles of Lorraine, the Palace of the Count of Flanders and the Egmont Palace. Other uniform neoclassical ensembles can be found around the Place des Martyrs/Martelaarsplein and the /. Some additional landmarks in the centre are the Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries (1847), one of the oldest covered shopping arcades in Europe, the Congress Column (1859), the former Brussels Stock Exchange building (1873) and the Palace of Justice (1883). The latter, designed by Joseph Poelaert, in eclectic style, is reputed to be the largest building constructed in the 19th century.

Located outside the historical centre, in a greener environment bordering the European Quarter, are the Parc du Cinquantenaire/Jubelpark with its memorial arcade and nearby museums, and in Laeken, the Royal Palace of Laeken and the Royal Domain with its large greenhouses, as well as the Museums of the Far East.

Also particularly striking are the buildings in the Art Nouveau style, most famously by the Belgian architects Victor Horta, Paul Hankar and Henry Van de Velde. Some of Brussels&#x27; municipalities, such as Schaerbeek, Etterbeek, Ixelles, and Saint-Gilles, were developed during the heyday of Art Nouveau and have many buildings in that style. The Major Town Houses of the Architect Victor Horta—Hôtel Tassel (1893), Hôtel van Eetvelde (1898), Hôtel Solvay (1900) and the Horta Museum (1901)—have been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 2000. Another example of Brussels&#x27; Art Nouveau is the Stoclet Palace (1911), by the Viennese architect Josef Hoffmann, designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in June 2009.

Art Deco structures in Brussels include the Résidence Palace (1927) (now part of the Europa building), the Centre for Fine Arts (1928), the Villa Empain (1934), the Town Hall of Forest (1938), and the Flagey Building (also known as the &quot;Radio House&quot;) on the Place Eugène Flagey/Eugène Flageyplein (1938) in Ixelles. Some religious buildings from the interwar era were also constructed in that style, such as the Church of St. John the Baptist (1932) in Molenbeek and the Church of St. Augustine (1935) in Forest. Completed only in 1969, and combining Art Deco with neo-Byzantine elements, the Basilica of the Sacred Heart in Koekelberg is one of the largest churches by area in the world, and its cupola provides a panoramic view of Brussels and its outskirts. Another example are the exhibition halls of the Centenary Palace, built for the 1935 World&#x27;s Fair on the Heysel/Heizel Plateau in northern Brussels, home to the Brussels Exhibition Centre (Brussels Expo).

The Atomium is a symbolic modernist structure, located on the Heysel Plateau, which was originally built for the 1958 World&#x27;s Fair (Expo 58). It consists of nine steel spheres connected by tubes, and forms a model of an iron crystal (specifically, a unit cell), magnified 165 billion times. The architect André Waterkeyn devoted the building to science. It is now considered a landmark of Brussels. Next to the Atomium, is Mini-Europe miniature park, with 1:25 scale maquettes of famous buildings from across Europe.

Since the second half of the 20th century, modern office towers have been built in Brussels (Madou Tower, Rogier Tower, Proximus Towers, Finance Tower, the World Trade Center, among others). There are some thirty towers, mostly concentrated in the city&#x27;s main business district: the Northern Quarter (also called &quot;Little Manhattan&quot;), near Brussels-North railway station. The South Tower, standing adjacent to Brussels-South railway station, is the tallest building in Belgium, at . Along the North–South connection, is the State Administrative Centre, an administrative complex in the International Style. The postmodern buildings of the Espace Léopold complete the picture.

The city&#x27;s embrace of modern architecture translated into an ambivalent approach towards historic preservation, leading to the destruction of notable architectural landmarks, most famously the Maison du Peuple/Volkshuis by Victor Horta, a process known as Brusselisation.

==Culture==
===Visual arts and museums===
Brussels contains over 80 museums. The Royal Museums of Fine Arts has an extensive collection of various painters, such as Flemish old masters like Bruegel, Rogier van der Weyden, Robert Campin, Anthony van Dyck, Jacob Jordaens, and Peter Paul Rubens. The Magritte Museum houses the world&#x27;s largest collection of works by the surrealist artist René Magritte. Museums dedicated to the national history of Belgium include the BELvue Museum, the Royal Museums of Art and History, and the Royal Museum of the Armed Forces and Military History. The Musical Instruments Museum (MIM), housed in the Old England building, is part of the Royal Museums of Art and History, and is internationally renowned for its collection of over 8,000 instruments.

The Brussels Museums Council is an independent body for all the museums in the Brussels-Capital Region, covering around 100 federal, private, municipal, and community museums. It promotes member museums through the Brussels Card (giving access to public transport and 30 of the 100 museums), the Brussels Museums Nocturnes (every Thursday from 5 p.m. to 10 p.m. from mid-September to mid-December) and the Museum Night Fever (an event for and by young people on a Saturday night in late February or early March).

Brussels has had a distinguished artist scene for many years. The famous Belgian surrealists René Magritte and Paul Delvaux, for instance, studied and lived there, as did the avant-garde dramatist Michel de Ghelderode. The city was also home of the impressionist painter Anna Boch from the artists&#x27; group &quot;Les XX&quot;, and includes other famous Belgian painters such as Léon Spilliaert. Brussels is also a capital of the comic strip; some treasured Belgian characters are Tintin, Lucky Luke, The Smurfs, Spirou, Gaston, Marsupilami, Blake and Mortimer, Boule et Bill and Cubitus (see Belgian comics). Throughout the city, walls are painted with large motifs of comic book characters; these murals taken together are known as Brussels&#x27; Comic Book Route. Also, the interiors of some Metro stations are designed by artists. The Belgian Comic Strip Center combines two artistic leitmotifs of Brussels, being a museum devoted to Belgian comic strips, housed in the former &quot;Magasins Waucquez&quot; textile department store, designed by Victor Horta in the Art Nouveau style. In addition, street art is changing the landscape of this multicultural city.

===Performing arts venues and festivals===

Brussels is well known for its performing arts scene, with the Royal Theatre of La Monnaie, the Royal Park Theatre, the Théâtre Royal des Galeries, and the Kaaitheater among the most notable institutions.

The Kunstenfestivaldesarts, an international performing arts festival, is organised every year in May. Its main hub is the Kaaitheater, but performances and artworks are also hosted in around 30 venues throughout the city.

The King Baudouin Stadium is a concert and competition facility with a 50,000 seat capacity, the largest in Belgium. The site was formerly occupied by the Heysel Stadium. The Centre for Fine Arts (often referred to as BOZAR in French or PSK in Dutch), a multi-purpose centre for theatre, cinema, music, literature, and art exhibitions, is home to the National Orchestra of Belgium and to the annual Queen Elisabeth Competition for classical singers and instrumentalists, one of the most challenging and prestigious competitions of the kind. Studio 4 in Le Flagey cultural centre hosts the Brussels Philharmonic.

Other concert venues include Forest National/Vorst Nationaal, the Ancienne Belgique, the Cirque Royal/Koninklijk Circus, the Botanique and Palais 12/Paleis 12. Furthermore, the Jazz Station in Saint-Josse-ten-Noode is a museum and archive on jazz, and a venue for jazz concerts.

===Other cultural events and festivals===
Many events are organised or hosted in Brussels throughout the year. In addition, many festivals animate the Brussels scene.

The Iris Festival is the official festival of the Brussels-Capital Region and is held annually in spring. The International Fantastic Film Festival of Brussels (BIFFF) is organised during the Easter holidays and the Magritte Awards in February. The Festival of Europe, an open day and activities in and around the institutions of the European Union, is held on 9 May. On Belgian National Day, on 21 July, a military parade and celebrations take place on the / and in Brussels Park, ending with a fireworks display in the evening.

Some summer festivities include Couleur Café Festival, a festival of world and urban music, around the end of June or early July, the Brussels Summer Festival (BSF), a music festival in August, the Midi Fair, the most important yearly fair in Brussels, lasting more than a month, in July and August, and Brussels Beach, when the banks of the canal are turned into a temporary urban beach. Other biennial events are the Zinneke Parade, a colourful, multicultural parade through the city, which has been held since 2000 in May, as well as the popular Flower Carpet at the Grand-Place in August. Heritage Days are organised on the third weekend of September (sometimes coinciding with the car-free day) and are a good opportunity to discover the wealth of buildings, institutions and real estate in Brussels. The &quot;Winter Wonders&quot; animate the heart of Brussels in December; these winter activities were launched in Brussels in 2001.

===Folklore===

Brussels&#x27; identity owes much to its rich folklore and traditions, among the liveliest in the country.

The Ommegang, a folkloric costumed procession, commemorating the Joyous Entry of Emperor Charles V and his son Philip II in the city in 1549, takes place every year in July. The colourful parade includes floats, traditional processional giants, such as Saint Michael and Saint Gudula, and scores of folkloric groups, either on foot or on horseback, dressed in medieval garb. The parade ends in a pageant on the Grand-Place. Since 2019, it has been recognised as a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO.

The Meyboom, an even-older folk tradition of Brussels (1308), celebrating the &quot;May tree&quot;—in fact, a corruption of the Dutch &quot;tree of joy&quot;—takes place paradoxically on 9 August. After parading a young beech in the city, it is planted in a joyful spirit with lots of music, &quot;Brusseleir&quot; songs, and processional giants. It has also been recognised as an expression of intangible cultural heritage by UNESCO, as part of the bi-national inscription &quot;Processional giants and dragons in Belgium and France&quot;. The celebration is reminiscent of the town&#x27;s long-standing (folkloric) feud with Leuven, which dates back to the Middle Ages.

Saint Verhaegen (often shortened to &quot;St V&quot;), a folkloric student procession, celebrating the anniversary of the founding of the (ULB) and the (VUB), is held on 20 November. Since 2019, it has also been listed as intangible cultural heritage of the Brussels-Capital Region.

Another good introduction to the &quot;Brusseleir&quot; local dialect and way of life can be obtained at the Royal Theatre Toone, a folkloric theatre of marionettes, located a stone&#x27;s throw away from the Grand-Place. Finally, two famous folkloric plays, &quot;Le Mariage de Mademoiselle Beulemans&quot; by Frantz Fonson and Fernand Wicheler, and &quot;Bossemans et Coppenolle&quot; by Joris d&#x27;Hanswyck and Paul Van Stalle, are still the subject of regular revivals.

==Cuisine==
Brussels is well known for its local waffle, its chocolate, its French fries and its numerous types of beers. The Brussels sprout, which has long been popular in Brussels, and may have originated there, is also named after the city.

Owing to Brussels&#x27; cosmopolitan population, almost every national cuisine in the world can be found there. The gastronomic offer includes approximately 1,800 restaurants (including three 2-starred and ten 1-starred Michelin restaurants), and a number of bars. In addition to the traditional restaurants, there are many cafés, bistros and the usual range of international fast food chains. The cafés are similar to bars, and offer beer and light dishes; coffee houses are called (literally &quot;tea salons&quot;). Also widespread are brasseries, which usually offer a variety of beers and typical national dishes.

Belgian cuisine is known among connoisseurs as one of the best in Europe. It is characterised by the combination of French cuisine with the more hearty Flemish fare. Notable specialities include Brussels waffles (gaufres) and mussels (usually as &quot;moules-frites&quot;, served with fries). The city is a stronghold of chocolate and praline manufacturers with renowned companies like Côte d&#x27;Or, Neuhaus, Leonidas and Godiva. Pralines were first introduced in 1912 by Jean Neuhaus II, a Belgian chocolatier of Swiss origin, in the Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries. Numerous friteries are spread throughout the city, and in tourist areas, fresh hot waffles are also sold on the street.

As well as other Belgian beers, the spontaneously fermented lambic style, brewed in and around Brussels, is widely available there and in the nearby Senne valley where the wild yeasts that ferment it have their origin. Kriek, a cherry lambic, is available in almost every bar or restaurant in Brussels.

Brussels is known as the birthplace of the Belgian endive. The technique for growing blanched endives was accidentally discovered in the 1850s at the Botanical Garden of Brussels in Saint-Josse-ten-Noode.

==Shopping==
Famous shopping areas in Brussels include the pedestrian-only Rue Neuve/Nieuwstraat, the second busiest shopping street in Belgium (after the Meir, in Antwerp) with a weekly average of 230,000 visitors, home to popular international chains (H&amp;M, C&amp;A, Zara, Primark), as well as the City 2 and Anspach galleries. The Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries hold a variety of luxury shops and some six million people stroll through them each year. The neighbourhood around the / has become, in recent years, a focal point for fashion and design; this main street and its side streets also feature Belgium&#x27;s young and most happening artistic talent.

In Ixelles, the / and the Namur Gate area offer a blend of luxury shops, fast food restaurants and entertainment venues, and the /, in the mainly-Congolese &quot;Matongé&quot; district, offers a taste of African fashion and lifestyle. The nearby Avenue Louise/Louizalaan is lined with high-end fashion stores and boutiques, making it one of the most expensive streets in Belgium.

There are shopping centres outside the inner ring: Basilix, Woluwe Shopping Center, Westland Shopping Center, and Docks Bruxsel, which opened in October 2017. In addition, Brussels ranks as one of Europe&#x27;s best capital cities for flea market shopping. The &quot;Old Market&quot;, on the Place du Jeu de Balle/Vossenplein, in the Marolles/Marollen neighbourhood, is particularly renowned. The nearby Sablon/Zavel area is home to many of Brussels&#x27; antique dealers. The &quot;Midi Market&quot; around Brussels-South station and the / is reputed to be one of the largest markets in Europe.

==Sports==

Sport in Brussels is under the responsibility of the Communities. The (ADEPS) is responsible for recognising the various French-speaking sports federations and also runs three sports centres in the Brussels-Capital Region. Its Dutch-speaking counterpart is (formerly called BLOSO).

The King Baudouin Stadium (formerly the Heysel Stadium) is the largest in the country and home to the national teams in football and rugby union. It hosted the final of the 1972 UEFA European Football Championship, and the opening game of the 2000 edition. Several European club finals have been held at the ground, including the 1985 European Cup Final which saw 39 deaths due to hooliganism and structural collapse. The King Baudouin Stadium is also home of the annual Memorial Van Damme athletics event, Belgium&#x27;s foremost track and field competition, which is part of the Diamond League. Other important athletics events are the Brussels Marathon and the 20 km of Brussels, an annual run with 30,000 participants.

===Football===
R.S.C. Anderlecht, based in the Constant Vanden Stock Stadium in Anderlecht, is the most successful Belgian football club in the Belgian Pro League, with 34 titles. It has also won the most major European tournaments for a Belgian side, with 6 European titles. Brussels is also home to Union Saint-Gilloise, the most successful Belgian club before World War II, with 11 titles. The club was founded in Saint-Gilles but is based in nearby Forest, and plays in the Belgian Pro League. Racing White Daring Molenbeek, based in Molenbeek-Saint-Jean, and often referred to as RWDM, is a very popular football club that, since 2023, is back playing in the Belgian Pro League.

Other Brussels clubs that played in the national series over the years were Royal White Star Bruxelles, Ixelles SC, Crossing Club de Schaerbeek (born from a merger between RCS de Schaerbeek and Crossing Club Molenbeek), Scup Jette, RUS de Laeken, Racing Jet de Bruxelles, AS Auderghem, KV Wosjot Woluwe and FC Ganshoren.

===Cycling===
Brussels is home to notable cycling races. The city is the arrival location of the Brussels Cycling Classic, formerly known as Paris–Brussels, which is one of the oldest semi classic bicycle races on the international calendar. From World War I until the early 1970s, the Six Days of Brussels was organised regularly. In the last decades of the 20th century, the Grand Prix Eddy Merckx was also held in Brussels.

==Economy==

Serving as the centre of administration for Belgium and Europe, Brussels&#x27; economy is largely service-oriented. It is dominated by regional and world headquarters of multinationals, by European institutions, by various local and federal administrations, and by related services companies, though it does have a number of notable craft industries, such as the Cantillon Brewery, a lambic brewery founded in 1900.

Brussels has a robust economy. The region contributes to one fifth of Belgium&#x27;s GDP, and its 550,000 jobs account for 17.7% of Belgium&#x27;s employment. Its GDP per capita is nearly double that of Belgium as a whole, and it has the highest GDP per capita of any NUTS 1 region in the EU, at ~$80,000 in 2016. That being said, the GDP is boosted by a massive inflow of commuters from neighbouring regions; over half of those who work in Brussels live in Flanders or Wallonia, with 230,000 and 130,000 commuters per day respectively. Conversely, only 16.0% of people from Brussels work outside Brussels (68,827 (68.5%) of them in Flanders and 21,035 (31.5%) in Wallonia). Not all of the wealth generated in Brussels remains in Brussels itself, and , the unemployment among residents of Brussels is 20.4%.

There are approximately 50,000 businesses in Brussels, of which around 2,200 are foreign. This number is constantly increasing and can well explain the role of Brussels in Europe. The city&#x27;s infrastructure is very favourable in terms of starting up a new business. House prices have also increased in recent years, especially with the increase of young professionals settling down in Brussels, making it the most expensive city to live in Belgium. In addition, Brussels holds more than 1,000 business conferences annually, making it the ninth most popular conference city in Europe.

Brussels is rated as the 34th most important financial centre in the world as of 2020, according to the Global Financial Centres Index. The Brussels Stock Exchange, abbreviated to BSE, now called Euronext Brussels, is part of the European stock exchange Euronext, along with Paris Bourse, Lisbon Stock Exchange and Amsterdam Stock Exchange. Its benchmark stock market index is the BEL20.

==Media==
Brussels is a centre of both media and communications in Belgium, with many Belgian television stations, radio stations, newspapers and telephone companies having their headquarters in the region. The French-language public broadcaster RTBF, the Dutch-language public broadcaster VRT, the two regional channels BX1 (formerly Télé Bruxelles) and Bruzz (formerly TV Brussel), the encrypted BeTV channel and private channels RTL-TVI and VTM are headquartered in Brussels. Some national newspapers such as Le Soir, La Libre, De Morgen and the news agency Belga are based in or around Brussels. The Belgian postal company bpost, as well as the telecommunication companies and mobile operators Proximus, Orange Belgium and Telenet are all located there.

As English is spoken widely, several English media organisations operate in Brussels. The most popular of these are the English-language daily news media platform and bi-monthly magazine &quot;The Brussels Times&quot; and the website &quot;The Bulletin&quot;. Dutch-language public broadcaster VRT has also English version of its online news. The multilingual pan-European news channel Euronews also maintains an office in Brussels.

==Education==
===Tertiary education===
There are several universities in Brussels. Except for the Royal Military Academy, a federal military college established in 1834, all universities in Brussels are private and autonomous. The Royal Military Academy also the only Belgian university organised on the boarding school model.

The Université libre de Bruxelles (ULB), a French-speaking university, with about 20,000 students, has three campuses in the city, and the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), its Dutch-speaking sister university, has about 10,000 students. Both universities originate from a single ancestor university, founded in 1834, namely the Free University of Brussels, which was split in 1970, at about the same time the Flemish and French Communities gained legislative power over the organisation of higher education.

Saint-Louis University, Brussels (also known as UCLouvain Saint-Louis – Bruxelles) was founded in 1858 and is specialised in social and human sciences, with 4,000 students, and located on two campuses in the City of Brussels and Ixelles. From September 2018 on, the university uses the name &quot;UCLouvain&quot;, together with the Catholic University of Louvain, in the context of a merger between both universities.

Still other universities have campuses in Brussels, such as the French-speaking Catholic University of Louvain (UCLouvain), which has 10,000 students in the city with its medical faculties at UCLouvain Bruxelles Woluwe since 1973, in addition to its Faculty of Architecture, Architectural Engineering and Urban Planning and UCLouvain&#x27;s Dutch-speaking sister Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (KU Leuven) (offering bachelor&#x27;s and master&#x27;s degrees in economics &amp; business, law, arts, and architecture; 4,400 students). In addition, the University of Kent&#x27;s Brussels School of International Studies is a specialised postgraduate school offering advanced international studies.

Also a dozen of university colleges are located in Brussels, including two drama schools, founded in 1832: the French-speaking Conservatoire Royal and its Dutch-speaking equivalent, the Koninklijk Conservatorium.

===Primary and secondary education===
Most of Brussels pupils between the ages of 3 and 18 go to schools organised by the French-speaking Community or the Flemish Community, with close to 80% going to French-speaking schools, and roughly 20% to Dutch-speaking schools. Due to the post-war international presence in the city, there are also a number of international schools, including the International School of Brussels, with 1,450 pupils, between the ages of and 18, the British School of Brussels, and the four European Schools, which provide free education for the children of those working in the EU institutions. The combined student population of the four European Schools in Brussels is around 10,000.

===Libraries===

Brussels has a number of public or private-owned libraries on its territory. Most public libraries in Brussels fall under the competence of the Communities and are usually separated between French-speaking and Dutch-speaking institutions, although some are mixed.

The Royal Library of Belgium (KBR) is the national library of Belgium and one of the most prestigious libraries in the world. It owns several collections of historical importance, like the famous Fétis archives, and is the depository for all books ever published in Belgium or abroad by Belgian authors. It is located on the Mont des Arts/Kunstberg in central Brussels, near the Central Station.

There are several academic libraries and archives in Brussels. The libraries of the Université libre de Bruxelles (ULB) and the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) constitute the largest ensemble of university libraries in the city. In addition to the &quot;Solbosch&quot; location, there are branches in &quot;La Plaine&quot; and &quot;Erasme&quot;/&quot;Erasmus&quot;. Other academic libraries include those of Saint-Louis University, Brussels and the Catholic University of Louvain (UCLouvain).

===Science and technology===

Science and technology in Brussels is well developed with the presence of several universities and research institutes. The Brussels-Capital Region is home to several national science and technology institutes including the National Fund for Scientific Research (NFSR), the Institute for the Encouragement of Scientific Research and Innovation of Brussels (ISRIB), the Royal Academies for Science and the Arts of Belgium (RASAB) and the Belgian Academy Council of Applied Sciences (BACAS). Several science parks associated with the universities are also spread over the region.

The Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, located in Leopold Park, houses the world&#x27;s largest hall completely dedicated to dinosaurs, with its collection of 30 fossilised &quot;Iguanodon&quot; skeletons. In addition, the Planetarium of the Royal Observatory of Belgium (part of the institutions of the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office), on the Heysel Plateau in Laeken, is one of the largest in Europe.

===Healthcare===

Brussels is home to a thriving pharmaceutical and health care industry which includes pioneering biotechnology research. The health sector employs 70,000 employees in 30,000 companies. There are 3,000 life sciences researchers in the city and two large science parks: Da Vinci Research Park and Erasmus Research Park. There are five university hospitals, a military hospital and more than 40 general hospitals and specialist clinics.

Due to its bilingual nature, hospitals in the Brussels-Capital Region can be either monolingual French, monolingual Dutch, or bilingual, depending on their nature. University hospitals belong to one of the two linguistic communities and are thus monolingual French or Dutch by law. Other hospitals managed by a public authority must be legally bilingual. Private hospitals are legally not bound to either language, but most cater to both. However, all hospital emergency services in the Capital Region (whether part of a public or private hospital) are required to be bilingual, since patients transported by emergency ambulance cannot choose the hospital they will be brought to.

==Transport==
Brussels has an extensive network of both private or public transportation means. Public transportation includes Brussels buses, trams, and metro (all three operated by the Brussels Intercommunal Transport Company (STIB/MIVB)), as well as a set of railway lines (operated by Infrabel) and railway stations served by public trains (operated by the National Railway Company of Belgium (NMBS/SNCB)). Air transport is available via one of the city&#x27;s two airports (Brussels Airport and Brussels South Charleroi Airport), and boat transport is available via the Port of Brussels. Bicycle-sharing and car-sharing public systems are also available.

The complexity of the Belgian political landscape makes some transportation issues difficult to solve. The Brussels-Capital Region is surrounded by the Flemish and Walloon regions, which means that the airports, as well as many roads serving Brussels (most notably the Brussels Ring) are located in the other two Belgian regions. The city is relatively car-dependent by northern European standards and is considered to be the most congested city in the world according to the INRIX traffic survey.

===Air===
The Brussels-Capital Region is served by two airports, both located outside of the administrative territory of the region. The most notable is Brussels Airport, located in the nearby Flemish municipality of Zaventem, east of the capital, which can be accessed by highway (A201), train, taxi and bus. Brussels National Airport has its own railway station. This station is located in the underground (level -1) of the airport terminal building itself. The secondary airport is Brussels South Charleroi Airport, located in Gosselies, a part of the city of Charleroi (Wallonia), some south-west of Brussels, which can be accessed by highway (E19 then E420) or a private bus. There is also Melsbroek Air Base, located in Steenokkerzeel, a military airport which shares its infrastructure with Brussels Airport. The aforementioned airports are also the main airports of Belgium.

===Water===
Since the 16th century, Brussels has had its own harbour, the Port of Brussels. It has been enlarged throughout the centuries to become the second Belgian inland port. Historically situated near the /, it lies today to the north-west of the region, on the Brussels–Scheldt Maritime Canal (commonly called Willebroek Canal), which connects Brussels to Antwerp via the Scheldt. Ships and large barges up to can penetrate deep into the country, avoiding break-ups and load transfers between Antwerp and the centre of Brussels, hence reducing the cost for companies using the canal, and thus offering a competitive advantage.

Moreover, the connection of the Willebroek Canal with the Brussels–Charleroi Canal, in the very heart of the capital, creates a north–south link, by means of waterways, between the Netherlands, Flanders and the industrial zone of Hainaut (Wallonia). There, navigation can access the network of French canals, thanks to the important inclined plane of Ronquières and the lifts of Strépy-Bracquegnies.

The importance of river traffic in Brussels makes it possible to avoid the road equivalent of 740,000 trucks per year—almost 2,000 per day—which, in addition to easing traffic problems, represents an estimated carbon dioxide saving of per year.

===Train===

The Brussels-Capital Region has three main train stations: Brussels-South, Brussels-Central and Brussels-North, which are also the busiest of the country. Brussels-South is also served by direct high-speed rail links: to London by Eurostar trains via the Channel Tunnel; to Amsterdam by Thalys and &quot;InterCity&quot; connections; to Amsterdam, Paris, and Cologne by Thalys; and to Cologne and Frankfurt by the German ICE.

The train rails in Brussels go underground, near the centre, through the North–South connection, with Brussels Central Station also being largely underground. The tunnel itself is only six tracks wide at its narrowest point, which often causes congestion and delays due to heavy use of the route.

The City of Brussels has minor railway stations at Bockstael, Brussels-Chapel, Brussels-Congress, Brussels-Luxembourg, Brussels-Schuman, Brussels-West, Haren, Haren-South and Simonis. In the Brussels Region, there are also railways stations at Berchem-Sainte-Agathe, Boitsfort, Boondael, Bordet (Evere), Etterbeek, Evere, Forest-East, Forest-South, Jette, Meiser (Schaerbeek), Moensberg (Uccle), Saint-Job (Uccle), Schaarbeek, Uccle-Calevoet, Uccle-Stalle, Vivier d&#x27;Oie-Diesdelle (Uccle), Merode and Watermael.

===Public transport===
The Brussels Intercommunal Transport Company (STIB/MIVB) is the local public transport operator in Brussels. It covers the 19 municipalities of the Brussels-Capital Region and some surface routes extend to the near suburbs in the other two regions, linking with the De Lijn network in Flanders and the TEC network in Wallonia.

====Metro, trams and buses====

The Brussels Metro dates back to 1976, but underground lines known as the &quot;premetro&quot; have been serviced by tramways since 1968. It is the only rapid transit system in Belgium (Antwerp and Charleroi both having light rail systems). The network consists of four conventional metro lines and three &quot;premetro&quot; lines. The metro-grade lines are M1, M2, M5, and M6, with some shared sections, covering a total of . , the Metro network within the region has a total of 69 metro and &quot;premetro&quot; stations. The Metro is an important means of transport, connecting with six railway stations of the National Railway Company of Belgium (NMBS/SNCB), and many tram and bus stops operated by STIB/MIVB, as well as with Flemish De Lijn and Walloon TEC bus stops.

A comprehensive bus and tram network covers the region. , the Brussels tram system consists of 17 tram lines (three of which – lines T4, T7 and T10 – qualify as &quot;premetro&quot; lines that partly travel over underground sections that were intended to be eventually converted into metro lines). The total route length is , making it one of the largest tram networks in Europe. The Brussels bus network is complementary to the rail network. It consists of 50 bus routes and 11 night routes, spanning .

Since April 2007, STIB/MIVB has also been operating a night bus network called Noctis on Friday and Saturday nights from midnight until 3 a.m. The service consists of 11 routes (N04, N05, N06, N08, N09, N10, N11, N12, N13, N16 and N18). The fare on these night buses is the same as during the day. All the lines leave from the Place de la Bourse/Beursplein in the city centre at 30 minutes intervals and cover all the main streets in the capital, as they radiate outwards to the suburbs. Noctis services returned from 2 July 2021 after over a year of disruption due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium.

====Ticketing====
MoBIB is the STIB/MIVB electronic smart card, introduced in 2007, replacing the discontinued paper tickets. The hourly travel fare includes all means of transport (metro, tram and bus) operated by STIB/MIVB. Each trip has a different cost depending on the type of support purchased. Passengers can purchase monthly passes, yearly passes, 1 and 10-trip tickets and daily and 3-day passes. These can be bought over the Internet, but require customers to have a smart card reader. GO vending machines accept coins, local and international chip and PIN credit and debit cards.

Moreover, a complimentary interticketing system means that a combined STIB/MIVB ticket holder can, depending on the option, also use the train network operated by NMBS/SNCB and/or long-distance buses and commuter services operated by De Lijn or TEC. With this ticket, a single journey can include multiple stages across the different modes of transport and networks.

====Other public transport====
Since 2003, Brussels has had a car-sharing service operated by the Bremen company Cambio, in partnership with STIB/MIVB and the local ridesharing company Taxi Stop. In 2006, a public bicycle-sharing programme was introduced. The scheme was subsequently taken over by Villo!. Since 2008, this night-time public transport service has been supplemented by Collecto, a shared taxi system, which operates on weekdays between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. In 2012, the Zen Car electric car-sharing scheme was launched in the university and European areas, though it ceased operating in the city in 2020.

===Road network===
In medieval times, Brussels stood at the intersection of routes running north–south (the modern /) and east–west (/–/–/). The ancient pattern of streets, radiating from the Grand-Place, in large part remains, but has been overlaid by boulevards built over the river Senne, over the city walls and over the railway connection between the North and South Stations. In 2012, Brussels had the most congested traffic in Europe and North America, according to US traffic information platform INRIX.

Brussels is the hub of a range of national roads, the main ones being clockwise: the N1 (N to Breda), N2 (E to Maastricht), N3 (E to Aachen), N4 (SE to Luxembourg), N5 (S to Reims), N6 (S to Maubeuge), N7 (SW to Lille), N8 (W to Koksijde) and N9 (NW to Ostend). Usually named /, these highways normally run in a straight line, but sometimes lose themselves in a maze of narrow shopping streets. The region is skirted by the European route E19 (N-S) and the E40 (E-W), while the E411 leads away to the SE. Brussels has an orbital motorway, numbered R0 (R-zero) and commonly referred to as the Ring. It is pear-shaped, as the southern side was never built as originally conceived, owing to residents&#x27; objections.

The city centre, sometimes known as the Pentagon, is surrounded by an inner ring road, the Small Ring (, ), a sequence of boulevards formally numbered R20 or N0. These were built upon the site of the second set of city walls following their demolition. The Metro line 2 runs under much of these. Since June 2015, a number of central boulevards inside the Pentagon have become car-free, limiting transit traffic through the old city.

On the eastern side of the region, the R21 or Greater Ring (, ) is formed by a string of boulevards that curves round from Laeken to Uccle. Some &quot;premetro&quot; stations (see Brussels Metro) were built on that route. A little further out, a stretch numbered R22 leads from Zaventem to Saint-Job.

==Security and emergency services==

===Police===

The Brussels local police, supported by the federal police, is responsible for law enforcement in Brussels. The 19 municipalities of the Brussels-Capital Region are divided into six police zones, all bilingual (French and Dutch):
* 5339 Brussels Capital Ixelles: the City of Brussels and Ixelles
* 5340 Brussels West: Berchem-Sainte-Agathe, Ganshoren, Jette, Koekelberg and Molenbeek-Saint-Jean
* 5341 South: Anderlecht, Forest and Saint-Gilles
* 5342 Uccle/Watermael-Boitsfort/Auderghem: Auderghem, Uccle and Watermael-Boitsfort
* 5343 Montgomery: Etterbeek, Woluwe-Saint-Lambert and Woluwe-Saint-Pierre
* 5344 Polbruno: Evere, Saint-Josse-ten-Noode and Schaerbeek

===Fire department===
The Brussels Fire and Emergency Medical Care Service, commonly known by its acronym SIAMU (DBDMH), operates in the 19 municipalities of Brussels. It is a class X fire department and the largest fire service in Belgium in terms of annual operations, equipment, and personnel. It has 9 fire stations, spread over the entire Brussels-Capital Region, and employs about 1,000 professional firefighters. As well as preventing and fighting fires, SIAMU also provides emergency medical care services in Brussels via its centralised 100 number (and the single 112 emergency number for the 27 countries of the European Union). It is bilingual (French–Dutch).

==Parks and green spaces==
Brussels is one of the greenest capitals in Europe, with over 8,000 hectares of green spaces. Vegetation cover and natural areas are higher in the outskirts, where they have limited the peri-urbanisation of the capital, but they decrease sharply towards the centre of Brussels; 10% in the central Pentagon, 30% of the municipalities in the first ring, and 71% of the municipalities in the second ring are occupied by green spaces.

Many parks and gardens, both public and privately owned, are scattered throughout the city. In addition to this, the Sonian Forest is located in its southern part and stretches out over the three Belgian regions. , it has been inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, the only Belgian component to the multinational inscription &#x27;Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe&#x27;.

==Notable people==
==Twin towns – sister cities==
Brussels is twinned with the following cities:

* Atlanta, United States
* Beijing, China
* Berlin, Germany
* Breda, Netherlands
* Casablanca, Morocco
* Kinshasa, Congo
* Kyiv, Ukraine
* Macao, China
* Madrid, Spain
* Ljubljana, Slovenia
* Prague, Czech Republic
* Washington, D.C., United States

==See also==

* Bourgeois of Brussels
* Nazi ghost train 
* Seven Noble Houses of Brussels
* Sculpture in Brussels
* Brussels Regional Investment Company
* European Network of Information Centres for the Performing Arts
* List of urban areas in the European Union

==References==

===Footnotes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Brussels-Capital Region 
* Official tourism website 
* Interactive map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="0" end="8" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="25" end="48" title="Brussels" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55" end="61" title="Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium#Regions" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="65" end="72" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84" end="101" title="#Municipalities" label="19 municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q239" start="117" end="133" title="City of Brussels" label="City of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="271" end="298" title="French Community of Belgium" label="French Community of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="307" end="324" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q9337" start="351" end="365" title="Flemish Region" label="Flemish Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="403" end="410" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="420" end="434" title="Walloon Region" label="Walloon Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q845920" start="537" end="542" title="Senne (river)" label="Senne"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="610" end="626" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="659" end="681" title="international politics" label="international politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="745" end="753" title="Diplomacy" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="759" end="772" title="civil servant" label="civil servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="797" end="805" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="827" end="841" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748720" start="877" end="892" title="EU institutions" label="EU institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="908" end="934" title="European Commission" label="administrative-legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="936" end="955" title="European Council" label="executive-political"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="961" end="972" title="European Parliament" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="1024" end="1034" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="1100" end="1110" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="1211" end="1224" title="Metonymy" label="metonymically"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="1289" end="1296" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800833" start="1305" end="1317" title="NATO Headquarters" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1321" end="1325" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1447" end="1461" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q9005" start="1604" end="1621" title="Brussels metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825332" start="1676" end="1694" title="Metropolitan areas in Belgium" label="largest in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="1723" end="1734" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="1767" end="1772" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="1774" end="1781" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="1787" end="1793" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967836" start="1808" end="1823" title="Flemish Diamond" label="Flemish Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122" start="1852" end="1867" title="Walloon Brabant" label="Walloon Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28485845" start="1994" end="2011" title="Euronext Brussels" label="Euronext Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="2060" end="2071" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="Q506298" start="2268" end="2282" title="Brussels Metro" label="Brussels Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="2295" end="2308" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="2350" end="2357" title="Brussels Airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140900" start="2362" end="2378" title="List of railway stations in Belgium" label="railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450775" start="2468" end="2492" title="Francisation of Brussels" label="language shift to French"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="2679" end="2692" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="2800" end="2810" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q62271704" start="2920" end="2926" title="Belgian waffle" label="waffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964269" start="2932" end="2941" title="Belgian chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q152088" start="2947" end="2959" title="French fries" label="French fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q348229" start="2986" end="2990" title="Beer in Belgium" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3080" end="3086" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="3087" end="3106" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q215429" start="3152" end="3175" title="Grand-Place" label="Grand-Place/Grote Markt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152072" start="3197" end="3209" title="Manneken Pis" label="Manneken Pis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180901" start="3221" end="3228" title="Atomium" label="Atomium"/>
<link wikidata="Q551479" start="3264" end="3282" title="La Monnaie/De Munt" label="La Monnaie/De Munt"/>
<link wikidata="Q945059" start="3291" end="3317" title="Royal Museums of Art and History" label="Museums of Art and History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882210" start="3348" end="3362" title="Belgian comics" label="Belgian comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="3408" end="3419" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q443089" start="3549" end="3558" title="Old Dutch" label="Old Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559991" start="3597" end="3614" title="Saint Vindicianus" label="Saint Vindicianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181285" start="3630" end="3637" title="Cambrai" label="Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="3714" end="3720" title="Hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q321718" start="3826" end="3831" title="Evere" label="Evere"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="3851" end="3857" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860505" start="3861" end="3873" title="Old Frankish" label="Old Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56488" start="4139" end="4157" title="Brabantian dialect" label="Brabantian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668371" start="4180" end="4190" title="Brusselian dialect" label="Brusselian"/>
<link wikidata="Q815549" start="4380" end="4394" title="Belgian French" label="Belgian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309004" start="4539" end="4553" title="Dutch spelling" label="Dutch spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q970597" start="4588" end="4599" title="French orthography" label="French form"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="4931" end="4945" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="4989" end="4998" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="5061" end="5069" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="5072" end="5078" title="dolmen" label="dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="5084" end="5099" title="standing stones" label="standing stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q215429" start="5122" end="5145" title="Grand-Place" label="Grand-Place/Grote Markt"/>
<link wikidata="Q671645" start="5150" end="5157" title="Tomberg metro station" label="Tomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q211764" start="5161" end="5181" title="Woluwe-Saint-Lambert" label="Woluwe-Saint-Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="5204" end="5218" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5243" end="5248" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320851" start="5334" end="5350" title="Tour &amp;amp; Taxis" label="Tour &amp;amp; Taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18435290" start="5370" end="5378" title="Pentagon (Brussels)" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="5438" end="5458" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="5489" end="5504" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q585739" start="5606" end="5616" title="Gaugericus" label="Gaugericus"/>
<link wikidata="Q90908591" start="5651" end="5660" title="Saint-Géry Island" label="an island"/>
<link wikidata="Q845920" start="5674" end="5679" title="Senne (river)" label="Senne"/>
<link wikidata="Q469603" start="5765" end="5796" title="Charles, Duke of Lower Lorraine" label="Charles, Duke of Lower Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="5814" end="5819" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="5828" end="5834" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q267660" start="5841" end="5847" title="Gudula" label="Gudula"/>
<link wikidata="Q836859" start="5853" end="5860" title="Moorsel" label="Moorsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114" start="5898" end="5911" title="East Flanders" label="East Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q150512" start="5952" end="5979" title="Otto II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q660393" start="6026" end="6043" title="Lower Lotharingia" label="Lower Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q955409" start="6184" end="6211" title="Lambert I, Count of Louvain" label="Lambert I, Count of Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q896471" start="6348" end="6369" title="Brabant Road" label="important trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="6382" end="6389" title="County of Flanders" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="6400" end="6406" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="6411" end="6416" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="6422" end="6429" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="6437" end="6455" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Kingdom of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131821" start="6605" end="6615" title="Coudenberg" label="Coudenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q949445" start="6620" end="6632" title="Sablon, Brussels" label="Sablon/Zavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058509" start="6840" end="6856" title="Dukes of Brabant" label="Dukes of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="6963" end="6980" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83529852" start="7014" end="7037" title="first walls of Brussels" label="first walls of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q269654" start="7142" end="7181" title="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula" label="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="7209" end="7219" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q83529852" start="7252" end="7273" title="Second walls of Brussels" label="a second set of walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289679" start="7354" end="7364" title="Small Ring, Brussels" label="Small Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q466252" start="7525" end="7559" title="Margaret III, Countess of Flanders" label="Margaret III, Countess of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q298892" start="7565" end="7580" title="Philip the Bold" label="Philip the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="7582" end="7598" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182135" start="7638" end="7653" title="House of Valois" label="House of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q470800" start="7662" end="7669" title="Anthony, Duke of Brabant" label="Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="7711" end="7727" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q316877" start="7744" end="7759" title="Battle of Nancy" label="Battle of Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157073" start="7798" end="7814" title="Mary of Burgundy" label="Mary of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="7864" end="7876" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="7882" end="7895" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="7907" end="7915" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157109" start="8045" end="8067" title="Burgundian Netherlands" label="Burgundian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q330533" start="8087" end="8106" title="Seventeen Provinces" label="Seventeen Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q157098" start="8149" end="8168" title="Philip the Handsome" label="Philip the Handsome"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="8266" end="8275" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="8297" end="8310" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q269654" start="8327" end="8366" title="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula" label="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="8481" end="8496" title="Habsburg Empire" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131821" start="8602" end="8619" title="Coudenberg Palace" label="Coudenberg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031430" start="8745" end="8765" title="Habsburg Netherlands" label="Habsburg Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="8774" end="8792" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q231250" start="9013" end="9017" title="lace" label="lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515521" start="9041" end="9058" title="Brussels tapestry" label="Brussels tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="9127" end="9147" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="9154" end="9163" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q636264" start="9189" end="9220" title="Bombardment of Brussels (1695)" label="bombard Brussels with artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18435290" start="9447" end="9462" title="Pentagon (Brussels)" label="the city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="9590" end="9619" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q129000522" start="9656" end="9669" title="Assault on Brussels (1708)" label="French attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="9704" end="9721" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q700283" start="9880" end="9900" title="Austrian Netherlands" label="Austrian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924575" start="9911" end="9923" title="Siege of Brussels" label="was captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="9954" end="9984" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q179831" start="10164" end="10173" title="Prefectures in France" label="chef-lieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268811" start="10181" end="10203" title="Dyle (department)" label="department of the Dyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="10255" end="10263" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="10271" end="10294" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="battlefield of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="10360" end="10378" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15864" start="10416" end="10449" title="United Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="United Kingdom of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="10462" end="10481" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="William I of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10533" end="10546" title="Province of Brabant#United Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="South Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q223933" start="10610" end="10628" title="Belgian Revolution" label="Belgian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q157672" start="10671" end="10683" title="Daniel-Francois-Esprit Auber" label="Auber&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q470773" start="10696" end="10716" title="La Muette de Portici" label="La Muette de Portici"/>
<link wikidata="Q551479" start="10730" end="10757" title="La Monnaie" label="Royal Theatre of La Monnaie"/>
<link wikidata="Q848831" start="10862" end="10869" title="Province of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12971" start="10932" end="10941" title="Leopold I of Belgium" label="Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q160913" start="10953" end="10973" title="King of the Belgians" label="King of the Belgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512800" start="11231" end="11259" title="Société Générale de Belgique" label="Société Générale de Belgique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="11271" end="11292" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723575" start="11316" end="11340" title="Brussels–Charleroi Canal" label="Brussels–Charleroi Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20754971" start="11420" end="11447" title="Free University of Brussels (1834–1969)" label="Free University of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391752" start="11476" end="11498" title="Saint-Louis University, Brussels" label="Saint-Louis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359804" start="11521" end="11544" title="History of rail transport in Belgium" label="first passenger railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q180775" start="11594" end="11614" title="Molenbeek-Saint-Jean" label="Molenbeek-Saint-Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="11620" end="11628" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="11814" end="11827" title="health hazard" label="health hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812867" start="11876" end="11898" title="mayor of the City of Brussels" label="city&amp;#x27;s then-mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q462143" start="11900" end="11913" title="Jules Anspach" label="Jules Anspach"/>
<link wikidata="Q610373" start="11960" end="11983" title="covering of the Senne" label="completely covered over"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="11998" end="12011" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117470" start="12062" end="12071" title="Haussmann&amp;#x27;s renovation of Paris" label="Haussmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q105360174" start="12102" end="12120" title="Central Boulevards of Brussels" label="central boulevards"/>
<link wikidata="Q28485845" start="12187" end="12210" title="Brussels Stock Exchange" label="Brussels Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q850537" start="12223" end="12240" title="Palais de Justice, Brussels" label="Palace of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586107" start="12252" end="12282" title="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Church" label="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967" start="12369" end="12379" title="Leopold II of Belgium" label="Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405188" start="12385" end="12417" title="Brussels International Exposition (1897)" label="International Exposition of 1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361068" start="12494" end="12516" title="Africa Palace" label="Palace of the Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q779703" start="12531" end="12562" title="Royal Museum for Central Africa" label="Royal Museum for Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q456544" start="12581" end="12589" title="Tervuren" label="Tervuren"/>
<link wikidata="Q525703" start="12646" end="12657" title="Avenue de Tervueren" label="grand alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864692" start="12736" end="12747" title="Art Nouveau in Brussels" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q49744" start="12799" end="12811" title="Victor Horta" label="Victor Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075644" start="12813" end="12824" title="Paul Hankar" label="Paul Hankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154083" start="12830" end="12848" title="Henry van de Velde" label="Henry van de Velde"/>
<link wikidata="Q847588" start="13029" end="13046" title="Solvay Conference" label="Solvay Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="13086" end="13103" title="world&amp;#x27;s fair" label="world&amp;#x27;s fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q932774" start="13110" end="13151" title="Brussels International Exposition (1910)" label="Brussels International Exposition of 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748873" start="13157" end="13198" title="Brussels International Exposition of 1935" label="Brussels International Exposition of 1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q74035" start="13240" end="13247" title="Expo 58" label="Expo 58"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="13257" end="13268" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18108964" start="13286" end="13294" title="German occupation of Belgium during World War I" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13353" end="13365" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557876" start="13380" end="13405" title="German occupation of Belgium during World War II" label="occupied by German forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350356" start="13471" end="13495" title="Guards Armoured Division" label="Guards Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="13517" end="13533" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28898" start="13552" end="13560" title="Zaventem" label="Zaventem"/>
<link wikidata="Q997166" start="13678" end="13700" title="North–South connection" label="North–South connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q222434" start="13794" end="13802" title="Brussels premetro" label="premetro"/>
<link wikidata="Q506298" start="13872" end="13877" title="Brussels Metro" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="14008" end="14022" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107161" start="14316" end="14330" title="Brusselisation" label="Brusselisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q838185" start="14470" end="14496" title="federal regions of Belgium" label="federal regions of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="14509" end="14517" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="14522" end="14530" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173" start="14562" end="14573" title="yellow iris" label="yellow iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q129372" start="14842" end="14869" title="European Capital of Culture" label="European Capital of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14605366" start="14947" end="14965" title="Brussels Agreement (2013)" label="Brussels Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857637" start="14990" end="15004" title="40th G7 summit" label="40th G7 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q29788955" start="15050" end="15054" title="2017 Brussels summit" label="28th"/>
<link wikidata="Q48759771" start="15056" end="15060" title="2018 Brussels summit" label="29th"/>
<link wikidata="Q106817677" start="15065" end="15082" title="2021 Brussels summit" label="31st NATO Summits"/>
<link wikidata="Q23365300" start="15085" end="15101" title="2016 Brussels bombings" label="On 22 March 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308663" start="15121" end="15130" title="nail bomb" label="nail bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="15153" end="15157" title="ISIL" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="15177" end="15193" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28898" start="15197" end="15205" title="Zaventem" label="Zaventem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206139" start="15217" end="15248" title="Maalbeek/Maelbeek metro station" label="Maalbeek/Maelbeek metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="15283" end="15298" title="suicide bombers" label="suicide bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="15364" end="15373" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="15631" end="15638" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="15640" end="15648" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q81046" start="15664" end="15673" title="Charleroi" label="Charleroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="15675" end="15683" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="15698" end="15707" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="15717" end="15726" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q845920" start="15800" end="15805" title="Senne (river)" label="Senne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254455" start="15890" end="15903" title="Sonian Forest" label="Sonian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q506931" start="15987" end="15995" title="Maalbeek" label="Maalbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q286772" start="16004" end="16010" title="Woluwe" label="Woluwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q105360174" start="16086" end="16119" title="Central Boulevards of Brussels" label="Brussels&amp;#x27; central boulevards"/>
<link wikidata="Q72946" start="16214" end="16220" title="Forest, Belgium" label="Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="16296" end="16311" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16313" end="16319" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="16474" end="16488" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="16908" end="16915" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q633629" start="16936" end="16956" title="Belgian Constitution" label="Belgian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q239" start="17004" end="17020" title="City of Brussels" label="City of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q635307" start="17156" end="17180" title="Royal Palace of Brussels" label="Royal Palace of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q160913" start="17192" end="17212" title="King of the Belgians" label="King of the Belgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892311" start="17280" end="17293" title="Brussels Park" label="Brussels Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542585" start="17323" end="17345" title="Royal Palace of Laeken" label="Royal Palace of Laeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q160913" start="17372" end="17392" title="Monarchy of Belgium" label="Belgian royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137059" start="17399" end="17419" title="Belgian Federal Parliament" label="Palace of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137059" start="17489" end="17515" title="Belgian Federal Parliament" label="Belgian Federal Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q213107" start="17535" end="17560" title="Prime Minister of Belgium" label="Prime Minister of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19601543" start="17673" end="17693" title="Council of Ministers (Belgium)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230309" start="17718" end="17736" title="Court of Cassation (Belgium)" label="Court of Cassation"/>
<link wikidata="Q850537" start="17785" end="17802" title="Palace of Justice (Brussels)" label="Palace of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755321" start="17865" end="17885" title="Constitutional Court of Belgium" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761425" start="17891" end="17907" title="Council of State (Belgium)" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100043" start="17913" end="17927" title="Court of Audit of Belgium" label="Court of Audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321057" start="17933" end="17951" title="Royal Belgian Mint" label="Royal Belgian Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q685918" start="17960" end="17984" title="National Bank of Belgium" label="National Bank of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="18040" end="18067" title="French Community of Belgium" label="French Community of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="18076" end="18093" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292" start="18099" end="18117" title="Flemish Parliament" label="Flemish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186029" start="18122" end="18140" title="Flemish Government" label="Flemish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477569" start="18185" end="18219" title="Parliament of the French Community" label="Parliament of the French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944068" start="18228" end="18262" title="Government of the French Community" label="Government of the French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q493522" start="18293" end="18307" title="Municipalities of Belgium" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18337" end="18343" title="Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium#Regions" label="Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q239" start="18977" end="18993" title="City of Brussels" label="City of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q730506" start="19005" end="19011" title="Laeken" label="Laeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q672888" start="19013" end="19018" title="Haren, Belgium" label="Haren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645721" start="19023" end="19042" title="Neder-Over-Heembeek" label="Neder-Over-Heembeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068998" start="19154" end="19178" title="Avenue Louise/Louizalaan" label="Avenue Louise/Louizalaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q833646" start="19204" end="19236" title="Bois de la Cambre/Ter Kamerenbos" label="Bois de la Cambre/Ter Kamerenbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208713" start="19255" end="19262" title="Ixelles" label="Ixelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q219244" start="19547" end="19557" title="Koekelberg" label="Koekelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q272243" start="19607" end="19628" title="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode" label="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode"/>
<link wikidata="Q272262" start="19713" end="19732" title="Watermael-Boitsfort" label="Watermael-Boitsfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="20371" end="20378" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q211690" start="20423" end="20431" title="London boroughs" label="boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="20435" end="20441" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q679388" start="20451" end="20466" title="Arrondissements of Paris" label="arrondissements"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="20476" end="20481" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q180775" start="20544" end="20564" title="Molenbeek-Saint-Jean" label="Molenbeek-Saint-Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23956390" start="20603" end="20607" title="Brussels ISIL terror cell" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q847731" start="20612" end="20631" title="Islamist terrorists" label="Islamist terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479779" start="20664" end="20669" title="November 2015 Paris attacks" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q23365300" start="20674" end="20682" title="2016 Brussels bombings" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="20828" end="20842" title="Walloon Region" label="Walloon Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q9337" start="20851" end="20865" title="Flemish Region" label="Flemish Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="20920" end="20927" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="21118" end="21134" title="French Community of Belgium" label="French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="21142" end="21159" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435138" start="21216" end="21232" title="Common Community Commission" label="Common Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="21333" end="21340" title="welfare spending" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q848831" start="21362" end="21369" title="Brabant (province)" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q83116" start="21429" end="21449" title="provinces of Belgium" label="provinces of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589739" start="21657" end="21685" title="governor of Brussels-Capital" label="governor of Brussels-Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q475050" start="21768" end="21784" title="federal district" label="federal district"/>
<link wikidata="Q435623" start="21852" end="21862" title="Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q435627" start="22014" end="22032" title="Minister-President of the Brussels-Capital Region" label="minister-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q736559" start="22059" end="22076" title="Secretary of state" label="state secretaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141208" start="22425" end="22435" title="Ordinance (Belgium)" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477569" start="22592" end="22637" title="Parliament of the French Community of Belgium" label="Parliament of the French Community of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292" start="22752" end="22770" title="Flemish Parliament" label="Flemish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="23842" end="23858" title="French Community of Belgium" label="French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="23867" end="23884" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150083" start="23974" end="24001" title="French Community Commission" label="French Community Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924609" start="24022" end="24050" title="Flemish Community Commission" label="Flemish Community Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q435623" start="24157" end="24198" title="Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region" label="Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="24882" end="24892" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="24964" end="24970" title="decree" label="decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435138" start="25077" end="25104" title="Common Community Commission" label="Common Community Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q679847" start="25522" end="25528" title="by-law" label="by-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q612665" start="25970" end="25996" title="Vrije Universiteit Brussel" label="Vrije Universiteit Brussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="26463" end="26471" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="26493" end="26507" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748720" start="26542" end="26567" title="Institutions of the European Union" label="institutions of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193739" start="26624" end="26643" title="Treaty of Amsterdam" label="Treaty of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="26684" end="26703" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="26749" end="26778" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="26879" end="26898" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="26902" end="26912" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q421992" start="27193" end="27211" title="Espace Léopold" label="Brussels hemicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="27240" end="27256" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857637" start="27318" end="27327" title="40th G7 summit" label="G7 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="27363" end="27373" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27551" end="27567" title="Brussels and the European Union#European Quarter" label="European Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q821009" start="27710" end="27729" title="Berlaymont building" label="Berlaymont building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375164" start="27789" end="27804" title="Europa building" label="Europa building"/>
<link wikidata="Q421992" start="27828" end="27842" title="Espace Léopold" label="Espace Léopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="28142" end="28148" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="28358" end="28370" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="28501" end="28535" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800833" start="28544" end="28577" title="NATO headquarters" label="NATO&amp;#x27;s Brussels headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860401" start="28585" end="28597" title="List of diplomatic missions to NATO" label="29 embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="28754" end="28780" title="World Customs Organization" label="World Customs Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q663492" start="28785" end="28796" title="Eurocontrol" label="Eurocontrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="28915" end="28926" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377852" start="28977" end="29011" title="European Trade Union Confederation" label="European Trade Union Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="29024" end="29072" title="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions" label="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q595208" start="29089" end="29118" title="World Confederation of Labour" label="World Confederation of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="29412" end="29428" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="29480" end="29489" title="embassies" label="embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="29513" end="29521" title="Diplomacy" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="29596" end="29609" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q572835" start="29612" end="29632" title="International school" label="International school"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="29806" end="29814" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="29894" end="29897" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q845737" start="29947" end="29965" title="Treaty of Brussels" label="Treaty of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="30018" end="30024" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="30026" end="30036" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="30042" end="30053" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="30062" end="30076" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="30120" end="30137" title="Intergovernmental organization" label="intergovernmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127126" start="30138" end="30155" title="military alliance" label="military alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="30288" end="30301" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860401" start="30370" end="30398" title="List of diplomatic missions to NATO" label="through embassies in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q643292" start="30424" end="30436" title="NATO summit" label="NATO Summits"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800833" start="30561" end="30573" title="NATO headquarters" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q672888" start="30598" end="30603" title="Haren, Belgium" label="Haren"/>
<link wikidata="Q239" start="30643" end="30659" title="City of Brussels" label="City of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="30859" end="30885" title="international organisation" label="international organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="30914" end="30933" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q272730" start="30950" end="30958" title="airspace" label="airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q236185" start="31145" end="31172" title="Blue Banana" label="urbanised regions of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="31182" end="31187" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="31189" end="31195" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q164903" start="31201" end="31211" title="Rhine-Ruhr" label="Rhine-Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q806" start="31231" end="31239" title="Randstad" label="Randstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q93368" start="31795" end="31828" title="arrondissement of Halle-Vilvoorde" label="arrondissement of Halle-Vilvoorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q93392" start="31857" end="31881" title="arrondissement of Leuven" label="arrondissement of Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118" start="31885" end="31900" title="Flemish Brabant" label="Flemish Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122" start="31934" end="31949" title="Walloon Brabant" label="Walloon Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="32217" end="32225" title="commuter" label="commuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q117965" start="32232" end="32265" title="Brussels Regional Express Network" label="Brussels Regional Express Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967836" start="32345" end="32359" title="Flemish Diamond" label="diamond-shaped"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="32360" end="32371" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="32378" end="32383" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="32385" end="32392" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="32397" end="32403" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="32666" end="32684" title="political refugees" label="political refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780490" start="32774" end="32790" title="Communards" label="Paris Communards"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="32922" end="32933" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="32935" end="32944" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749" start="32946" end="32968" title="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon" label="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q315747" start="32970" end="32987" title="Georges Boulanger" label="Georges Boulanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q755" start="32989" end="33002" title="Paul Verlaine" label="Paul Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="33004" end="33018" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q92562" start="33024" end="33035" title="Léon Daudet" label="Léon Daudet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83116" start="33139" end="33156" title="Belgian provinces" label="Belgian provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="33186" end="33194" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="33218" end="33233" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="33260" end="33274" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="33281" end="33287" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="33403" end="33409" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="33478" end="33488" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12480" start="33818" end="33825" title="Statbel" label="Statbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222011" start="34282" end="34290" title="Moroccans in Belgium" label="Moroccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541828" start="34299" end="34306" title="Riffian people" label="Riffian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="34317" end="34324" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="34330" end="34337" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q815524" start="34405" end="34421" title="Belgian overseas colonies" label="Belgian colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="34435" end="34467" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="34469" end="34475" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="34480" end="34487" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="34510" end="34521" title="naturalised" label="naturalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="34642" end="34648" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="34804" end="34822" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="34993" end="35007" title="Dutch-speaking" label="Dutch-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q56488" start="35019" end="35037" title="Brabantian dialect" label="Brabantian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q815549" start="35066" end="35072" title="Belgian French" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="35170" end="35182" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="35196" end="35214" title="Flemish people" label="Flemish population"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="35246" end="35252" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="35257" end="35265" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236213" start="35271" end="35285" title="Francization" label="rise of French"/>
<link wikidata="Q223933" start="35376" end="35396" title="Belgian independence" label="Belgian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="35415" end="35430" title="Standard language" label="standardisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194417" start="35639" end="35654" title="social mobility" label="social mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q953523" start="36336" end="36351" title="language border" label="language border"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="36490" end="36498" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927117" start="36595" end="36627" title="Brussels and the European Union" label="centre of international politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q284545" start="36791" end="36809" title="Brussels Periphery" label="Brussels periphery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7217335" start="37027" end="37043" title="Belgian politics" label="Belgian politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469495" start="37518" end="37542" title="Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde" label="Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q737681" start="37867" end="37906" title="municipalities with language facilities" label="municipalities with language facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668371" start="39517" end="39527" title="Brusselian dialect" label="Brusselian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56488" start="39595" end="39604" title="Brabantic" label="Brabantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="39649" end="39665" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Duchy of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="40155" end="40162" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q381151" start="40195" end="40202" title="Walloons" label="Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="40564" end="40572" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="40608" end="40619" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q239" start="40735" end="40751" title="City of Brussels" label="City of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="40778" end="40787" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q269654" start="40807" end="40846" title="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula" label="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577114" start="40863" end="40875" title="co-cathedral" label="co-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092186" start="40883" end="40915" title="Archdiocese of Mechelen–Brussels" label="Archdiocese of Mechelen–Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q846006" start="40962" end="40999" title="Basilica of the Sacred Heart, Brussels" label="National Basilica of the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846867" start="41005" end="41019" title="Minor Basilica" label="Minor Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="41024" end="41037" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q683879" start="41061" end="41098" title="List of largest church buildings" label="largest churches by area in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547264" start="41104" end="41132" title="Church of Our Lady of Laeken" label="Church of Our Lady of Laeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q160913" start="41172" end="41192" title="Monarchy of Belgium" label="Belgian royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q792419" start="41219" end="41235" title="Belgian monarchs" label="Belgian monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239532" start="41248" end="41259" title="Royal Crypt (Belgium)" label="Royal Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="41384" end="41392" title="atheists" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="41397" end="41406" title="agnostics" label="agnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="41439" end="41450" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="41452" end="41469" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="41471" end="41478" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="41675" end="41688" title="non-religious" label="non-religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="41699" end="41705" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755321" start="42144" end="42172" title="Belgian Constitutional Court" label="Belgian Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="42232" end="42239" title="Primary school" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="42244" end="42253" title="Secondary school" label="secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077918" start="42314" end="42321" title="Islam in Belgium" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548310" start="42385" end="42409" title="Great Mosque of Brussels" label="Great Mosque of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101790" start="42426" end="42458" title="Cinquantenaire" label="Parc du Cinquantenaire/Jubelpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="42474" end="42480" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="43004" end="43010" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="43012" end="43019" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517921" start="43025" end="43034" title="Louis XIV style" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q215429" start="43049" end="43060" title="Grand-Place" label="Grand-Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="43068" end="43078" title="Postmodern architecture" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927117" start="43096" end="43111" title="Brussels and the European Union" label="EU institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349760" start="43126" end="43147" title="medieval architecture" label="medieval architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q90908591" start="43258" end="43280" title="Saint-Géry Island" label="Saint Géry/Sint-Goriks"/>
<link wikidata="Q956832" start="43307" end="43324" title="Brabantine Gothic" label="Brabantine Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q269654" start="43325" end="43364" title="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula" label="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula"/>
<link wikidata="Q83529852" start="43455" end="43471" title="First walls of Brussels" label="first city walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q83529852" start="43560" end="43572" title="Second walls of Brussels" label="second walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988142" start="43580" end="43590" title="Halle Gate" label="Halle Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="43665" end="43691" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351624" start="43748" end="43758" title="Flamboyant" label="Flamboyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255327" start="43759" end="43768" title="Brussels Town Hall" label="Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="43774" end="43784" title="neo-Gothic" label="neo-Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q968055" start="43791" end="43801" title="Museum of the City of Brussels" label="Breadhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961493" start="43824" end="43833" title="guildhall" label="guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337009" start="43849" end="43867" title="Guilds of Brussels" label="Guilds of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q152072" start="43875" end="43887" title="Manneken Pis" label="Manneken Pis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="43925" end="43931" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="43992" end="43998" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="44017" end="44029" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q28472160" start="44089" end="44102" title="Royal Quarter" label="Royal Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131821" start="44103" end="44113" title="Palace of Coudenberg" label="Coudenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892311" start="44127" end="44140" title="Brussels Park" label="Brussels Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049313" start="44149" end="44174" title="Place Royale, Brussels" label="Place Royale/Koningsplein"/>
<link wikidata="Q635307" start="44197" end="44209" title="Royal Palace of Brussels" label="Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109592" start="44215" end="44248" title="Church of St. James on Coudenberg" label="Church of St. James on Coudenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q910603" start="44254" end="44274" title="Palace of the Nation" label="Palace of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616099" start="44302" end="44316" title="Academy Palace" label="Academy Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628206" start="44322" end="44351" title="Palace of Charles of Lorraine" label="Palace of Charles of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15939973" start="44357" end="44388" title="Palace of the Count of Flanders" label="Palace of the Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429651" start="44397" end="44410" title="Egmont Palace" label="Egmont Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049291" start="44473" end="44506" title="Place des Martyrs, Brussels" label="Place des Martyrs/Martelaarsplein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491935" start="44566" end="44594" title="Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries" label="Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q600633" start="44661" end="44676" title="Congress Column" label="Congress Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q28485845" start="44696" end="44719" title="Brussels Stock Exchange" label="Brussels Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q850537" start="44744" end="44761" title="Law Courts of Brussels" label="Palace of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q740717" start="44794" end="44809" title="Joseph Poelaert" label="Joseph Poelaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479493" start="44814" end="44822" title="Eclecticism in architecture" label="eclectic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44980" end="44996" title="Brussels and the European Union#European Quarter" label="European Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101790" start="45006" end="45038" title="Cinquantenaire" label="Parc du Cinquantenaire/Jubelpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859916" start="45048" end="45063" title="Arcade du Cinquantenaire" label="memorial arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q730506" start="45091" end="45097" title="Laeken" label="Laeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542585" start="45103" end="45125" title="Royal Palace of Laeken" label="Royal Palace of Laeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644661" start="45162" end="45173" title="Royal Greenhouses of Laeken" label="greenhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q94564" start="45190" end="45213" title="Museums of the Far East" label="Museums of the Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864692" start="45268" end="45279" title="Art Nouveau in Brussels" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q49744" start="45327" end="45339" title="Victor Horta" label="Victor Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075644" start="45341" end="45352" title="Paul Hankar" label="Paul Hankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154083" start="45357" end="45375" title="Henry Van de Velde" label="Henry Van de Velde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12887" start="45424" end="45434" title="Schaerbeek" label="Schaerbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q192859" start="45436" end="45445" title="Etterbeek" label="Etterbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q208713" start="45447" end="45454" title="Ixelles" label="Ixelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q237674" start="45460" end="45472" title="Saint-Gilles, Belgium" label="Saint-Gilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426014" start="45565" end="45612" title="Major Town Houses of the Architect Victor Horta" label="Major Town Houses of the Architect Victor Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881679" start="45613" end="45625" title="Hôtel Tassel" label="Hôtel Tassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818182" start="45634" end="45652" title="Hôtel van Eetvelde" label="Hôtel van Eetvelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671145" start="45661" end="45673" title="Hôtel Solvay" label="Hôtel Solvay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995367" start="45689" end="45701" title="Horta Museum" label="Horta Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="45731" end="45737" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="45738" end="45757" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q239028" start="45823" end="45837" title="Stoclet Palace" label="Stoclet Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q84250" start="45872" end="45886" title="Josef Hoffmann" label="Josef Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878356" start="45946" end="45954" title="Art Deco in Brussels" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375164" start="46031" end="46046" title="Europa building" label="Europa building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285837" start="46053" end="46073" title="Centre for Fine Arts" label="Centre for Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324786" start="46086" end="46098" title="Villa Empain" label="Villa Empain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834825" start="46111" end="46130" title="Forest Town Hall" label="Town Hall of Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222873" start="46147" end="46162" title="Flagey Building" label="Flagey Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070882" start="46214" end="46252" title="Place Eugène Flagey" label="Place Eugène Flagey/Eugène Flageyplein"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="46306" end="46318" title="interwar era" label="interwar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q20853463" start="46368" end="46398" title="Church of St. John the Baptist, Molenbeek" label="Church of St. John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3581005" start="46427" end="46450" title="Church of St. Augustine, Forest" label="Church of St. Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q966571" start="46521" end="46534" title="neo-Byzantine" label="neo-Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q846006" start="46549" end="46577" title="Basilica of the Sacred Heart, Brussels" label="Basilica of the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q219244" start="46581" end="46591" title="Koekelberg" label="Koekelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q683879" start="46606" end="46643" title="List of largest church buildings in the world" label="largest churches by area in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q11346334" start="46653" end="46659" title="cupola" label="cupola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748873" start="46797" end="46819" title="Brussels International Exposition (1935)" label="1935 World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q155285" start="46827" end="46848" title="Heysel Plateau" label="Heysel/Heizel Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q994373" start="46911" end="46924" title="Brussels Expo" label="Brussels Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180901" start="46932" end="46939" title="Atomium" label="Atomium"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="46954" end="46963" title="Modern architecture" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q74035" start="47065" end="47072" title="Expo 58" label="Expo 58"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="47153" end="47157" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="47158" end="47165" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="47183" end="47192" title="unit cell" label="unit cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q523346" start="47238" end="47253" title="André Waterkeyn" label="André Waterkeyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895393" start="47310" end="47318" title="landmark" label="landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067006" start="47356" end="47367" title="Mini-Europe" label="Mini-Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q974968" start="47368" end="47382" title="miniature park" label="miniature park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126762" start="47400" end="47408" title="maquette" label="maquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636175" start="47544" end="47555" title="Madou Tower" label="Madou Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377122" start="47557" end="47569" title="Rogier Tower" label="Rogier Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363386" start="47571" end="47586" title="Proximus Towers" label="Proximus Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533638" start="47588" end="47601" title="Finance Tower" label="Finance Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570014" start="47607" end="47625" title="World Trade Center (Brussels)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="47711" end="47733" title="central business district" label="main business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407620" start="47739" end="47755" title="Northern Quarter (Brussels)" label="Northern Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q660792" start="47805" end="47835" title="Brussels-North railway station" label="Brussels-North railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816400" start="47841" end="47852" title="South Tower (Brussels)" label="South Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q800587" start="47875" end="47905" title="Brussels-South railway station" label="Brussels-South railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253269" start="47914" end="47941" title="List of tallest structures in Belgium" label="tallest building in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q997166" start="47958" end="47980" title="North–South connection" label="North–South connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="48051" end="48070" title="International Style" label="International Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q421992" start="48104" end="48118" title="Espace Léopold" label="Espace Léopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103761" start="48340" end="48366" title="Maison du Peuple, Brussels" label="Maison du Peuple/Volkshuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107161" start="48403" end="48417" title="Brusselisation" label="Brusselisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q616406" start="48471" end="48495" title="List of museums in Brussels" label="contains over 80 museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q377500" start="48501" end="48527" title="Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium" label="Royal Museums of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185042" start="48585" end="48604" title="Flemish painting" label="Flemish old masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q43270" start="48610" end="48617" title="Pieter Bruegel the Elder" label="Bruegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q68631" start="48619" end="48640" title="Rogier van der Weyden" label="Rogier van der Weyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q80442" start="48642" end="48655" title="Robert Campin" label="Robert Campin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150679" start="48657" end="48673" title="Anthony van Dyck" label="Anthony van Dyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q270658" start="48675" end="48689" title="Jacob Jordaens" label="Jacob Jordaens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="48695" end="48712" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q943581" start="48718" end="48733" title="Magritte Museum" label="Magritte Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="48793" end="48803" title="surrealist" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836" start="48811" end="48824" title="René Magritte" label="René Magritte"/>
<link wikidata="Q728437" start="48891" end="48904" title="BELvue Museum" label="BELvue Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q945059" start="48910" end="48942" title="Royal Museums of Art and History" label="Royal Museums of Art and History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395176" start="48952" end="49005" title="Royal Museum of the Armed Forces and Military History" label="Royal Museum of the Armed Forces and Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131318" start="49011" end="49037" title="Musical Instrument Museum, Brussels" label="Musical Instruments Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261451" start="49059" end="49070" title="Old England (department store)" label="Old England"/>
<link wikidata="Q164712" start="49834" end="49846" title="Paul Delvaux" label="Paul Delvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="49898" end="49909" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q49746" start="49920" end="49940" title="Michel de Ghelderode" label="Michel de Ghelderode"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="49972" end="49985" title="impressionist" label="impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q466668" start="49994" end="50003" title="Anna Boch" label="Anna Boch"/>
<link wikidata="Q463283" start="50039" end="50045" title="Les XX" label="Les XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394505" start="50104" end="50119" title="Léon Spilliaert" label="Léon Spilliaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="50155" end="50166" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q744536" start="50206" end="50212" title="The Adventures of Tintin" label="Tintin"/>
<link wikidata="Q137475" start="50214" end="50224" title="Lucky Luke" label="Lucky Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221" start="50226" end="50236" title="The Smurfs" label="The Smurfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130014" start="50238" end="50244" title="Spirou et Fantasio" label="Spirou"/>
<link wikidata="Q737153" start="50246" end="50252" title="Gaston (comics)" label="Gaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q841812" start="50254" end="50265" title="Marsupilami" label="Marsupilami"/>
<link wikidata="Q59990" start="50267" end="50285" title="Blake and Mortimer" label="Blake and Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q59991" start="50287" end="50300" title="Boule et Bill" label="Boule et Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q96323298" start="50305" end="50312" title="Cubitus" label="Cubitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882210" start="50318" end="50332" title="Belgian comics" label="Belgian comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="50424" end="50429" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364879" start="50459" end="50490" title="Brussels&amp;#x27; Comic Book Route" label="Brussels&amp;#x27; Comic Book Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q506298" start="50520" end="50534" title="Brussels Metro" label="Metro stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q815542" start="50564" end="50590" title="Belgian Comic Strip Center" label="Belgian Comic Strip Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49744" start="50774" end="50786" title="Victor Horta" label="Victor Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864692" start="50794" end="50805" title="Art Nouveau in Brussels" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516" start="50826" end="50836" title="street art" label="street art"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="50967" end="50982" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q551479" start="50999" end="51026" title="La Monnaie" label="Royal Theatre of La Monnaie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527925" start="51032" end="51050" title="Royal Park Theatre" label="Royal Park Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527923" start="51056" end="51082" title="Théâtre Royal des Galeries" label="Théâtre Royal des Galeries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51092" end="51103" title="Kaaitheater" label="Kaaitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200485" start="51146" end="51168" title="Kunstenfestivaldesarts" label="Kunstenfestivaldesarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q622671" start="51370" end="51391" title="King Baudouin Stadium" label="King Baudouin Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q622671" start="51521" end="51535" title="Heysel Stadium" label="Heysel Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285837" start="51541" end="51561" title="Centre for Fine Arts" label="Centre for Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910975" start="51717" end="51746" title="National Orchestra of Belgium" label="National Orchestra of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124312" start="51765" end="51792" title="Queen Elisabeth Competition" label="Queen Elisabeth Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="51797" end="51806" title="Classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222873" start="51919" end="51928" title="Le Flagey" label="Le Flagey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14622698" start="51955" end="51976" title="Brussels Philharmonic" label="Brussels Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560724" start="52008" end="52039" title="Forest National" label="Forest National/Vorst Nationaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973948" start="52045" end="52062" title="Ancienne Belgique" label="Ancienne Belgique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870444" start="52068" end="52098" title="Cirque Royal" label="Cirque Royal/Koninklijk Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220550" start="52104" end="52113" title="Le Botanique" label="Botanique"/>
<link wikidata="Q16668670" start="52118" end="52137" title="Palais 12" label="Palais 12/Paleis 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q28546669" start="52156" end="52168" title="Jazz Station" label="Jazz Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q272243" start="52172" end="52193" title="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode" label="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="52221" end="52225" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q23929903" start="52431" end="52444" title="Iris Festival" label="Iris Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q979103" start="52643" end="52657" title="Magritte Award" label="Magritte Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149196" start="52676" end="52694" title="Festival of Europe" label="Festival of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="52761" end="52775" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190144" start="52798" end="52818" title="Belgian National Day" label="Belgian National Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892311" start="52894" end="52907" title="Brussels Park" label="Brussels Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946581" start="52990" end="53011" title="Couleur Café Festival" label="Couleur Café Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="53027" end="53032" title="World music" label="world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529400" start="53037" end="53048" title="urban music" label="urban music"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53092" end="53116" title=":fr:Brussels Summer Festival" label="Brussels Summer Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074870" start="53156" end="53165" title="Midi Fair" label="Midi Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723575" start="53300" end="53305" title="Brussels–Charleroi Canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q584259" start="53377" end="53391" title="Zinneke Parade" label="Zinneke Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112794" start="53507" end="53520" title="Flower Carpet (Brussels)" label="Flower Carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q215429" start="53528" end="53539" title="Grand-Place" label="Grand-Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575593" start="53551" end="53564" title="European Heritage Days" label="Heritage Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470659" start="54026" end="54034" title="Ommegang of Brussels" label="Ommegang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959157" start="54087" end="54099" title="Joyous Entry" label="Joyous Entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="54103" end="54120" title="Emperor Charles V" label="Emperor Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="54133" end="54142" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="54275" end="54288" title="Saint Michael" label="Saint Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q267660" start="54293" end="54305" title="Saint Gudula" label="Saint Gudula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806852" start="54418" end="54425" title="Medieval pageant" label="pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q215429" start="54433" end="54444" title="Grand-Place" label="Grand-Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q877988" start="54486" end="54545" title="Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity" label="Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="54549" end="54555" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q21052026" start="54562" end="54569" title="Meyboom" label="Meyboom"/>
<link wikidata="Q76574" start="54642" end="54650" title="Maypole" label="May tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="54778" end="54783" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="54953" end="54981" title="intangible cultural heritage" label="intangible cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025375" start="55038" end="55091" title="Processional giants and dragons in Belgium and France" label="Processional giants and dragons in Belgium and France"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="55185" end="55191" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="55217" end="55228" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463486" start="55231" end="55246" title="Saint Verhaegen" label="Saint Verhaegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668371" start="55571" end="55584" title="Brusselian dialect" label="local dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903553" start="55624" end="55643" title="Royal Theatre Toone" label="Royal Theatre Toone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189888" start="55668" end="55678" title="marionette" label="marionette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224309" start="55780" end="55816" title="Le Mariage de Mademoiselle Beulemans" label="Le Mariage de Mademoiselle Beulemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911576" start="55872" end="55895" title="Bossemans et Coppenolle" label="Bossemans et Coppenolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q62271704" start="56041" end="56047" title="Belgian waffle" label="waffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964269" start="56053" end="56062" title="Belgian chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q152088" start="56068" end="56080" title="French fries" label="French fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q348229" start="56107" end="56111" title="Beer in Belgium" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q150463" start="56118" end="56133" title="Brussels sprout" label="Brussels sprout"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="56401" end="56411" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="56458" end="56466" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="56562" end="56567" title="cafés" label="cafés"/>
<link wikidata="Q866742" start="56569" end="56575" title="bistro" label="bistro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751429" start="56614" end="56623" title="Fast food restaurant" label="fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="56696" end="56709" title="coffee houses" label="coffee houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581509" start="56777" end="56786" title="brasserie" label="brasserie"/>
<link wikidata="Q792312" start="56858" end="56873" title="Belgian cuisine" label="Belgian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="56974" end="56988" title="French cuisine" label="French cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q375" start="57053" end="57068" title="Brussels waffle" label="Brussels waffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="57084" end="57091" title="mussels" label="mussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200514" start="57104" end="57129" title="moules frites" label="&amp;quot;moules-frites&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964269" start="57179" end="57188" title="Belgian chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290274" start="57193" end="57200" title="praline (Belgian chocolate)" label="praline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150967" start="57244" end="57258" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Or (chocolate)" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813801" start="57260" end="57267" title="Chocolatier Neuhaus" label="Neuhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80335" start="57269" end="57277" title="Leonidas (chocolate maker)" label="Leonidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q931084" start="57282" end="57288" title="Godiva Chocolatier" label="Godiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q305012" start="57359" end="57370" title="chocolatier" label="chocolatier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491935" start="57395" end="57423" title="Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries" label="Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814211" start="57434" end="57443" title="friteries" label="friteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q348229" start="57563" end="57575" title="Beer in Belgium" label="Belgian beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="57582" end="57605" title="spontaneously fermented" label="spontaneously fermented"/>
<link wikidata="Q526314" start="57606" end="57612" title="lambic" label="lambic"/>
<link wikidata="Q845920" start="57695" end="57700" title="Senne (river)" label="Senne"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="57723" end="57728" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756073" start="57765" end="57770" title="Kriek" label="Kriek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544599" start="57893" end="57907" title="Chicory" label="Belgian endive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924924" start="57935" end="57943" title="Blanching (horticulture)" label="blanched"/>
<link wikidata="Q739334" start="58000" end="58028" title="Botanical Garden of Brussels" label="Botanical Garden of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q272243" start="58032" end="58053" title="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode" label="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode"/>
<link wikidata="Q830036" start="58076" end="58084" title="shopping" label="shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129760" start="58131" end="58152" title="Rue Neuve (Brussels)" label="Rue Neuve/Nieuwstraat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12852" start="58211" end="58215" title="Meir, Antwerp" label="Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="58220" end="58227" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q188326" start="58310" end="58317" title="H&amp;amp;M" label="H&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q701338" start="58319" end="58326" title="C&amp;amp;A" label="C&amp;amp;A"/>
<link wikidata="Q147662" start="58328" end="58332" title="Zara (retailer)" label="Zara"/>
<link wikidata="Q137023" start="58334" end="58341" title="Primark" label="Primark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491935" start="58393" end="58421" title="Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries" label="Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399071" start="58745" end="58755" title="Namur Gate" label="Namur Gate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58881" end="58888" title="Ixelles#Matongé" label="Matongé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135569" start="58923" end="58938" title="African fashion" label="African fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068998" start="58965" end="58989" title="Avenue Louise/Louizalaan" label="Avenue Louise/Louizalaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q385870" start="59335" end="59346" title="flea market" label="flea market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217006" start="59392" end="59425" title="Place du Jeu de Balle" label="Place du Jeu de Balle/Vossenplein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986430" start="59434" end="59451" title="Marollen" label="Marolles/Marollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q949445" start="59504" end="59516" title="Sablon (Brussels)" label="Sablon/Zavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="59556" end="59563" title="antique" label="antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q800587" start="59608" end="59630" title="Brussels-South station" label="Brussels-South station"/>
<link wikidata="Q838185" start="59762" end="59773" title="Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium" label="Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824309" start="59780" end="59785" title="ADEPS" label="ADEPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182976" start="59983" end="59988" title="Bloso" label="BLOSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q622671" start="59996" end="60017" title="King Baudouin Stadium" label="King Baudouin Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="60112" end="60120" title="Belgium national football team" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q335062" start="60125" end="60136" title="Belgium national rugby union team" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q182386" start="60165" end="60205" title="1972 UEFA European Football Championship" label="1972 UEFA European Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="60231" end="60247" title="Euro 2000" label="the 2000 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068861" start="60322" end="60345" title="1985 European Cup Final" label="1985 European Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426540" start="60463" end="60481" title="Memorial Van Damme" label="Memorial Van Damme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="60523" end="60538" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q301839" start="60573" end="60587" title="Diamond League" label="Diamond League"/>
<link wikidata="Q997129" start="60630" end="60647" title="Brussels Marathon" label="Brussels Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830720" start="60656" end="60673" title="20 km of Brussels" label="20 km of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q187528" start="60731" end="60748" title="R.S.C. Anderlecht" label="R.S.C. Anderlecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q262326" start="60763" end="60792" title="Constant Vanden Stock Stadium" label="Constant Vanden Stock Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12886" start="60796" end="60806" title="Anderlecht" label="Anderlecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q216022" start="60860" end="60878" title="Belgian Pro League" label="Belgian Pro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q196160" start="61017" end="61037" title="Union Saint-Gilloise" label="Union Saint-Gilloise"/>
<link wikidata="Q237674" start="61133" end="61145" title="Saint-Gilles, Belgium" label="Saint-Gilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q72946" start="61169" end="61175" title="Forest, Belgium" label="Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979061" start="61214" end="61243" title="RWDM47" label="Racing White Daring Molenbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q180775" start="61254" end="61274" title="Molenbeek-Saint-Jean" label="Molenbeek-Saint-Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q784311" start="61477" end="61503" title="Royal White Star Bruxelles" label="Royal White Star Bruxelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191556" start="61517" end="61544" title="Crossing Club de Schaerbeek" label="Crossing Club de Schaerbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215841" start="61765" end="61777" title="cycling race" label="cycling race"/>
<link wikidata="Q510854" start="61820" end="61844" title="Brussels Cycling Classic" label="Brussels Cycling Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q962393" start="61907" end="61919" title="classic cycle races" label="semi classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609" start="61920" end="61933" title="Road bicycle racing" label="bicycle races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796048" start="62009" end="62029" title="Six Days of Brussels" label="Six Days of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350538" start="62100" end="62122" title="Grand Prix Eddy Merckx" label="Grand Prix Eddy Merckx"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="62262" end="62269" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="62334" end="62348" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207288" start="62497" end="62502" title="craft" label="craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345368" start="62527" end="62544" title="Cantillon Brewery" label="Cantillon Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q526314" start="62548" end="62554" title="lambic" label="lambic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="62666" end="62669" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="62744" end="62758" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q193083" start="62849" end="62855" title="Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics" label="NUTS 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="62954" end="62963" title="commuters" label="commuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="63421" end="63429" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="63586" end="63600" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="63748" end="63760" title="professional" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772346" start="64083" end="64113" title="Global Financial Centres Index" label="Global Financial Centres Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q28485845" start="64175" end="64192" title="Euronext Brussels" label="Euronext Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="64218" end="64232" title="stock exchange" label="stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q842108" start="64233" end="64241" title="Euronext" label="Euronext"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385849" start="64254" end="64266" title="Paris Bourse" label="Paris Bourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415561" start="64268" end="64289" title="Lisbon Stock Exchange" label="Lisbon Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q478720" start="64294" end="64318" title="Amsterdam Stock Exchange" label="Amsterdam Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q223371" start="64334" end="64352" title="stock market index" label="stock market index"/>
<link wikidata="Q795831" start="64360" end="64365" title="BEL20" label="BEL20"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="64499" end="64508" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="64595" end="64613" title="public broadcaster" label="public broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190356" start="64614" end="64618" title="RTBF" label="RTBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858" start="64658" end="64661" title="Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroeporganisatie" label="VRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q23934497" start="64723" end="64728" title="Bruzz" label="Bruzz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892639" start="64766" end="64770" title="BeTV (Belgium)" label="BeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q474349" start="64800" end="64807" title="RTL-TVI" label="RTL-TVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176298" start="64812" end="64815" title="VTM (TV channel)" label="VTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q690672" start="64880" end="64887" title="Le Soir" label="Le Soir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798898" start="64889" end="64897" title="La Libre" label="La Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180166" start="64899" end="64908" title="De Morgen" label="De Morgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="64917" end="64928" title="news agency" label="news agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q815453" start="64929" end="64934" title="Belga (news agency)" label="Belga"/>
<link wikidata="Q49845" start="64980" end="64986" title="Mail" label="postal"/>
<link wikidata="Q740553" start="64995" end="65000" title="bpost" label="bpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005282" start="65066" end="65074" title="Proximus" label="Proximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038997" start="65076" end="65090" title="Orange Belgium" label="Orange Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q616340" start="65095" end="65102" title="Telenet (Belgium)" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25226673" start="65320" end="65338" title="The Brussels Times" label="The Brussels Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720575" start="65367" end="65379" title="The Bulletin (Brussels weekly)" label="The Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="65474" end="65486" title="multilingual" label="multilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294864" start="65487" end="65499" title="Pan-European identity" label="pan-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q8478" start="65513" end="65521" title="Euronews" label="Euronews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="65618" end="65630" title="universities" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515214" start="65659" end="65681" title="Royal Military Academy (Belgium)" label="Royal Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="65865" end="65880" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q574606" start="65893" end="65922" title="Université libre de Bruxelles" label="Université libre de Bruxelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q612665" start="66028" end="66054" title="Vrije Universiteit Brussel" label="Vrije Universiteit Brussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="66066" end="66080" title="Dutch-speaking" label="Dutch-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q20754971" start="66218" end="66245" title="Free University of Brussels (1834–1969)" label="Free University of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391752" start="66399" end="66431" title="Saint-Louis University, Brussels" label="Saint-Louis University, Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587903" start="66535" end="66548" title="human science" label="human science"/>
<link wikidata="Q239" start="66607" end="66623" title="City of Brussels" label="City of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q208713" start="66628" end="66635" title="Ixelles" label="Ixelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q378134" start="66731" end="66761" title="Université catholique de Louvain" label="Catholic University of Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q60538019" start="67010" end="67036" title="UCLouvain Bruxelles Woluwe" label="UCLouvain Bruxelles Woluwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55596818" start="67068" end="67137" title="Faculty of Architecture, Architectural Engineering and Urban Planning" label="Faculty of Architecture, Architectural Engineering and Urban Planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q833670" start="67181" end="67211" title="Katholieke Universiteit Leuven" label="Katholieke Universiteit Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979801" start="67394" end="67434" title="Brussels School of International Studies" label="Brussels School of International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q336968" start="67641" end="67660" title="Conservatoire royal de Bruxelles" label="Conservatoire Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="67669" end="67683" title="Dutch-speaking" label="Dutch-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q336968" start="67700" end="67725" title="Koninklijk Conservatorium (Brussel)" label="Koninklijk Conservatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="67850" end="67875" title="French-speaking Community" label="French-speaking Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="67883" end="67900" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799688" start="68117" end="68149" title="International School of Brussels" label="International School of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971004" start="68202" end="68228" title="British School of Brussels" label="British School of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377519" start="68243" end="68258" title="European School" label="European School"/>
<link wikidata="Q748720" start="68331" end="68346" title="EU institutions" label="EU institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377519" start="68392" end="68407" title="European School" label="European School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="68506" end="68515" title="libraries" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q383931" start="68726" end="68750" title="Royal Library of Belgium" label="Royal Library of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q22806" start="68764" end="68780" title="national library" label="national library"/>
<link wikidata="Q523581" start="68918" end="68923" title="Fétis" label="Fétis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865794" start="69047" end="69070" title="Mont des Arts" label="Mont des Arts/Kunstberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q800588" start="69101" end="69116" title="Brussels Central Station" label="Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q574606" start="69203" end="69232" title="Université libre de Bruxelles" label="Université libre de Bruxelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q612665" start="69247" end="69273" title="Vrije Universiteit Brussel" label="Vrije Universiteit Brussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391752" start="69529" end="69561" title="Saint-Louis University, Brussels" label="Saint-Louis University, Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q378134" start="69570" end="69600" title="Université catholique de Louvain" label="Catholic University of Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853291" start="69727" end="69739" title="List of universities in Belgium" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600910" start="69869" end="69906" title="National Fund for Scientific Research" label="National Fund for Scientific Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848835" start="69919" end="70000" title="Institute for the Encouragement of Scientific Research and Innovation of Brussels" label="Institute for the Encouragement of Scientific Research and Innovation of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339384" start="70014" end="70065" title="Royal Academies for Science and the Arts of Belgium" label="Royal Academies for Science and the Arts of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822959" start="70082" end="70125" title="Belgian Academy Council of Applied Sciences" label="Belgian Academy Council of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q222297" start="70228" end="70271" title="Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences" label="Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423861" start="70284" end="70296" title="Leopold Park" label="Leopold Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="70359" end="70367" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="70396" end="70402" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q130980" start="70413" end="70422" title="Iguanodon" label="Iguanodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391652" start="70457" end="70468" title="Planetarium (Belgium)" label="Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421339" start="70476" end="70504" title="Royal Observatory of Belgium" label="Royal Observatory of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328260" start="70538" end="70575" title="Belgian Federal Science Policy Office" label="Belgian Federal Science Policy Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q155285" start="70585" end="70599" title="Heysel Plateau" label="Heysel Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q730506" start="70603" end="70609" title="Laeken" label="Laeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q507443" start="70694" end="70708" title="Pharmaceutical industry" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="70713" end="70724" title="health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="70760" end="70773" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976594" start="70916" end="70928" title="science park" label="science park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813474" start="70996" end="71016" title="university hospitals" label="university hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387974" start="71020" end="71037" title="military hospital" label="military hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322300" start="71105" end="71125" title="Languages of Belgium" label="its bilingual nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q838185" start="71308" end="71330" title="Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium" label="linguistic communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q180481" start="71717" end="71726" title="ambulance" label="ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872519" start="71907" end="71921" title="Brussels buses" label="Brussels buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q778680" start="71923" end="71928" title="Brussels trams" label="trams"/>
<link wikidata="Q506298" start="71934" end="71939" title="Brussels Metro" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631655" start="71967" end="72007" title="Brussels Intercommunal Transport Company" label="Brussels Intercommunal Transport Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q536120" start="72069" end="72077" title="Infrabel" label="Infrabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q524255" start="72141" end="72176" title="National Railway Company of Belgium" label="National Railway Company of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="72259" end="72275" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431012" start="72280" end="72312" title="Brussels South Charleroi Airport" label="Brussels South Charleroi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567864" start="72355" end="72371" title="Port of Brussels" label="Port of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9337" start="72593" end="72600" title="Flemish Region" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="72605" end="72612" title="Wallonia" label="Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q570917" start="72710" end="72723" title="Brussels Ring" label="Brussels Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972382" start="72917" end="72922" title="INRIX" label="INRIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="73093" end="73109" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28898" start="73157" end="73165" title="Zaventem" label="Zaventem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431012" start="73425" end="73457" title="Brussels South Charleroi Airport" label="Brussels South Charleroi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q900761" start="73470" end="73479" title="Gosselies" label="Gosselies"/>
<link wikidata="Q81046" start="73503" end="73512" title="Charleroi" label="Charleroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="73514" end="73522" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q651419" start="73635" end="73653" title="Melsbroek Air Base" label="Melsbroek Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q984888" start="73666" end="73680" title="Steenokkerzeel" label="Steenokkerzeel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567864" start="73898" end="73914" title="Port of Brussels" label="Port of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117579" start="74092" end="74123" title="Brussels–Scheldt Maritime Canal" label="Brussels–Scheldt Maritime Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="74187" end="74194" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q37620" start="74203" end="74210" title="Scheldt" label="Scheldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723575" start="74517" end="74541" title="Brussels–Charleroi Canal" label="Brussels–Charleroi Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129" start="74689" end="74696" title="Hainaut (province)" label="Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="74698" end="74706" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q912618" start="74792" end="74806" title="Canal inclined plane" label="inclined plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q99464" start="74810" end="74820" title="Ronquières inclined plane" label="Ronquières"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671324" start="74838" end="74857" title="Strépy-Bracquegnies" label="Strépy-Bracquegnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q800587" start="75178" end="75192" title="Brussels-South railway station" label="Brussels-South"/>
<link wikidata="Q800588" start="75194" end="75210" title="Brussels-Central" label="Brussels-Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q660792" start="75215" end="75229" title="Brussels-North railway station" label="Brussels-North"/>
<link wikidata="Q156013" start="75350" end="75358" title="Eurostar" label="Eurostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="75374" end="75388" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="75393" end="75402" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q466985" start="75406" end="75412" title="Thalys" label="Thalys"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="75477" end="75484" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q466985" start="75488" end="75494" title="Thalys" label="Thalys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="75515" end="75524" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="75539" end="75542" title="Intercity Express" label="ICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q997166" start="75618" end="75640" title="North–South connection" label="North–South connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q239" start="75847" end="75863" title="City of Brussels" label="City of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936291" start="75894" end="75903" title="Bockstael railway station" label="Bockstael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627408" start="75905" end="75920" title="Brussels-Chapel railway station" label="Brussels-Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201793" start="75922" end="75939" title="Brussels-Congress railway station" label="Brussels-Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q800583" start="75941" end="75960" title="Brussels-Luxembourg railway station" label="Brussels-Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q800589" start="75962" end="75978" title="Schuman station" label="Brussels-Schuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096078" start="75980" end="75993" title="Brussels-West station" label="Brussels-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q736902" start="75995" end="76000" title="Haren railway station (Brussels)" label="Haren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697132" start="76002" end="76013" title="Haren-South railway station" label="Haren-South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628257" start="76018" end="76025" title="Simonis metro station" label="Simonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095968" start="76087" end="76108" title="Berchem-Sainte-Agathe railway station" label="Berchem-Sainte-Agathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932552" start="76110" end="76119" title="Boitsfort railway station" label="Boitsfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100626" start="76121" end="76129" title="Boondael railway station" label="Boondael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096028" start="76131" end="76145" title="Bordet railway station" label="Bordet (Evere)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723162" start="76147" end="76156" title="Etterbeek railway station" label="Etterbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969853" start="76158" end="76163" title="Evere railway station" label="Evere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479446" start="76165" end="76176" title="Forest-East railway station" label="Forest-East"/>
<link wikidata="Q952542" start="76178" end="76190" title="Forest-South railway station" label="Forest-South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745256" start="76192" end="76197" title="Jette railway station" label="Jette"/>
<link wikidata="Q654988" start="76199" end="76218" title="Meiser railway station" label="Meiser (Schaerbeek)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331977" start="76220" end="76237" title="Moensberg railway station" label="Moensberg (Uccle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823157" start="76239" end="76256" title="Saint-Job railway station" label="Saint-Job (Uccle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q801418" start="76258" end="76268" title="Schaerbeek railway station" label="Schaarbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095852" start="76270" end="76284" title="Uccle-Calevoet railway station" label="Uccle-Calevoet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478426" start="76286" end="76298" title="Uccle-Stalle railway station" label="Uccle-Stalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141073" start="76337" end="76343" title="Merode station" label="Merode"/>
<link wikidata="Q739090" start="76348" end="76357" title="Watermael railway station" label="Watermael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631655" start="76387" end="76427" title="Brussels Intercommunal Transport Company" label="Brussels Intercommunal Transport Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="76453" end="76469" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q614819" start="76649" end="76656" title="De Lijn" label="De Lijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="76668" end="76676" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q366922" start="76685" end="76688" title="TEC (transport)" label="TEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="76700" end="76708" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506298" start="76747" end="76761" title="Brussels Metro" label="Brussels Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q222434" start="76823" end="76831" title="Brussels premetro" label="premetro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="76896" end="76909" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364889" start="76929" end="76936" title="Antwerp Pre-metro" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682845" start="76941" end="76950" title="Métro Léger de Charleroi" label="Charleroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="76963" end="76973" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345228" start="77102" end="77104" title="Brussels Metro line 1" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826676" start="77106" end="77108" title="Brussels Metro line 2" label="M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q957143" start="77110" end="77112" title="Brussels Metro line 5" label="M5"/>
<link wikidata="Q668977" start="77118" end="77120" title="Brussels Metro line 6" label="M6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763333" start="77224" end="77266" title="List of Brussels Metro stations" label="69 metro and &amp;quot;premetro&amp;quot; stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834952" start="77294" end="77312" title="Transport in Brussels" label="means of transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="77334" end="77349" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q524255" start="77358" end="77393" title="National Railway Company of Belgium" label="National Railway Company of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="77474" end="77481" title="Flanders" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q614819" start="77482" end="77489" title="De Lijn" label="De Lijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="77494" end="77501" title="Wallonia" label="Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q366922" start="77502" end="77505" title="TEC (transport)" label="TEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872519" start="77534" end="77537" title="Brussels buses" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q778680" start="77542" end="77554" title="Brussels trams" label="tram network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527775" start="77651" end="77653" title="Brussels tram route 4" label="T4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239018" start="77655" end="77657" title="Brussels tram route 7" label="T7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523530" start="78350" end="78379" title="Place de la Bourse, Brussels" label="Place de la Bourse/Beursplein"/>
<link wikidata="Q84446340" start="78596" end="78624" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="79685" end="79691" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358919" start="79794" end="79826" title="Community bicycle program" label="public bicycle-sharing programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510744" start="79885" end="79891" title="Villo!" label="Villo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q215429" start="80398" end="80409" title="Grand-Place" label="Grand-Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q610373" start="80476" end="80496" title="covering of the Senne" label="over the river Senne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80498" end="80517" title="Fortifications of Brussels#Construction of the Small Ring" label="over the city walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972382" start="80711" end="80716" title="INRIX" label="INRIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575047" start="80804" end="80806" title="N1 road (Belgium)" label="N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="80813" end="80818" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444960" start="80821" end="80823" title="N2 road (Belgium)" label="N2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309" start="80830" end="80840" title="Maastricht" label="Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q940734" start="80843" end="80845" title="N3 road (Belgium)" label="N3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="80852" end="80858" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506981" start="80861" end="80863" title="N4 road (Belgium)" label="N4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="80871" end="80881" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024191" start="80884" end="80886" title="N5 road (Belgium)" label="N5"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="80893" end="80898" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q138648" start="80910" end="80918" title="Maubeuge" label="Maubeuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="80931" end="80936" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185953" start="80939" end="80941" title="N8 road (Belgium)" label="N8"/>
<link wikidata="Q465545" start="80948" end="80956" title="Koksijde" label="Koksijde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="80972" end="80978" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375828" start="81143" end="81161" title="European route E19" label="European route E19"/>
<link wikidata="Q327162" start="81176" end="81179" title="European route E40" label="E40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920250" start="81197" end="81201" title="E411" label="E411"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="81240" end="81256" title="orbital motorway" label="orbital motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q570917" start="81311" end="81315" title="Brussels Ring" label="Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q18435290" start="81476" end="81484" title="Pentagon (Brussels)" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289679" start="81527" end="81537" title="Small Ring, Brussels" label="Small Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q83529852" start="81636" end="81660" title="Second walls of Brussels" label="second set of city walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826676" start="81693" end="81705" title="Brussels Metro line 2" label="Metro line 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q105360174" start="81761" end="81779" title="Central Boulevards of Brussels" label="central boulevards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749083" start="81916" end="81928" title="Greater ring (Brussels)" label="Greater Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q730506" start="81993" end="81999" title="Laeken" label="Laeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q203312" start="82003" end="82008" title="Uccle" label="Uccle"/>
<link wikidata="Q506298" start="82050" end="82064" title="Brussels Metro" label="Brussels Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q203312" start="82160" end="82169" title="Uccle" label="Saint-Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q239" start="82490" end="82506" title="City of Brussels" label="City of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q208713" start="82511" end="82518" title="Ixelles" label="Ixelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q272272" start="82541" end="82562" title="Berchem-Sainte-Agathe" label="Berchem-Sainte-Agathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q366552" start="82564" end="82573" title="Ganshoren" label="Ganshoren"/>
<link wikidata="Q241918" start="82575" end="82580" title="Jette" label="Jette"/>
<link wikidata="Q219244" start="82582" end="82592" title="Koekelberg" label="Koekelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q180775" start="82597" end="82617" title="Molenbeek-Saint-Jean" label="Molenbeek-Saint-Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12886" start="82632" end="82642" title="Anderlecht" label="Anderlecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q72946" start="82644" end="82650" title="Forest, Belgium" label="Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q237674" start="82655" end="82667" title="Saint-Gilles, Belgium" label="Saint-Gilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q272228" start="82712" end="82721" title="Auderghem" label="Auderghem"/>
<link wikidata="Q203312" start="82723" end="82728" title="Uccle" label="Uccle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272262" start="82733" end="82752" title="Watermael-Boitsfort" label="Watermael-Boitsfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q192859" start="82772" end="82781" title="Etterbeek" label="Etterbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q211764" start="82783" end="82803" title="Woluwe-Saint-Lambert" label="Woluwe-Saint-Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q242393" start="82808" end="82827" title="Woluwe-Saint-Pierre" label="Woluwe-Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q321718" start="82845" end="82850" title="Evere" label="Evere"/>
<link wikidata="Q272243" start="82852" end="82873" title="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode" label="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode"/>
<link wikidata="Q12887" start="82878" end="82888" title="Schaerbeek" label="Schaerbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="83106" end="83118" title="fire service" label="fire service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195942" start="83196" end="83208" title="fire station" label="fire station"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="83296" end="83307" title="firefighter" label="firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412012" start="83775" end="83792" title="peri-urbanisation" label="peri-urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18435290" start="83886" end="83894" title="Pentagon (Brussels)" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254455" start="84138" end="84151" title="Sonian Forest" label="Sonian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84217" end="84232" title="Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium#Regions" label="Belgian regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="84263" end="84269" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="84270" end="84289" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q156011" start="84357" end="84426" title="Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe" label="Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="84497" end="84504" title="sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="84535" end="84542" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="84560" end="84567" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="84577" end="84583" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="84595" end="84600" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="84616" end="84626" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="84638" end="84646" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="84656" end="84660" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="84672" end="84677" title="Macao" label="Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="84687" end="84693" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="84703" end="84712" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="84725" end="84731" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="84750" end="84766" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2922315" start="84799" end="84820" title="Bourgeois of Brussels" label="Bourgeois of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983389" start="84823" end="84839" title="Nazi ghost train" label="Nazi ghost train"/>
<link wikidata="Q481408" start="84843" end="84873" title="Seven Noble Houses of Brussels" label="Seven Noble Houses of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577912" start="84876" end="84897" title="Sculpture in Brussels" label="Sculpture in Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979799" start="84900" end="84936" title="Brussels Regional Investment Company" label="Brussels Regional Investment Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412864" start="84939" end="85002" title="European Network of Information Centres for the Performing Arts" label="European Network of Information Centres for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809955" start="85005" end="85046" title="List of urban areas in the European Union" label="List of urban areas in the European Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3710" wikidata="Q205725" url="?curid=3710" title="Be">
<text>BE or be may refer to:
==Linguistics==
* Be (Cyrillic), a letter of the Cyrillic alphabet
* &quot;be&quot; (interjection), in several languages
* Be languages or Ong Be, a pair of languages of northern Hainan province, China
* Belarusian language, ISO 639-1 code: be
* Black English, or African-American Vernacular English, an English dialect
* British English, abbr. BE, usually used in contrast to AE (American English)
* &quot;To be&quot;, the English copular verb

==Music==
===Albums===
* &quot;Be&quot; (Beady Eye album), 2013
* &quot;Be&quot; (Casiopea album), 1998
* &quot;Be&quot; (Common album), 2005
* &quot;BE&quot; (Pain of Salvation album), 2004
** &quot;BE (Original Stage Production)&quot;, a 2005 live album by Pain of Salvation
* Be (BTS album), 2020

===Songs===
* &quot;Be&quot; (Neil Diamond song), a 1973 single
* &quot;Be&quot;, a song by Jessica Simpson from &quot;In This Skin&quot;
* &quot;Be&quot;, a song by Lenny Kravitz from &quot;Let Love Rule&quot;
* &quot;Be&quot;, a song by Slade from &quot;Whatever Happened to Slade&quot;

==Organisations==
* Be Inc., a former US software company (1990–2001) and developer of the Be Operating System (BeOS)
* Be Unlimited, a former UK Internet service provider (2003–2014)
* Badminton Europe, the governing body of badminton in Europe
* British Eventing, the British governing body for the equestrian sport of eventing
* BearingPoint (former stock ticker symbol BE)
* or Left Bloc, a Portuguese political party
* Bob Evans Restaurants, an American restaurant chain

==Places==
* Bè, a neighborhood in Togo
* Belgium (ISO 3166-1 and FIPS 10-4 country code: BE)
* Berlin, a state of Germany
* Bermuda (World Meteorological Organization territory code: BE)
* Canton of Bern, a canton of Switzerland

==Science and technology==
* Base excess (BE), excess or deficit in the amount of base in the blood
* Beryllium, symbol Be, a chemical element

===Computing===
* .be, the country code top-level domain for Belgium
* Backup Exec, backup and recovery software from Veritas Software
* Big-endian, a system that stores the most significant byte of a word at the smallest memory address
* BeOS, an operating system by Be

===Physics===
* Baumé scale (°Bé), a density scale
* Be star, in astronomy, a B-type star
* Bejan number (Be), in thermodynamics and fluid mechanics

==Transportation==
* BE Be Electric, Electric Car Manufacturing Company
* Baltimore and Eastern Railroad Company (B&amp;E), US
* Beriev (design office prefix: Be), a Russian aircraft manufacturer
* Blue Engines (prefix: BE), the rocket engines from Blue Origin
* BE, then IATA code of Flybe (2022–2023), former English airline
* BE, then IATA code of Flybe (1979–2020), former English airline
* BE, then IATA code of British European Airways (1946–1974), former British airline

==Other uses==
* Bé (footballer), Portuguese footballer
* Bachelor of Engineering, an academic degree
* Bahá&#x27;í Era, in timekeeping
* Buddhist Era, in timekeeping

==See also==

* B (disambiguation)
* Bay (disambiguation)
* BBE (disambiguation)
* Bebe (disambiguation)
* Bee (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205725" start="0" end="2" title="Be" label="BE"/>
<link wikidata="Q205725" start="6" end="8" title="Be" label="be"/>
<link wikidata="Q16291" start="41" end="54" title="Be (Cyrillic)" label="Be (Cyrillic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267408" start="92" end="121" title="Be (interjection)" label="&amp;quot;be&amp;quot; (interjection)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093790" start="146" end="158" title="Be languages" label="Be languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="227" end="246" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002" start="287" end="322" title="African-American Vernacular English" label="African-American Vernacular English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="345" end="360" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="430" end="435" title="Copula (linguistics)#English" label="To be"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965815" start="494" end="526" title="Be (Beady Eye album)" label="&amp;quot;Be&amp;quot; (Beady Eye album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875465" start="535" end="566" title="Be (Casiopea album)" label="&amp;quot;Be&amp;quot; (Casiopea album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q812804" start="575" end="604" title="Be (Common album)" label="&amp;quot;Be&amp;quot; (Common album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603341" start="613" end="653" title="BE (Pain of Salvation album)" label="&amp;quot;BE&amp;quot; (Pain of Salvation album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835507" start="669" end="699" title="BE (Original Stage Production)" label="BE (Original Stage Production)"/>
<link wikidata="Q99671345" start="748" end="762" title="Be (BTS album)" label="Be (BTS album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413229" start="784" end="818" title="Be (Neil Diamond song)" label="&amp;quot;Be&amp;quot; (Neil Diamond song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565432" start="889" end="901" title="In This Skin" label="In This Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q998400" start="961" end="974" title="Let Love Rule (Lenny Kravitz album)" label="Let Love Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234537" start="1026" end="1052" title="Whatever Happened to Slade" label="Whatever Happened to Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q791615" start="1080" end="1087" title="Be Inc." label="Be Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4875608" start="1180" end="1192" title="Be Unlimited" label="Be Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q799611" start="1246" end="1262" title="Badminton Europe" label="Badminton Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969948" start="1308" end="1324" title="British Eventing" label="British Eventing"/>
<link wikidata="Q813034" start="1392" end="1404" title="BearingPoint" label="BearingPoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932386" start="1484" end="1505" title="Bob Evans Restaurants" label="Bob Evans Restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q597653" start="1550" end="1552" title="Bè" label="Bè"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1579" end="1586" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1633" end="1639" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="1662" end="1669" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11911" start="1727" end="1741" title="Canton of Bern" label="Canton of Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q809826" start="1797" end="1808" title="Base excess" label="Base excess"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="1870" end="1879" title="Beryllium" label="Beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q39773" start="1930" end="1933" title=".be" label=".be"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291630" start="1983" end="1994" title="Backup Exec" label="Backup Exec"/>
<link wikidata="Q339338" start="2049" end="2059" title="Big-endian" label="Big-endian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62563" start="2151" end="2155" title="BeOS" label="BeOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q899679" start="2200" end="2211" title="Baumé scale" label="Baumé scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q812800" start="2237" end="2244" title="Be star" label="Be star"/>
<link wikidata="Q110800801" start="2276" end="2288" title="Bejan number" label="Bejan number"/>
<link wikidata="Q29469156" start="2408" end="2446" title="Baltimore and Eastern Railroad Company" label="Baltimore and Eastern Railroad Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q642622" start="2463" end="2469" title="Beriev" label="Beriev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2532" end="2543" title="Blue Origin#Rocket engines" label="Blue Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q112262317" start="2619" end="2636" title="Flybe (2022–2023)" label="Flybe (2022–2023)"/>
<link wikidata="Q283790" start="2685" end="2702" title="Flybe (1979–2020)" label="Flybe (1979–2020)"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="2751" end="2775" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q82776202" start="2830" end="2845" title="Bé (footballer)" label="Bé (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q798132" start="2871" end="2894" title="Bachelor of Engineering" label="Bachelor of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q373037" start="2917" end="2932" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Era" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q370752" start="2951" end="2963" title="Buddhist Era" label="Buddhist Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q27297" start="2997" end="3015" title="B (disambiguation)" label="B (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q293252" start="3018" end="3038" title="Bay (disambiguation)" label="Bay (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q358720" start="3041" end="3061" title="BBE (disambiguation)" label="BBE (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q394507" start="3064" end="3085" title="Bebe (disambiguation)" label="Bebe (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q294649" start="3088" end="3108" title="Bee (disambiguation)" label="Bee (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3711" wikidata="Q224065" url="?curid=3711" title="Bell (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[bell]] is a percussion instrument, usually cup-shaped.

Bell may also refer to:
==Sound and music==

* Bell (wind instrument), a part of a wind instrument
* Bell cymbal, a type of cymbal, tending to be thick and uniformly so, and small
* Bell effect, a musical technique
* Cymbal bell, the most central part of a cymbal

==Signals==
* Bell, a signal from an engine order telegraph, a communications device used on a ship or submarine
* Alarm bell, used to alert people of a fire or burglary detected or, as part of a traditional alarm clock, to awaken or remind
* Church bell, indicating when to go to church
* Doorbell, a signaling device to alert residents to visitors
* Division bell, used in a parliament to call members to a vote
* Last call bell, a signal that a bar is closing soon
* School bell, a signal used for transitions during a school day
* Ship&#x27;s bell, a signal for marking time on a ship

==People==
* Bell (surname), a list of people with the surname Bell
** Alexander Graham Bell (1847–1922), inventor of the telephone
** Jocelyn Bell Burnell (1943-), astrophysicist who discovered pulsars 
** John Stewart Bell (1928–1990), originator of Bell&#x27;s theorem in quantum physics
* bell hooks (Gloria Jean Watkins, 1952–2021), American author, academic, and activist
* Bell (singer), Swedish singer and songwriter

==Places==
=== Australia ===
* Bell, New South Wales
* Bell, Queensland, a town in the Western Downs Region

===Canada===
* Bell Island (Newfoundland and Labrador)
* Bell Peninsula, Nunavut
* Bell River (Quebec)

===Germany===
* Bell, Mayen-Koblenz, Germany, a municipality
* Bell, Rhein-Hunsrück, Germany, a municipality

===United States===
* Bell, California
* Bell, Florida
* Bell, Illinois
* Bell, Oklahoma
* Bell, Wisconsin
* Bell Canyon, California
* Bell City, Missouri
* Bell County, Kentucky
* Bell County, Texas
* Bell Township, Pennsylvania (disambiguation)

===Other places===
* Bell (crater), a crater on the Moon
* Bell, South Africa
* Bell Creek (disambiguation)

==Businesses==
===Telecommunications===
* Bell Canada, a Canadian telecommunications company
* Bell Labs, a research &amp; development organization founded by AT&amp;T, now owned by Nokia
* Bell System, the organization that provided telephone service in the United States until 1984
* Bell Telephone Company, founded in 1877 by the family of Alexander Graham Bell

===Other businesses===
* Bell Aircraft, a former American aircraft manufacturer 
** Bell Textron, formerly Bell Helicopter
* Bell ID, a Dutch software company 
* Bell Inn, Enfield, London, England
* Bell Records, a record label
* Bell Sports, a helmet manufacturer
* Bell (St. Paul&#x27;s Churchyard), a historical bookseller in London
* Bell&#x27;s Brewery, based in Michigan, U.S.
* Bell&#x27;s whisky, a brand of Scotch

==Science and technology==
* Bell, the body of a jellyfish
* Bell character, in computing, a device control code
* Bell number, in mathematics
* Bell polynomials, in mathematics
* Bell state, in quantum information science
* Diving bell, a cable-suspended underwater airtight chamber

==Transportation==
* Bell station (disambiguation)
* SS &quot;Empire Bell&quot;, a ship
* USS &quot;Bell&quot;, the name of two U.S. Navy ships
* Bell (cyclecar), made in 1920 
* Bell maneuver, a version of the tailslide in aerobatics

==Other uses==
* Bell (fictional currency), in the game &quot;Animal Crossing&quot;
* Bell (typeface)

==See also==

* Bel (disambiguation)
* Bell High School (disambiguation)
* Bell House (disambiguation)
* Bell Lake (disambiguation)
* Bell pepper
* Bell, Book &amp; Candle (disambiguation)
* Belle (disambiguation)
* Bells (disambiguation)
* The Bell (disambiguation)
* The Bells (disambiguation)
* Justice Bell (disambiguation)
* Old Bell (disambiguation)
* Glockenspiel (disambiguation)
* Alexander Graham Bell honors and tributes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224065" start="2" end="10" title="Bell (disambiguation)" label="[[bell]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q224065" start="60" end="64" title="Bell (disambiguation)" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173453" start="107" end="129" title="Bell (wind instrument)" label="Bell (wind instrument)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883310" start="161" end="172" title="Bell cymbal" label="Bell cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="242" end="253" title="Bell effect" label="Bell effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="277" end="288" title="Cymbal bell" label="Cymbal bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262266" start="362" end="384" title="engine order telegraph" label="engine order telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q212758" start="533" end="544" title="alarm clock" label="alarm clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500690" start="568" end="579" title="Church bell" label="Church bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q384459" start="615" end="623" title="Doorbell" label="Doorbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q691161" start="677" end="690" title="Division bell" label="Division bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309238" start="741" end="755" title="Last call bell" label="Last call bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q862131" start="795" end="806" title="School bell" label="School bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q275365" start="860" end="876" title="Ship&amp;#x27;s bell" label="Ship&amp;#x27;s bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444604" start="928" end="942" title="Bell (surname)" label="Bell (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="986" end="1007" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q233974" start="1050" end="1070" title="Jocelyn Bell Burnell" label="Jocelyn Bell Burnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q370077" start="1122" end="1139" title="John Stewart Bell" label="John Stewart Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q259507" start="1208" end="1218" title="bell hooks" label="bell hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131806982" start="1295" end="1308" title="Bell (singer)" label="Bell (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883076" start="1372" end="1393" title="Bell, New South Wales" label="Bell, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883078" start="1396" end="1412" title="Bell, Queensland" label="Bell, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q815709" start="1465" end="1504" title="Bell Island (Newfoundland and Labrador)" label="Bell Island (Newfoundland and Labrador)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883228" start="1507" end="1521" title="Bell Peninsula" label="Bell Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14506269" start="1533" end="1552" title="Bell River (Quebec)" label="Bell River (Quebec)"/>
<link wikidata="Q654172" start="1570" end="1589" title="Bell, Mayen-Koblenz" label="Bell, Mayen-Koblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q676696" start="1617" end="1637" title="Bell, Rhein-Hunsrück" label="Bell, Rhein-Hunsrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q377736" start="1686" end="1702" title="Bell, California" label="Bell, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q815676" start="1705" end="1718" title="Bell, Florida" label="Bell, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883075" start="1721" end="1735" title="Bell, Illinois" label="Bell, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313563" start="1738" end="1752" title="Bell, Oklahoma" label="Bell, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658268" start="1755" end="1770" title="Bell, Wisconsin" label="Bell, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883136" start="1773" end="1784" title="Bell Canyon" label="Bell Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q642084" start="1799" end="1818" title="Bell City, Missouri" label="Bell City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q491941" start="1821" end="1842" title="Bell County, Kentucky" label="Bell County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q108428" start="1845" end="1863" title="Bell County, Texas" label="Bell County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256576" start="1866" end="1910" title="Bell Township, Pennsylvania (disambiguation)" label="Bell Township, Pennsylvania (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739652" start="1933" end="1946" title="Bell (crater)" label="Bell (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12721623" start="1971" end="1989" title="Bell, South Africa" label="Bell, South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883151" start="1992" end="2019" title="Bell Creek (disambiguation)" label="Bell Creek (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="2063" end="2074" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="2116" end="2125" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="2211" end="2222" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883277" start="2307" end="2329" title="Bell Telephone Company" label="Bell Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q815695" start="2412" end="2425" title="Bell Aircraft" label="Bell Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q815723" start="2471" end="2483" title="Bell Textron" label="Bell Textron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948412" start="2512" end="2519" title="Bell ID" label="Bell ID"/>
<link wikidata="Q27085641" start="2549" end="2566" title="Bell Inn, Enfield" label="Bell Inn, Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883239" start="2586" end="2598" title="Bell Records" label="Bell Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883256" start="2617" end="2628" title="Bell Sports" label="Bell Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698324" start="2654" end="2687" title="Bell (St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Churchyard)" label="Bell (St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Churchyard)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883063" start="2725" end="2744" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s Brewery" label="Bell&amp;#x27;s Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883072" start="2772" end="2790" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s whisky" label="Bell&amp;#x27;s whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178" start="2860" end="2869" title="jellyfish" label="jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q815674" start="2872" end="2886" title="Bell character" label="Bell character"/>
<link wikidata="Q816063" start="2926" end="2937" title="Bell number" label="Bell number"/>
<link wikidata="Q815666" start="2956" end="2972" title="Bell polynomials" label="Bell polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898260" start="2991" end="3001" title="Bell state" label="Bell state"/>
<link wikidata="Q937854" start="3036" end="3047" title="Diving bell" label="Diving bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883260" start="3117" end="3146" title="Bell station (disambiguation)" label="Bell station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393574" start="3149" end="3175" title="SS Empire Bell" label="SS &amp;quot;Empire Bell&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052188" start="3186" end="3206" title="USS Bell" label="USS &amp;quot;Bell&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q114421" start="3242" end="3257" title="Bell (cyclecar)" label="Bell (cyclecar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711524" start="3307" end="3316" title="tailslide" label="tailslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139803" start="3349" end="3374" title="Bell (fictional currency)" label="Bell (fictional currency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642009" start="3418" end="3433" title="Bell (typeface)" label="Bell (typeface)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466735" start="3451" end="3471" title="Bel (disambiguation)" label="Bel (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883178" start="3474" end="3507" title="Bell High School (disambiguation)" label="Bell High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q815700" start="3510" end="3537" title="Bell House (disambiguation)" label="Bell House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883202" start="3540" end="3566" title="Bell Lake (disambiguation)" label="Bell Lake (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="3569" end="3580" title="Bell pepper" label="Bell pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q815661" start="3583" end="3623" title="Bell, Book &amp;amp; Candle (disambiguation)" label="Bell, Book &amp;amp; Candle (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q294042" start="3626" end="3648" title="Belle (disambiguation)" label="Belle (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q411937" start="3651" end="3673" title="Bells (disambiguation)" label="Bells (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716385" start="3676" end="3701" title="The Bell (disambiguation)" label="The Bell (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q521091" start="3704" end="3730" title="The Bells (disambiguation)" label="The Bells (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16800477" start="3733" end="3762" title="Justice Bell (disambiguation)" label="Justice Bell (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872647" start="3765" end="3790" title="Old Bell (disambiguation)" label="Old Bell (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531919" start="3793" end="3822" title="Glockenspiel (disambiguation)" label="Glockenspiel (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718996" start="3825" end="3866" title="Alexander Graham Bell honors and tributes" label="Alexander Graham Bell honors and tributes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3712" wikidata="Q217365" url="?curid=3712" title="Bell Labs">
<text>Bell Labs is an American industrial research and development (R&amp;D) company, currently operating as a subsidiary of Finnish technology company Nokia. With a long history, Bell Labs is credited with the development of radio astronomy, the transistor, the laser, the photovoltaic cell, the charge-coupled device (CCD), information theory, the Unix operating system, and the programming languages B, C, C++, S, SNOBOL, AWK, AMPL, and others, throughout the 20th century. Eleven Nobel Prizes and five Turing Awards have been awarded for work completed at Bell Laboratories.

The laboratory began in the late 19th century as the Western Electric Engineering Department, located at 463 West Street in New York City. After years of conducting research and development under Western Electric, a Bell subsidiary, the Engineering Department was reformed into Bell Telephone Laboratories in 1925 and placed under the shared ownership of Western Electric and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&amp;T). In the 1960s, laboratory and company headquarters were moved to Murray Hill, New Jersey. Its alumni during this time include people like William Shockley, Dennis Ritchie, Claude Shannon and Willard Boyle.

Bell Labs became a subsidiary of AT&amp;T Technologies in 1984 after the Bell System was broken up. After the breakup, its funding greatly declined. In 1996, AT&amp;T Technologies was spun off and renamed to Lucent Technologies, who used the Murray Hill site as their headquarters. Bell Laboratories was split as well, with part of it going to AT&amp;T as AT&amp;T Laboratories. In 2006, Lucent merged with French telecommunications company Alcatel to form Alcatel-Lucent, which was in turn acquired by Nokia in 2016.

==Origin and historical locations==
=== Bell&#x27;s personal research after the telephone ===

In 1880, when the French government awarded Alexander Graham Bell the Volta Prize of 50,000francs for the invention of the telephone (equivalent to about US$10,000 at the time, or about $ now), he used the award to fund the Volta Laboratory (also known as the &quot;Alexander Graham Bell Laboratory&quot;) in Washington, D.C. in collaboration with Sumner Tainter and Bell&#x27;s cousin Chichester Bell. The laboratory was variously known as the &quot;Volta Bureau&quot;, the &quot;Bell Carriage House&quot;, the &quot;Bell Laboratory&quot; and the &quot;Volta Laboratory&quot;.

It focused on the analysis, recording, and transmission of sound. Bell used his considerable profits from the laboratory for further research and education advancing the diffusion of knowledge relating to the deaf. This resulted in the founding of the Volta Bureau () at the Washington, D.C. home of his father, linguist Alexander Melville Bell. The carriage house there, at 1527 35th Street N.W., became their headquarters in 1889.

In 1893, Bell constructed a new building close by at 1537 35th Street N.W., specifically to house the lab. This building was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1972.

After the invention of the telephone, Bell maintained a relatively distant role with the Bell System as a whole, but continued to pursue his own personal research interests.

===Early antecedent===
The Bell Patent Association was formed by Alexander Graham Bell, Thomas Sanders, and Gardiner Hubbard when filing the first patents for the telephone in 1876.

Bell Telephone Company, the first telephone company, was formed a year later. It later became a part of the American Bell Telephone Company.

In 1884, the American Bell Telephone Company created the Mechanical Department from the Electrical and Patent Department formed a year earlier.

American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company (AT&amp;T) and its own subsidiary company took control of American Bell and the Bell System by 1889.

American Bell held a controlling interest in Western Electric (which was the manufacturing arm of the business) whereas AT&amp;T was doing research into the service providers.

===Formal organization and location changes===

In 1896, Western Electric bought property at 463 West Street to centralize the manufacturers and engineers which had been supplying AT&amp;T with such technology as telephones, telephone exchange switches and transmission equipment.

During the early 20th century, several historically significant laboratories were established. In 1915, the first radio transmissions were made from a shack in Montauk, Long Island. That same year, tests were performed on the first transoceanic radio telephone at a house in Arlington County, Virginia. A radio reception laboratory was established in 1919 in the Cliffwood section of Aberdeen Township, New Jersey. Additionally for 1919, a transmission studies site was established in Phoenixville, Pennsylvania that built, in 1929, the coaxial conductor line for first tests of long-distance transmission in various frequencies.

On January 1, 1925, Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc. was organized to consolidate the development and research activities in the communication field and allied sciences for the Bell System. Ownership was evenly shared between Western Electric and AT&amp;T. The new company had 3600 engineers, scientists, and support staff. Its space was expanded with a new building occupying about one quarter of a city block.

The first chairman of the board of directors was John J. Carty, AT&amp;T&#x27;s vice president, and the first president was Frank B. Jewett, also a board member, who stayed there until 1940. The operations were directed by E. B. Craft, executive vice-president, and formerly chief engineer at Western Electric.

In the early 1920s, a few outdoor facilities and radio communications development facilities were developed. In 1925, the test plot studies were established at Gulfport, Mississippi, where there were numerous telephone pole samples established for wood preservation. At the Deal, New Jersey location, work was done on ship-to-shore radio telephony. In 1926, in the Whippany section of Hanover Township, New Jersey, land was acquired and established for the development of a 50-kilowatt broadcast transmitter. In 1931, Whippany increased with added from a nearby property. In 1928, a site in Chester Township, New Jersey, was leased for outdoor tests, though the facility became inadequate for such purposes. In 1930, the Chester location required the purchase of an additional of land to be used for a new outdoor plant development laboratory. Prior to Chester being established, a test plot was installed in Limon, Colorado in 1929, similar to the one in Gulfport. The three test plots at Gulfport, Limon, and Chester were outdoor facilities for preservatives and prolonging the use of telephone poles. Additionally, in 1929, a land expansion was done at the Deal Labs to . This added land increased the facility for radio transmission studies.

The beginning of 1930s, established three facilities with radio communications experiments and chemical aspects testing. By 1939, the Summit, New Jersey, chemical laboratory was nearly 10 years established in a three-story building conducted experiments in corrosion, using various fungicides tests on cables, metallic components, or wood. For 1929, land was purchased in Holmdel Township, New Jersey, for a radio reception laboratory to replace the Cliffwood location that had been in operation since 1919. In 1930, the Cliffwood location was ending its operations as Holmdel was established. Whereas, in 1930, a location in Mendham Township, New Jersey, was established to continue radio receiver developments farther from the Whippany location and eliminate transmitter interference at that facility with developments. The Mendham location worked on communication equipment and broadcast receivers. These devices were used for marine, aircraft, and police services as well as the location performed precision frequency-measuring apparatus, field strength measurements, and conducted radio interference.

By the early 1940s, Bell Labs engineers and scientists had begun to move to other locations away from the congestion and environmental distractions of New York City, and in 1967 Bell Laboratories headquarters was officially relocated to Murray Hill, New Jersey.

Among the later Bell Laboratories locations in New Jersey were Holmdel Township, Crawford Hill, the Deal Test Site, Freehold, Lincroft, Long Branch, Middletown, Neptune Township, Princeton, Piscataway, Red Bank, Chester Township, and Whippany. Of these, Murray Hill and Crawford Hill remain in existence (the Piscataway and Red Bank locations were transferred to and are now operated by Telcordia Technologies and the Whippany site was purchased by Bayer).

The largest grouping of people in the company was in Illinois, at Naperville-Lisle, in the Chicago area, which had the largest concentration of employees (about 11,000) prior to 2001. There also were groups of employees in Indianapolis, Indiana; Columbus, Ohio; North Andover, Massachusetts; Allentown, Pennsylvania; Reading, Pennsylvania; and Breinigsville, Pennsylvania; Burlington, North Carolina (1950s–1970s, moved to Greensboro 1980s) and Westminster, Colorado. Since 2001, many of the former locations have been scaled down or closed.

Bell&#x27;s Holmdel research and development lab, a structure set on , was closed in 2007. The mirrored-glass building was designed by Eero Saarinen. In August 2013, Somerset Development bought the building, intending to redevelop it into a mixed commercial and residential project. A 2012 article expressed doubt on the success of the newly named Bell Works site, but several large tenants had announced plans to move in through 2016 and 2017.

===Building Complex Location (code) information, past and present===
* Chester (CH) – North Road, Chester Township, New Jersey (began 1930, outdoor test site for small size telephone pole preservation, timber-related equipment, cable laying mechanism for the first undersea voice cable, research for loop transmission, Lucent Technologies donated land for park)
* Crawford Hill (HOH) – Crawfords Corner Road, Holmdel, NJ (built 1930s, currently as exhibit and building sold, horn antenna used for &quot;Big Bang&quot; theory)
* Red Hill (HR) – located at exit 114 on the Garden State Parkway (480 Red Hill Rd, Middletown, NJ), the building that formerly housed hundreds of Bell Labs researchers is now in use by Memorial Sloan Kettering
* Holmdel (HO) – 101 Crawfords Corner, Holmdel, NJ (built 1959–1962, older structures in the 1920s, currently as private building called Bell Works, discovered extraterrestrial radio emissions, undersea cable research, satellite transmissions systems Telstar 3 and 4); provided office space for ~8000 workers in the 1980s (reaching a peak of ~9000 in 1982); prized glass building with hollow interior designed by Eero Saarinen; a 3-legged white water tower built to resemble a transistor marks the long entrance drive to this facility.
* Indian Hill (IH) – 2000 Naperville Road, Naperville, IL (built 1966, currently Nokia, developed switching technology and systems)
* Indian Hill New (IHN) – 1960 Lucent Lane, Naperville, IL (built in 2000 by Lucent Technologies for growth of the Indian Hill Bell Labs complex. The steel and glass designed, building with 900 parking places, was sold by Nokia for $4.8 million in April 2023. The buyer, Franklin Partners, purchased the site for warehousing but decisions were made to demolish the building for future approved planning. The pedestrian bridge to Indian Hill building was demolished as a separated company. The conference room and lobby scenes of the building were filmed in July 2010, during Alcatel-Lucent ownership, for the Ron Howard film, &quot;The Dilemma&quot;.)
* Indian Hill Park (IHP) – 200 Park Pl, Naperville, IL (Leased facility until Lucent Technologies consolidation to Indian Hill location.)
* Indian Hill South (IX) – Naperville, IL (Leased facility until Lucent Technologies consolidation to Indian Hill location.)
* Indian Hill West (IW) – Naperville, IL (Leased facility until Lucent Technologies consolidation to Indian Hill location.)
* Murray Hill (MH) – 600 Mountain Ave, Murray Hill, NJ (built 1941–1945, currently Nokia, developed transistor, UNIX operating system and C programming language, anechoic chamber, several building sections demolished)

* Network Software Center (NSC and/or NW) – 2500-2600 Warrenville Rd, Lisle, IL (Built in mid 1970s. Owned property under AT&amp;T Bell Labs, then Lucent Technologies constructed an additional building in 2000s. During Alcatel-Lucent consolidation to Indian Hill location, the buildings were placed for sale and sold to Navistar in 2010.)
* Short Hills (HL) – 101–103 JFK Parkway, Short Hills, NJ (Various departments such as Accounts Payable, IT Purchasing, HR Personnel, Payroll, Telecom, and the Government group, and Unix Administration Systems Computer Center. Buildings exist without the overhead walkway between the two buildings and two different companies are located from banking and business analytics.)
* Summit (SF) – 190 River Road, Summit, NJ (building was part of the UNIX Software Operations and became UNIX System Laboratories, Inc. In December 1991, USL combined with Novell. Location is a banking company.)
* West St ( ) – 463 West Street, New York, NY (built 1898, 1925 until December 1966 as Bell Labs headquarters, experimental talking movies, wave nature of matter, radar)
* Whippany (WH) – 67 Whippany Road, Whippany, NJ (built 1920s, demolished and portion building as Bayer, performed military research and development, research and development in radar, in guidance for the Nike missile, and in underwater sound, Telstar 1, wireless technologies)

===List of Bell Labs (1974)===
Bell Lab&#x27;s 1974 corporate directory listed 22 labs in the United States, located in:
* Allentown – Allentown, PA
* Atlanta – Norcross, GA
* Centennial Park – Piscataway, NJ
* Chester – Chester, NJ
* Columbus – Columbus, OH
* Crawford Hill – Holmdel, NJ
* Denver – Denver, CO
* Grand Forks-MSR – Cavalier, ND [Missile Site Radar (MSR) Site]
* Grand Forks-PAR – Cavalier, ND [Perimeter Acquisition Radar (PAR) Site]
* Guilford Center – Greensboro, NC
* Holmdel – Holmdel, NJ
* Indianapolis – Indianapolis, IN
* Indian Hill – Naperville, IL
* Kwajalein – San Francisco, CA
* Madison – Madison, NJ
* Merrimack Valley – North Andover, MA
* Murray Hill – Murray Hill, NJ
* Raritan River Center – Piscataway, NJ
* Reading – Reading, PA
* Union – Union, NJ
* Warren Service Center – Warren, NJ
* Whippany – Whippany, NJ

===List of Bell Labs (2024)===
Nokia Bell Lab&#x27;s 2024 website pictured 10 labs, located in:
* Antwerp – (Copernicuslaan 50, 2018 Antwerp, Belgium)
* Budapest – (Skypark 8A, Bókay János utca 36–42, 1083, Budapest, Hungary)
* Cambridge – (Broers Building, 21 J.J. Thomson Avenue, Cambridge, CB3 0FA, United Kingdom)
* Espoo – (Karaportti 3 FI-02610, Espoo, Finland)
* Munich – (Werinherstrasse 91 81541, Munich, Germany)
* Murray Hill – (600 Mountain Avenue, Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974-0636) (Global Headquarters)
* Oulu – (Kaapelitie 4, 90620 Oulu, Finland)
* Paris – (12 rue Jean Bart, 91300 Massy) Paris-Saclay, Nozay, France
* Shanghai – (No.388 Ningqiao Road, Pudong Jinqiao, Shanghai 201206 China
* Stuttgart – (Magirusstraße 8, 70469 Stuttgart, Germany)

Also listed as research locations without additional information was Sunnyvale, California, US and Tampere, Finland.

The Naperville, Illinois Bell Labs location near Chicago was considered the Chicago Innovation Center and hosted Nokia&#x27;s second annual Algorithm World event in 2022.

==Discoveries and developments==

Bell Laboratories was, and is, regarded by many as the premier research facility of its type, developing a wide range of revolutionary technologies, including radio astronomy, the transistor, the laser, information theory, the operating system Unix, the programming languages C and C++, solar cells, the charge-coupled device (CCD), and many other optical, wireless, and wired communications technologies and systems.

===1920s===
In 1924, Bell Labs physicist Walter A. Shewhart proposed the control chart as a method to determine when a process was in a state of statistical control. Shewhart&#x27;s methods were the basis for statistical process control (SPC): the use of statistically based tools and techniques to manage and improve processes. This was the origin of the modern quality control movement, including Six Sigma.

In 1926, the laboratories invented an early synchronous-sound motion picture system, in competition with Fox Movietone and DeForest Phonofilm.

In 1927, a Bell team headed by Herbert E. Ives successfully transmitted long-distance 128-line television images of Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover from Washington to New York. In 1928 the thermal noise in a resistor was first measured by John B. Johnson, for which Harry Nyquist provided the theoretical analysis; this is now termed &quot;Johnson-Nyquist noise&quot;. During the 1920s, the one-time pad cipher was invented by Gilbert Vernam and Joseph Mauborgne at the laboratories. Bell Labs&#x27; Claude Shannon later proved that it is unbreakable.

In 1928, Harold Black invented the negative feedback system commonly used in amplifiers. Later, Harry Nyquist analyzed Black&#x27;s design rule for negative feedback. This work was published in 1932 and became known as the Nyquist criterion.

===1930s===

In 1931, a foundation for radio astronomy was laid by Karl Jansky during his work investigating the origins of static on long-distance shortwave communications. He discovered that radio waves were being emitted from the center of the galaxy.

In 1931 and 1932, the labs made experimental high fidelity, long playing, and even stereophonic recordings of the Philadelphia Orchestra, conducted by Leopold Stokowski.

In 1933, stereo signals were transmitted live from Philadelphia to Washington, D.C.

In 1937, the vocoder, an electronic speech compression device, or codec, and the Voder, the first electronic speech synthesizer, were developed and demonstrated by Homer Dudley, the Voder being demonstrated at the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair. Bell researcher Clinton Davisson shared the Nobel Prize in Physics with George Paget Thomson for the discovery of electron diffraction, which helped lay the foundation for solid-state electronics.

===1940s===

In the early 1940s, the photovoltaic cell was developed by Russell Ohl. In 1943, Bell developed SIGSALY, the first digital scrambled speech transmission system, used by the Allies in World War II. The British wartime codebreaker Alan Turing visited the labs at this time, working on speech encryption and meeting Claude Shannon.

Bell Labs Quality Assurance Department gave the world and the United States such statisticians as Walter A. Shewhart, W. Edwards Deming, Harold F. Dodge, George D. Edwards, Harry Romig, R. L. Jones, Paul Olmstead, E.G.D. Paterson, and Mary N. Torrey. During World War II, Emergency Technical Committee – Quality Control, drawn mainly from Bell Labs&#x27; statisticians, was instrumental in advancing Army and Navy ammunition acceptance and material sampling procedures.

In 1947, the transistor, arguably the most important invention developed by Bell Laboratories, was invented by John Bardeen, Walter Houser Brattain, and William Bradford Shockley (who subsequently shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1956). In 1947, Richard Hamming invented Hamming codes for error detection and correction. For patent reasons, the result was not published until 1950.

In 1948, &quot;A Mathematical Theory of Communication&quot;, one of the founding works in information theory, was published by Claude Shannon in the &quot;Bell System Technical Journal&quot;. It built in part on earlier work in the field by Bell researchers Harry Nyquist and Ralph Hartley, but went much further. Bell Labs also introduced a series of increasingly complex calculators through the decade. Shannon was also the founder of modern cryptography with his 1949 paper &quot;Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems&quot;.

====Calculators====

* Model I: A complex number calculator, completed in 1939 and put into operation in 1940, for doing calculations of complex numbers.
* Model II: Relay Computer / Relay Interpolator, September 1943, for interpolating data points of flight profiles (needed for performance testing of a gun director). This model introduced error detection (self checking).
* Model III: Ballistic Computer, June 1944, for calculations of ballistic trajectories.
* Model IV: Error Detector Mark II, March 1945, an improved ballistic computer.
* Model V: General-purpose electromechanical computer, of which two were built, July 1946 and February 1947
* Model VI: 1949, an enhanced Model V.

===1950s===

The 1950s also saw developments based upon information theory. The central development was binary code systems. Efforts concentrated on the prime mission of supporting the Bell System with engineering advances, including the N-carrier system, TD microwave radio relay, direct distance dialing, E-repeater, wire spring relay, and the Number Five Crossbar Switching System.

In 1952, William Gardner Pfann revealed the method of zone melting, which enabled semiconductor purification and level doping.

In 1953, Maurice Karnaugh developed the Karnaugh map, used for managing of Boolean algebraic expressions.

In January 1954, Bell Labs built one of the first completely transistorized computer machines, TRADIC or Flyable TRADIC, for the United States Air Force with 10,358 germanium point-contact diodes and 684 Bell Labs Type 1734 Type A cartridge transistors. The design team was led by electrical engineer Jean Howard Felker with James R. Harris and Louis C. Brown (&quot;Charlie Brown&quot;) as the lead engineers on the project, which started in 1951. The device took only 3 cubic-feet and consumed 100 watt power for its small and low powered design in comparison to the vacuum tube designs of the times. The device could be installed in a B-52 Stratofortress Bomber and had a performance up to one million logical operations a second. The flyable program used a Mylar sheet with punched holes, instead of the removable plugboard.

In 1954, the first modern solar cell was invented at Bell Laboratories.

In 1955, Carl Frosch and Lincoln Derick discovered semiconductor surface passivation by silicon dioxide. 

In 1956 TAT-1, the first transatlantic communications cable to carry telephone conversations, was laid between Scotland and Newfoundland in a joint effort by AT&amp;T, Bell Laboratories, and British and Canadian telephone companies.

In 1957, Max Mathews created MUSIC, one of the first computer programs to play electronic music. Robert C. Prim and Joseph Kruskal developed new greedy algorithms that revolutionized computer network design.

In 1957 Frosch and Derick, using masking and predeposition, were able to manufacture silicon dioxide field effect transistors; the first planar transistors, in which drain and source were adjacent at the same surface. They showed that silicon dioxide insulated, protected silicon wafers and prevented dopants from diffusing into the wafer. 

In 1958, a technical paper by Arthur Schawlow and Charles Hard Townes first described the laser.

Following Frosch and Derick research, Mohamed Atalla and Dawon Kahng proposed a silicon MOS transistor in 1959 and successfully demonstrated a working MOS device with their Bell Labs team in 1960. Their team included E. E. LaBate and E. I. Povilonis who fabricated the device; M. O. Thurston, L. A. D’Asaro, and J. R. Ligenza who developed the diffusion processes, and H. K. Gummel and R. Lindner who characterized the device. 

K. E. Daburlos and H. J. Patterson of Bell Laboratories continued on the work of C. Frosch and L. Derick, and developed a process similar to Hoerni’s planar process about the same time.

J.R. Ligenza and W.G. Spitzer studied the mechanism of thermally grown oxides, fabricated a high quality Si/SiO2 stack and published their results in 1960.

===1960s===
On October 1, 1960, the Kwajalein Field Station was announced as a location for the Nike Zeus test program. Mr. R. W. Benfer was the first director to arrive shortly on October 5 for the program. Bell Labs designed many of the major system elements and conducted fundamental investigations of phase-controlled scanning antenna arrays.
In December 1960, Ali Javan, PhD physicist from the University of Tehran, Iran with help by Rolf Seebach and his associates William Bennett and Donald Heriot, successfully operated the first gas laser, the first continuous-light laser, operating at an unprecedented accuracy and color purity.

In 1962, the electret microphone was invented by Gerhard M. Sessler and James E. West. Also in 1962, John R. Pierce&#x27;s vision of communications satellites was realized by the launch of Telstar.

On July 10, 1962, the Telstar spacecraft was launched into orbit by NASA and it was designed and built by Bell Laboratories. The first worldwide television broadcast was July 23, 1962 with a press conference by President Kennedy.

In Spring 1964, the building of an electronic switching systems center was planned at Bell Laboratories near Naperville, Illinois. The building in 1966 would be called Indian Hill, and development work from former electronic switching organization at Holmdel and Systems Equipment Engineering organization would occupy the laboratory with engineers from Western Electric Hawthorne Works. Scheduled for work were about 1,200 people when completed in 1966, and peaked at 11,000 before October 2001 Lucent Technologies downsizing occurred.

In 1964, the carbon dioxide laser was invented by Kumar Patel and the discovery/operation of the Nd:YAG laser was demonstrated by J.E. Geusic &quot;et al.&quot; Experiments by Myriam Sarachik provided the first data that confirmed the Kondo effect. The research of Philip W. Anderson into electronic structure of magnetic and disordered systems led to improved understanding of metals and insulators for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1977. 
In 1965, Penzias and Wilson discovered the cosmic microwave background, for which they were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1978.

Frank W. Sinden, Edward E. Zajac, Ken Knowlton, and A. Michael Noll made computer-animated movies during the early to mid-1960s. Ken Knowlton invented the computer animation language BEFLIX. The first digital computer art was created in 1962 by Noll.

In 1966, orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM), a key technology in wireless services, was developed and patented by R. W. Chang.

In December 1966, the New York City site was sold and became the Westbeth Artists Community complex.

In 1968, molecular beam epitaxy was developed by J.R. Arthur and A.Y. Cho; molecular beam epitaxy allows semiconductor chips and laser matrices to be manufactured one atomic layer at a time.

In 1969, Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thompson created the computer operating system UNIX for the support of telecommunication switching systems as well as general-purpose computing. Also, in 1969, the charge-coupled device (CCD) was invented by Willard Boyle and George E. Smith, for which they were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2009.

From 1969 to 1971, Aaron Marcus, the first graphic designer involved with computer graphics, researched, designed, and programmed a prototype interactive page-layout system for the Picturephone.

===1970s===
The 1970s and 1980s saw more and more computer-related inventions at the Bell Laboratories as part of the personal computing revolution.

In the 1970s, major central office technology evolved from crossbar electromechanical relay-based technology and discrete transistor logic to Bell Labs-developed thick film hybrid and transistor–transistor logic (TTL), stored program-controlled switching systems; 1A/#4 TOLL Electronic Switching Systems (ESS) and 2A Local Central Offices produced at the Bell Labs Naperville and Western Electric Lisle, Illinois facilities. This technology evolution dramatically reduced floor space needs. The new ESS also came with its own diagnostic software that needed only a switchman and several frame technicians to maintain.

About 1970, the coax-22 cable was developed by Bell Labs. This coax cable with 22 strands allowed a total capacity of 132,000 telephone calls. Previously, a 12-strand coax cable was used for L-carrier systems. Both of these types of cables were manufactured at Western Electrics&#x27; Baltimore Works facility on machines designed by a Western Electric Senior development engineer.

In 1970, A. Michael Noll invented a tactile, force-feedback system, coupled with interactive stereoscopic computer display.

In 1971, an improved task priority system for computerized telephone exchange switching systems for telephone traffic was invented by Erna Schneider Hoover, who received one of the first software patents for it.

In 1972, Dennis Ritchie developed the compiled programming language C as a replacement for the interpreted language B, which was then used in a worse is better rewrite of UNIX. Also, the language AWK was designed and implemented by Alfred Aho, Peter Weinberger, and Brian Kernighan of Bell Laboratories. Also in 1972, Marc Rochkind invented the Source Code Control System.

In 1976, optical fiber systems were first tested in Georgia.

Production of their first internally designed microprocessor, the BELLMAC-8, began in 1977. In 1980 they demonstrated the first single-chip 32-bit microprocessor, the Bellmac 32A, which went into production in 1982.

In 1978, the proprietary operating system Oryx/Pecos was developed from scratch by Bell Labs in order to run AT&amp;T&#x27;s large-scale PBX switching equipment. It was first used with AT&amp;T&#x27;s flagship System 75, and until very recently was used in all variations up through and including Definity G3 (Generic 3) switches, now manufactured by Avaya.

===1980s===
During the 1980s, the operating system Plan 9 from Bell Labs was developed extending the UNIX model. Also, the Radiodrum, an electronic music instrument played in three space dimensions, was invented.

In 1980, the TDMA digital cellular telephone technology was patented.

In late 1981, the Bell Labs Research organization internal use of a terminal called Jerq led to the Blit terminal being renamed by designers Rob Pike and Bart Locanthi, Jr for the UNIX operating system. It was a programmable bitmap graphics terminal using multi-layers of opened windows operated by a keyboard and a distinguished red-colored three-button digitized mouse. It was later known as the AT&amp;T 5620 DMD terminal for commercial sales. The Blit used the Motorola 68000 microprocessor, whereas the Teletype/AT&amp;T 5620 Dot Mapped Display terminal used the Western Electric WE32000 microprocessor.

The launching of the Bell Labs Fellows Award started in 1982 to recognize and honor scientists and engineers who have made outstanding and sustained R&amp;D contributions at AT&amp;T with a level of distinction. As of the 2021 inductees, 336 people have received the honor.

Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie were also Bell Labs Fellows for 1982. Ritchie started in 1967 at Bell Labs in the Bell Labs Computer Systems Research department. Thompson started in 1966. Both co-inventors of the UNIX operating system and C language were also awarded decades later the 2011 Japan Prize for Information and Communications.

In 1982, fractional quantum Hall effect was discovered by Horst Störmer and former Bell Laboratories researchers Robert B. Laughlin and Daniel C. Tsui; they consequently won a Nobel Prize in 1998 for the discovery.

In 1984, the first photoconductive antennas for picosecond electromagnetic radiation were demonstrated by Auston and others. This type of antenna became an important component in terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. In 1984, Karmarkar&#x27;s algorithm for linear programming was developed by mathematician Narendra Karmarkar. Also in 1984, a divestiture agreement signed in 1982 with the American Federal government forced the breakup of AT&amp;T, and Bellcore (now iconectiv) was split off from Bell Laboratories to provide the same R&amp;D functions for the newly created local exchange carriers. AT&amp;T also was limited to using the Bell trademark only in association with Bell Laboratories. &quot;Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc.&quot; became a wholly owned company of the new AT&amp;T Technologies unit, the former Western Electric. The 5ESS Switch was developed during this transition.

The National Medal of Technology was awarded to Bell Labs, the first corporation to achieve this honor in February 1985.

In 1985, laser cooling was used to slow and manipulate atoms by Steven Chu and team. In 1985, the modeling language &quot;A Mathematical Programming Language&quot;, AMPL, was developed by Robert Fourer, David M. Gay and Brian Kernighan at Bell Laboratories. Also in 1985, Bell Laboratories was awarded the National Medal of Technology &quot;For contribution over decades to modern communication systems&quot;.

In 1985, the programming language C++ had its first commercial release. Bjarne Stroustrup started developing C++ at Bell Laboratories in 1979 as an extension to the original C language.

Arthur Ashkin invented optical tweezers that grab particles, atoms, viruses and other living cells with their laser beam fingers. A major breakthrough came in 1987, when Ashkin used the tweezers to capture living bacteria without harming them. He immediately began studying biological systems using the optical tweezers, which are now widely used to investigate the machinery of life. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics (2018) for his work involving optical tweezers and their application to biological systems.

In the mid-1980s, the Transmission System departments of Bell Labs developed highly reliable long-haul fiber-optic communications systems based on SONET, and network operations techniques, that enabled very high volume, near-instantaneous communications across the North American continent. Fail-safe and disaster-related traffic management operations systems enhanced the usefulness of the fiber optics. There was a synergy in the land-based and seas-based fiber optic systems, although they were developed by different divisions within the company. These systems are still in use throughout the U.S. today.

Charles A. Burrus became a Bell Labs Fellow in 1988 for his work done as a Technical Staff member. Prior to this accomplishment, was awarded in 1982 the AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories Distinguished Technical Staff Award. Charles started in 1955 at the Holmdel Bell Labs location and retired in 1996 with consultations to Lucent Technologies up to 2002.

In 1988, TAT-8 became the first transatlantic fiber-optic cable. Bell Labs in Freehold, NJ developed the 1.3-micron fiber, cable, splicing, laser detector, and 280 Mbit/s repeater for 40,000 telephone-call capacity.

In the late 1980s, realizing that voiceband modems were approaching the Shannon limit on bit rate, Richard D. Gitlin, Jean-Jacques Werner, and their colleagues pioneered a major breakthrough by inventing DSL (digital subscriber line) and creating the technology that enabled megabit transmission on installed copper telephone lines, thus facilitating the broadband era.

===1990s===
Bell Labs&#x27; John Mayo received the National Medal of Technology in 1990.

In May 1990, Ronald Snare was named AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories Fellow, for &quot;Singular contributions to the development of the common-channel signaling network and the signal transfer points globally.&quot; This system began service in the United States in 1978.

In the early 1990s, approaches to increase modem speeds to 56K were explored at Bell Labs, and early patents were filed in 1992 by Ender Ayanoglu, Nuri R. Dagdeviren and their colleagues.

The scientist, W. Lincoln Hawkins in 1992 received the National Medal of Technology for work done at Bell Labs.

In 1992, Jack Salz, Jack Winters and Richard D. Gitlin provided the foundational technology to demonstrate that adaptive antenna arrays at the transmitter and receiver can substantially increase both the reliability (via diversity) and capacity (via spatial multiplexing) of wireless systems without expanding the bandwidth. Subsequently, the BLAST system proposed by Gerard Foschini and colleagues dramatically expanded the capacity of wireless systems. This technology, known today as MIMO (Multiple Input Multiple Output), was a significant factor in the standardization, commercialization, performance improvement, and growth of cellular and wireless LAN systems.

Amos Joel in 1993 received the National Medal of Technology.

Two AT&amp;T Bell Labs scientists, Joel Engel and Richard Frenkiel, were honored with the National Medal of Technology, in 1994.

In 1994, the quantum cascade laser was invented by Federico Capasso, Alfred Cho, Jerome Faist and their collaborators. Also in 1994, Peter Shor devised his quantum factorization algorithm.

In 1996, SCALPEL electron lithography, which prints features atoms wide on microchips, was invented by Lloyd Harriott and his team. The operating system Inferno, an update of Plan 9, was created by Dennis Ritchie with others, using the then-new concurrent programming language Limbo. A high performance database engine (Dali) was developed which became DataBlitz in its product form.

In 1996, AT&amp;T spun off Bell Laboratories, along with most of its equipment manufacturing business, into a new company named Lucent Technologies. AT&amp;T retained a small number of researchers who made up the staff of the newly created AT&amp;T Labs.

Lucy Sanders was the third woman to receive the Bell Labs Fellow award in 1996, for her work in creating a RISC chip that allowed more phone calls using software and hardware on a single server. She started in 1977 and was one of the few woman engineers at Bell Labs.

In November 1997, Lucent planned a Bell Laboratories location at Yokosuka Research Park in Yokosuka, Japan for developing a third generation Wideband Code Division Multiple Access cellular system (W-CDMA.)

In 1997, the smallest then-practical transistor (60 nanometers, 182 atoms wide) was built. In 1998, the first optical router was invented.

Rudolph Kazarinov and Federico Capasso received the optoelectronics Rank Prize on December 8, 1998.

In December 1998, Ritchie and Thompson also were honorees of the National Medal of Technology for their work done for pre-Lucent Technologies Bell Labs. The award was presented by U.S. President William Clinton in 1999 in a White House ceremony.

===21st century===

2000 was an active year for the Laboratories, in which DNA machine prototypes were developed; progressive geometry compression algorithm made widespread 3-D communication practical; the first electrically powered organic laser was invented; a large-scale map of cosmic dark matter was compiled; and the F-15 (material), an organic material that makes plastic transistors possible, was invented.

In 2002, physicist Jan Hendrik Schön was fired after his work was found to contain fraudulent data. It was the first known case of fraud at Bell Labs.

In 2003, the New Jersey Institute of Technology Biomedical Engineering Laboratory was created at Murray Hill, New Jersey.

In 2004, Lucent Technologies awarded two women the prestigious Bell Labs Fellow Award. Magaly Spector, a director in INS/Network Systems Group, was awarded for &quot;sustained and exceptional scientific and technological contributions in solid-state physics, III-V material for semiconductor lasers, Gallium Arsenide integrated circuits, and the quality and reliability of products used in high speed optical transport systems for next generation high bandwidth communication.&quot; Eve Varma, a technical manager in MNS/Network Systems Group, was awarded for her citation in &quot;sustained contributions to digital and optical networking, including architecture, synchronization, restoration, standards, operations and control.&quot;

In 2005, Jeong H. Kim, former President of Lucent&#x27;s Optical Network Group, returned from academia to become the President of Bell Laboratories.

In April 2006, Bell Laboratories&#x27; parent company, Lucent Technologies, signed a merger agreement with Alcatel. On December 1, 2006, the merged company, Alcatel-Lucent, began operations. This deal raised concerns in the United States, where Bell Laboratories works on defense contracts. A separate company, LGS Innovations, with an American board was set up to manage Bell Laboratories&#x27; and Lucent&#x27;s sensitive U.S. government contracts. In March 2019, LGS Innovations was purchased by CACI.

In December 2007, it was announced that the former Lucent Bell Laboratories and the former Alcatel Research and Innovation would be merged into one organization under the name of Bell Laboratories. This is the first period of growth following many years during which Bell Laboratories progressively lost manpower due to layoffs and spin-offs making the company shut down briefly.

In February 2008, Alcatel-Lucent continued the Bell Laboratories tradition of awarding the prestigious award for outstanding technical contributors. Martin J. Glapa, a former chief Technical Officer of Lucent&#x27;s Cable Communications Business Unit and Director of Advanced Technologies, was presented by Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs President Jeong H. Kim with the 2006 Bell Labs Fellow Award in Network Architecture, Network Planning, and Professional Services with particular focus in Cable TV Systems and Broadband Services having &quot;significant resulting Alcatel-Lucent commercial successes.&quot; Glapa is a patent holder and has co-written the 2004 technical paper called &quot;Optimal Availability &amp; Security For Voice Over Cable Networks&quot; and co-authored the 2008 &quot;Impact of bandwidth demand growth on HFC networks&quot; published by IEEE.

As of July 2008, however, only four scientists remained in physics research, according to a report by the scientific journal &quot;Nature&quot;.

On August 28, 2008, Alcatel-Lucent announced it was pulling out of basic science, material physics, and semiconductor research, and it will instead focus on more immediately marketable areas, including networking, high-speed electronics, wireless networks, nanotechnology and software.

In 2009, Willard Boyle and George Smith were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for the invention and development of the charge-coupled device (CCD).

Rob Soni was an Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs Fellow in 2009 as cited for work in winning North American customers wireless business and for helping to define 4G wireless networks with transformative system architectures.

===2010s===
Gee Rittenhouse, former Head of Research, returned from his position as chief operating officer of Alcatel-Lucent&#x27;s Software, Services, and Solutions business in February 2013, to become the 12th President of Bell Labs.

On November 4, 2013, Alcatel-Lucent announced the appointment of Marcus Weldon as President of Bell Labs. His stated charter was to return Bell Labs to the forefront of innovation in Information and communications technology by focusing on solving the key industry challenges, as was the case in the great Bell Labs innovation eras in the past.

On May 20, 2014, Michel Combes, CEO of Alcatel-Lucent, announced the opening of a Bell Labs location in Tel Aviv, Israel by summer time. The Bell Labs research team would be directed by an Israeli computer scientist and alum of Bell Labs, Danny Raz. The Bell Labs research would be in &#x27;cloud networking&#x27; technologies for communications. The location would have approximately twenty academic scientific background employees.

In July 2014, Bell Labs announced it had broken &quot;the broadband Internet speed record&quot; with a new technology dubbed XG-FAST that promises 10 gigabits per second transmission speeds.

In 2014, Eric Betzig shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work in super-resolved fluorescence microscopy which he began pursuing while at Bell Labs in the Semiconductor Physics Research Department.

On April 15, 2015, Nokia agreed to acquire Alcatel-Lucent, Bell Labs&#x27; parent company, in a share exchange worth $16.6 billion. Their first day of combined operations was January 14, 2016.

In September 2016, Nokia Bell Labs, along with Technische Universität Berlin, Deutsche Telekom T-Labs and the Technical University of Munich achieved a data rate of one terabit per second by improving transmission capacity and spectral efficiency in an optical communications field trial with a new modulation technique.

Antero Taivalsaari became a Bell Labs Fellow in 2016 for his specific work.

In 2017, Dragan Samardzija was awarded the Bell Labs Fellow.

In 2018, Arthur Ashkin shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on &quot;the optical tweezers and their application to biological systems&quot; which was developed at Bell Labs in the 1980s.

===2020s===
In 2020, Alfred Aho and Jeffrey Ullman shared the Turing Award for their work on compilers, starting with their tenure at Bell Labs during 1967–69.

On, November 16, 2021, Nokia presented the 2021 Bell Labs Fellows Award Ceremony, six new members (Igor Curcio, Matthew Andrews, Bjorn Jelonnek, Ed Harstead, Gino Dion, Esa Tiirola) held at Nokia Batvik Mansion, Finland.

In December 2021, Nokia&#x27;s Chief Strategy and Technology Officer decided to reorganize Bell Labs in two separate functional organizations: Bell Labs Core Research and Bell Labs Solutions research. Bell Labs Core Research is in charge of creating disruptive technologies with 10-year horizon. Bell Labs Solutions Research, looks for shorter term solutions that can provide growth opportunities for Nokia.

The Nokia 2022 Bell Labs Fellows were recognized on November 29, 2022, in a New Jersey ceremony. Five researchers were inducted to the total of 341 recipients since its inception by AT&amp;T Bell Labs in 1982. One member was from New Jersey, two were from Cambridge, UK, and two were from Finland representing Espoo and Tampere locations.

On December 11, 2023, Nokia announced a state of the art research facility in New Brunswick, New Jersey. The planned relocation of the 80 year old, Murray Hill New Jersey Bell Labs facility would take place before 2028. The new building would be LEED Gold certified. The Murray Hill location has had iconic research of various historical innovations for AT&amp;T Corp., Lucent Technologies, Alcatel-Lucent, and Nokia.

==Nobel Prize, Turing Award, IEEE Medal of Honor==
Eleven Nobel Prizes have been awarded for work completed at Bell Laboratories.
* 1937: Clinton J. Davisson shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for demonstrating the wave nature of matter.
* 1956: John Bardeen, Walter H. Brattain, and William Shockley received the Nobel Prize in Physics for inventing the first transistors.
* 1977: Philip W. Anderson shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for developing an improved understanding of the electronic structure of glass and magnetic materials.
* 1978: Arno A. Penzias and Robert W. Wilson shared the Nobel Prize in Physics. Penzias and Wilson were cited for their discovering cosmic microwave background radiation, a nearly uniform glow that fills the Universe in the microwave band of the radio spectrum.
* 1997: Steven Chu shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for developing methods to cool and trap atoms with laser light.
* 1998: Horst Störmer, Robert Laughlin, and Daniel Tsui, were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for discovering and explaining the fractional quantum Hall effect.
* 2009: Willard S. Boyle, George E. Smith shared the Nobel Prize in Physics with Charles K. Kao. Boyle and Smith were cited for inventing charge-coupled device (CCD) semiconductor imaging sensors.
* 2014: Eric Betzig shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work in super-resolved fluorescence microscopy which he began pursuing while at Bell Labs.
* 2018: Arthur Ashkin shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on &quot;the optical tweezers and their application to biological systems&quot; which was developed at Bell Labs.
* 2023: Louis Brus shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work in &quot;the discovery and synthesis of quantum dots&quot; which he began at Bell Labs.
* 2024: John Hopfield shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for his work in artificial networks for machine learning.

The Turing Award has been won five times by Bell Labs researchers.
* 1968: Richard Hamming for his work on numerical methods, automatic coding systems, and error-detecting and error-correcting codes.
* 1983: Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie for their work on operating system theory, and for developing Unix.
* 1986: Robert Tarjan with John Hopcroft, for fundamental achievements in the design and analysis of algorithms and data structures.
* 2018: Yann LeCun and Yoshua Bengio shared the Turing Award with Geoffrey Hinton for their work in Deep Learning.
* 2020: Alfred Aho and Jeffrey Ullman shared the Turing Award for their work on Compilers.

First awarded in 1917, the IEEE Medal of Honor is the highest form of recognition by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. The IEEE Medal of Honor has been won 22 times by Bell Labs researchers. 
* 1926 Greenleaf Whittier Pickard &quot;For his contributions as to crystal detectors, coil antennas, wave propagation and atmospheric disturbances.&quot;
* 1936 G A Campbell &quot;For his contributions to the theory of electrical network.&quot;
* 1940 Lloyd Espenschied &quot;For his accomplishments as an engineer, as an inventor, as a pioneer in the development of radio telephony, and for his effective contributions to the progress of international radio coordination.&quot;
* 1946 Ralph Hartley &quot;For his early work on oscillating circuits employing triode tubes and likewise for his early recognition and clear exposition of the fundamental relationship between the total amount of information which may be transmitted over a transmission system of limited band-width and the time required.&quot;
* 1949 Ralph Brown &quot;For his extensive contributions to the field of radio and for his leadership in Institute affairs&quot;
* 1955 Harald T. Friis &quot;For his outstanding technical contributions in the expansion of the useful spectrum of radio frequencies, and for the inspiration and leadership he has given to young engineers.&quot;
* 1960 Harry Nyquist &quot;For fundamental contributions to a quantitative understanding of thermal noise, data transmission and negative feedback.&quot;
* 1963 George C. Southworth (with John H. Hammond, Jr.) &quot;For pioneering contributions to microwave radio physics, to radio astronomy, and to waveguide transmission.&quot; 
* 1966 Claude Shannon &quot;For his development of a mathematical theory of communication which unified and significantly advanced the state of the art.&quot;
* 1967 Charles H. Townes &quot;For his significant contributions in the field of quantum electronics which have led to the maser and the laser.&quot;
* 1971 John Bardeen &quot;For his profound contributions to the understanding of the conductivity of solids, to the invention of the transistor, and to the microscopic theory of superconductivity&quot;
* 1973 Rudolf Kompfner &quot;For a major contribution to world-wide communication through the conception of the traveling wave tube embodying a new principle of amplification.&quot;
* 1975 John R. Pierce &quot;For his pioneering concrete proposals and the realization of satellite communication experiments, and for contributions in theory and design of traveling wave tubes and in electron beam optics essential to this success.&quot;
* 1977 H. Earle Vaughan &quot;For his vision, technical contributions and leadership in the development of the first high-capacity pulse-code-modulation time-division telephone switching system.&quot;
* 1980 William Shockley &quot;For the invention of the junction transistor, the analog and the junction field-effect transistor, and the theory underlying their operation.&quot; 
* 1981 Sidney Darlington &quot;For fundamental contributions to filtering and signal processing leading to chirp radar.&quot;
* 1982 John Wilder Tukey &quot;For his contributions to the spectral analysis of random processes and the fast Fourier transform algorithm.&quot; 
* 1989 C. Kumar N. Patel &quot;For fundamental contributions to quantum electronics, including the carbon dioxide laser and the spin-flip Raman laser.&quot; 
* 1992 Amos E. Joel Jr. &quot;For fundamental contributions to and leadership in telecommunications switching systems.&quot;
* 1994 Alfred Y. Cho &quot;For seminal contributions to the development of molecular beam epitaxy.&quot;
* 2001 Herwig Kogelnik &quot;For fundamental contributions to the science and technology of lasers and optoelectronics, and for leadership in research and development of photonics and lightwave communication systems.&quot; 
* 2005 James L. Flanagan &quot;For sustained leadership and outstanding contributions in speech technology.&quot;

==Emmy Awards, Grammy Award, and Academy Award==
The Emmy Award has been won five times by Bell Labs: one under Lucent Technologies, one under Alcatel-Lucent, and three under Nokia. 
* 1997: Primetime Engineering Emmy Award for &quot;work on digital television as part of the HDTV Grand Alliance.&quot;
* 2013: Technology and Engineering Emmy for its &quot;Pioneering Work in Implementation and Deployment of Network DVR&quot; 
* 2016: Technology &amp; Engineering Emmy Award for the pioneering invention and deployment of fiber-optic cable.
* 2020: Technology &amp; Engineering Emmy Award for the CCD (charge-coupled device) was crucial in the development of television, allowing images to be captured digitally for recording transmission.
* 2021: Technology &amp; Engineering Emmy Award for the &quot;ISO Base Media File Format standardization, in which our multimedia research unit has played a major role.&quot;

The inventions of fiber-optics and research done in digital television and media File Format were under former AT&amp;T Bell Labs ownership.

The Grammy Award has been won once by Bell Labs under Alcatel-Lucent. 
* 2006: Technical Grammy Award for outstanding technical contributions to the recording field.

The Academy Award has been won once by E. C. Wente and Bell Labs.
* 1937: Scientific or Technical Award (Class II) for their multi-cellular high-frequency horn and receiver.

==Publications==
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, Western Electric, and other Bell System companies issued numerous publications, such as local house organs, for corporate distribution, for the scientific and industry communities, and for the general public, including telephone subscribers.

The Bell Laboratories Record was a principal house organ, featuring general interest content such as corporate news, support staff profiles and events, reports of facilities upgrades, but also articles of research and development results written for technical or non-technical audiences. The publication commenced in 1925 with the founding of the laboratories.

A prominent journal for the focussed dissemination of original or reprinted scientific research by Bell Labs engineers and scientists was the &quot;Bell System Technical Journal&quot;, started in 1922 by the AT&amp;T Information Department. Bell researchers also published widely in industry journals.

Some of these articles were reprinted by the Bell System as Monographs, consecutively issued starting in 1920. These reprints, numbering over 5000, comprise a catalog of Bell research over the decades. Research in the Monographs is aided by access to associated indexes, for monographs 1–1199, 1200–2850 (1958), 2851–4050 (1962), and 4051–4650 (1964).

Essentially all of the landmark work done by Bell Labs is memorialized in one or more corresponding monographs. Examples include:
* Monograph 1598 – Shannon, A Mathematical Theory of Communication, 1948 (reprinted from BSTJ).
* Monograph 1659 – Bardeen and Brattain, Physical Principles Involved in Transistor Action, 1949 (reprinted from BSTJ).
* Monograph 1757 – Hamming, Error Detecting and Error Correcting Codes, 1950 (reprinted from BSTJ).
* Monograph 3289 – Pierce, Transoceanic Communications by Means of Satellite, 1959 (reprinted from Proc. I.R.E.).
* Monograph 3345 – Schawlow &amp; Townes, Infrared and Optical Masers, 1958 (reprinted from Physical Review).

==Presidents==
==See also==
* &quot;Bell Labs Technical Journal&quot;—Published scientific journal of Bell Laboratories (1996–present)
* &quot;Bell Labs Record&quot;
* Industrial laboratory
* George Stibitz—Bell Laboratories engineer—&quot;father of the modern digital computer&quot;
* History of mobile phones—Bell Laboratories conception and development of cellular phones
* High speed photography &amp; Wollensak—&quot;Fastax&quot; high speed (rotating prism) cameras developed by Bell Labs
* Knolls Atomic Power Laboratory
* Simplified Message Desk Interface
* Sound film—&quot;Westrex&quot; sound system for cinema films developed by Bell Labs
* &quot;TWX Magazine&quot;—A short-lived trade periodical published by Bell Laboratories (1944–1952)
* Experiments in Art and Technology—A collaboration between artists and Bell Labs engineers &amp; scientists to create new forms of art
* Xerox PARC

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Martin, Douglas. Ian M. Ross, a President at Bell Labs, Dies at 85, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, March 16, 2013, p. A23
* Gleick, James. &quot;The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood&quot;. Vintage Books, 2012, 544 pages. .

==External links==
* 
* Bell Works, the re-imagining of the historic former Bell Labs building in Holmdel, New Jersey
* Timeline of discoveries as of 2006 &lt;Nokia Bell-Labs Timeline&gt;
* Bell Labs&#x27; Murray Hill anechoic chamber
* Bell Laboratories and the Development of Electrical Recording
* History of Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc. (from Bell System Memorial)
* &quot;Bell Communications Around the Globe&quot;, public art sculpture, Los Angeles, California
* The Idea Factory a video interview with Jon Gertner, author of &quot;The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of American Innovation, by Dave Iverson of KQED-FM Public Radio, San Francisco</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="0" end="9" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="36" end="60" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q783794" start="71" end="78" title="company" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="146" end="151" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="220" end="235" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="241" end="251" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="257" end="262" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="268" end="285" title="photovoltaic cell" label="photovoltaic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="291" end="312" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="320" end="338" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="344" end="348" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="375" end="396" title="Programming language" label="programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q797302" start="397" end="398" title="B (programming language)" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="400" end="401" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="403" end="406" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283865" start="408" end="409" title="S (programming language)" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q522041" start="411" end="417" title="SNOBOL" label="SNOBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q213970" start="419" end="422" title="AWK" label="AWK"/>
<link wikidata="Q295250" start="424" end="428" title="AMPL" label="AMPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="478" end="489" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="500" end="512" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="627" end="643" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883200" start="679" end="694" title="Bell Laboratories Building (Manhattan)" label="463 West Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="770" end="786" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="795" end="805" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="954" end="994" title="American Telephone and Telegraph Company" label="American Telephone and Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q984466" start="1071" end="1094" title="Murray Hill, New Jersey" label="Murray Hill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q130357271" start="1096" end="1106" title="List of Bell Labs alumni" label="Its alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q163415" start="1144" end="1160" title="William Shockley" label="William Shockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q45575" start="1162" end="1176" title="Dennis Ritchie" label="Dennis Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="1178" end="1192" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q73058" start="1197" end="1210" title="Willard Boyle" label="Willard Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654554" start="1246" end="1267" title="AT&amp;amp;T Technologies" label="AT&amp;amp;T Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959692" start="1286" end="1311" title="Breakup of the Bell System" label="Bell System was broken up"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="1557" end="1565" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654544" start="1569" end="1590" title="AT&amp;amp;T Laboratories" label="AT&amp;amp;T Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873176" start="1601" end="1607" title="Lucent Technologies" label="Lucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="1627" end="1645" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q885235" start="1654" end="1661" title="Alcatel" label="Alcatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="1670" end="1684" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel-Lucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="1716" end="1721" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="1845" end="1862" title="French Third Republic" label="French government"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="1871" end="1892" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532871" start="1897" end="1908" title="Volta Prize" label="Volta Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="1918" end="1924" title="French franc" label="francs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13443401" start="1933" end="1959" title="invention of the telephone" label="invention of the telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940714" start="2051" end="2067" title="Volta Laboratory and Bureau" label="Volta Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2136" end="2152" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2027658" start="2175" end="2189" title="Charles Sumner Tainter" label="Sumner Tainter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095984" start="2213" end="2228" title="Chichester Bell" label="Chichester Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q436991" start="2727" end="2750" title="Alexander Melville Bell" label="Alexander Melville Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="2976" end="3002" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="3253" end="3274" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494134" start="3296" end="3312" title="Gardiner Hubbard" label="Gardiner Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883277" start="3526" end="3557" title="American Bell Telephone Company" label="American Bell Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="3658" end="3700" title="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph Company" label="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="3848" end="3864" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883200" start="4073" end="4088" title="Bell Laboratories Building (Manhattan)" label="463 West Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="4205" end="4223" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q498773" start="4422" end="4442" title="Montauk, Long Island" label="Montauk, Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="4537" end="4563" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133118" start="4625" end="4634" title="Cliffwood, New Jersey" label="Cliffwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750546" start="4646" end="4675" title="Aberdeen Township, New Jersey" label="Aberdeen Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181862" start="4747" end="4773" title="Phoenixville, Pennsylvania" label="Phoenixville, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012945" start="5356" end="5369" title="John J. Carty" label="John J. Carty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397394" start="5431" end="5446" title="Frank B. Jewett" label="Frank B. Jewett"/>
<link wikidata="Q490587" start="5779" end="5800" title="Gulfport, Mississippi" label="Gulfport, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016720" start="5893" end="5909" title="Deal, New Jersey" label="Deal, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002645" start="5984" end="5992" title="Whippany, New Jersey" label="Whippany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016895" start="6004" end="6032" title="Hanover Township, New Jersey" label="Hanover Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014459" start="6210" end="6238" title="Chester Township, New Jersey" label="Chester Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074898" start="6528" end="6543" title="Limon, Colorado" label="Limon, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000642" start="7000" end="7018" title="Summit, New Jersey" label="Summit, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474335" start="7238" end="7266" title="Holmdel Township, New Jersey" label="Holmdel Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133118" start="7316" end="7325" title="Cliffwood, New Jersey" label="Cliffwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041401" start="7492" end="7520" title="Mendham Township, New Jersey" label="Mendham Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q984466" start="8210" end="8233" title="Murray Hill, New Jersey" label="Murray Hill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474335" start="8299" end="8315" title="Holmdel Township, New Jersey" label="Holmdel Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182875" start="8317" end="8330" title="Crawford Hill" label="Crawford Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245847" start="8336" end="8350" title="Deal Test Site" label="Deal Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q691237" start="8352" end="8360" title="Freehold Borough, New Jersey" label="Freehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084100" start="8362" end="8370" title="Lincroft, New Jersey" label="Lincroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q995231" start="8372" end="8383" title="Long Branch, New Jersey" label="Long Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q735215" start="8385" end="8395" title="Middletown Township, New Jersey" label="Middletown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641218" start="8397" end="8413" title="Neptune Township, New Jersey" label="Neptune Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="8415" end="8424" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428659" start="8426" end="8436" title="Piscataway, New Jersey" label="Piscataway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010539" start="8438" end="8446" title="Red Bank, New Jersey" label="Red Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014459" start="8448" end="8464" title="Chester Township, New Jersey" label="Chester Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002645" start="8470" end="8478" title="Whippany, New Jersey" label="Whippany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695688" start="8623" end="8645" title="Telcordia Technologies" label="Telcordia Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="8685" end="8690" title="Bayer" label="Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="8747" end="8755" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q243007" start="8760" end="8770" title="Naperville, Illinois" label="Naperville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023953" start="8771" end="8776" title="Lisle, Illinois" label="Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="8917" end="8929" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="8940" end="8954" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302167" start="8956" end="8984" title="North Andover, Massachusetts" label="North Andover, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="8986" end="9009" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q237896" start="9011" end="9032" title="Reading, Pennsylvania" label="Reading, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960426" start="9038" end="9065" title="Breinigsville, Pennsylvania" label="Breinigsville, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q948129" start="9139" end="9160" title="Westminster, Colorado" label="Westminster, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883199" start="9249" end="9285" title="Bell Labs Holmdel Complex" label="Holmdel research and development lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q167073" start="9372" end="9385" title="Eero Saarinen" label="Eero Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014459" start="9781" end="9809" title="Chester Township, New Jersey" label="Chester Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182875" start="10092" end="10099" title="Crawford Hill" label="Holmdel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883312" start="10158" end="10170" title="Holmdel Horn Antenna" label="horn antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808012" start="10395" end="10419" title="Memorial Sloan Kettering" label="Memorial Sloan Kettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883199" start="10459" end="10466" title="Bell Labs Holmdel Complex" label="Holmdel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167073" start="10833" end="10846" title="Eero Saarinen" label="Eero Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="10897" end="10907" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210206" start="11720" end="11731" title="The Dilemma" label="The Dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q332774" start="12289" end="12305" title="anechoic chamber" label="anechoic chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q29739" start="12666" end="12674" title="Navistar" label="Navistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417957" start="13648" end="13660" title="Project Nike" label="Nike missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q751132" start="13687" end="13696" title="Telstar 1" label="Telstar 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883199" start="14209" end="14216" title="Bell Labs Holmdel Complex" label="Holmdel"/>
<link wikidata="Q309172" start="14298" end="14307" title="Kwajalein" label="Kwajalein"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="14704" end="14720" title="Antwerp, Belgium" label="Antwerp, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="14778" end="14795" title="Budapest, Hungary" label="Budapest, Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="14853" end="14862" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="14923" end="14937" title="Espoo, Finland" label="Espoo, Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="14977" end="14992" title="Munich, Germany" label="Munich, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q984466" start="15032" end="15055" title="Murray Hill, New Jersey" label="Murray Hill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="15120" end="15133" title="Oulu, Finland" label="Oulu, Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q251665" start="15177" end="15189" title="Paris-Saclay" label="Paris-Saclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="15257" end="15265" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="15317" end="15335" title="Stuttgart, Germany" label="Stuttgart, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q208459" start="15407" end="15428" title="Sunnyvale, California" label="Sunnyvale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="15437" end="15453" title="Tampere, Finland" label="Tampere, Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q243007" start="15460" end="15480" title="Naperville, Illinois" label="Naperville, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="15821" end="15836" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="15842" end="15852" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="15858" end="15863" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="15865" end="15883" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="15906" end="15910" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="15938" end="15939" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="15944" end="15947" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="15949" end="15960" title="solar cells" label="solar cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="15966" end="15987" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q462232" start="16122" end="16140" title="Walter A. Shewhart" label="Walter A. Shewhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369242" start="16154" end="16167" title="control chart" label="control chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356717" start="16290" end="16317" title="statistical process control" label="statistical process control"/>
<link wikidata="Q236908" start="16480" end="16489" title="Six Sigma" label="Six Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="16536" end="16568" title="Sound film" label="synchronous-sound motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723514" start="16597" end="16610" title="Movietone sound system" label="Fox Movietone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381432" start="16615" end="16633" title="Phonofilm" label="DeForest Phonofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383002" start="16667" end="16682" title="Herbert E. Ives" label="Herbert E. Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="16752" end="16773" title="Secretary of Commerce" label="Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="16774" end="16788" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="16830" end="16843" title="thermal noise" label="thermal noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q202881" start="16880" end="16895" title="John Bertrand Johnson" label="John B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q316022" start="16907" end="16920" title="Harry Nyquist" label="Harry Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q150474" start="17032" end="17044" title="one-time pad" label="one-time pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="17045" end="17051" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q713359" start="17068" end="17082" title="Gilbert Vernam" label="Gilbert Vernam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707598" start="17087" end="17103" title="Joseph Mauborgne" label="Joseph Mauborgne"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="17141" end="17155" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585955" start="17203" end="17215" title="Harold Stephen Black" label="Harold Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q316022" start="17290" end="17303" title="Harry Nyquist" label="Harry Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756793" start="17417" end="17434" title="Nyquist stability criterion" label="Nyquist criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="17476" end="17491" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319212" start="17504" end="17515" title="Karl Jansky" label="Karl Jansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152721" start="17585" end="17609" title="Shortwave bands" label="shortwave communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="17684" end="17690" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q659181" start="17807" end="17829" title="Philadelphia Orchestra" label="Philadelphia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q297562" start="17844" end="17861" title="Leopold Stokowski" label="Leopold Stokowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="17873" end="17887" title="Stereophonic sound" label="stereo signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="17915" end="17927" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q908562" start="17962" end="17969" title="vocoder" label="vocoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529839" start="18030" end="18035" title="Voder" label="Voder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16346" start="18058" end="18076" title="Speech synthesis" label="speech synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095709" start="18113" end="18125" title="Homer Dudley" label="Homer Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q133222" start="18212" end="18228" title="Clinton Davisson" label="Clinton Davisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q133846" start="18268" end="18288" title="George Paget Thomson" label="George Paget Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q864822" start="18310" end="18330" title="electron diffraction" label="electron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="18368" end="18391" title="solid-state electronics" label="solid-state electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="18431" end="18448" title="photovoltaic cell" label="photovoltaic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144183" start="18466" end="18477" title="Russell Ohl" label="Russell Ohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120011" start="18503" end="18510" title="SIGSALY" label="SIGSALY"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="18580" end="18586" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18590" end="18602" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="18636" end="18647" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="18720" end="18734" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q462232" start="18835" end="18853" title="Walter A. Shewhart" label="Walter A. Shewhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q311472" start="18855" end="18872" title="W. Edwards Deming" label="W. Edwards Deming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783431" start="18874" end="18889" title="Harold F. Dodge" label="Harold F. Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538303" start="18891" end="18908" title="George D. Edwards" label="George D. Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43234839" start="18972" end="18986" title="Mary N. Torrey" label="Mary N. Torrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="19221" end="19231" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q949" start="19319" end="19331" title="John Bardeen" label="John Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184577" start="19333" end="19355" title="Walter Houser Brattain" label="Walter Houser Brattain"/>
<link wikidata="Q163415" start="19361" end="19386" title="William Shockley" label="William Bradford Shockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q92619" start="19458" end="19473" title="Richard Hamming" label="Richard Hamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q853922" start="19483" end="19495" title="Hamming code" label="Hamming code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="19501" end="19531" title="error detection and correction" label="error detection and correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q724029" start="19610" end="19648" title="A Mathematical Theory of Communication" label="A Mathematical Theory of Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="19685" end="19703" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="19722" end="19736" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127815" start="19750" end="19779" title="Bell System Technical Journal" label="Bell System Technical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316022" start="19853" end="19866" title="Harry Nyquist" label="Harry Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q529886" start="19871" end="19884" title="Ralph Hartley" label="Ralph Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q467928" start="20032" end="20051" title="History of cryptography" label="modern cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053345" start="20078" end="20117" title="Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems" label="Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q92839" start="20160" end="20185" title="complex number calculator" label="complex number calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="20263" end="20277" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741799" start="20671" end="20678" title="Model V" label="Model V"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20779" end="20787" title="Model V#Model VI" label="Model VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="20873" end="20891" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q864135" start="20921" end="20932" title="binary code" label="binary code"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="21076" end="21097" title="microwave radio relay" label="microwave radio relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280325" start="21099" end="21122" title="direct distance dialing" label="direct distance dialing"/>
<link wikidata="Q273693" start="21126" end="21134" title="repeater" label="repeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026766" start="21136" end="21153" title="wire spring relay" label="wire spring relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069514" start="21163" end="21200" title="Number Five Crossbar Switching System" label="Number Five Crossbar Switching System"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009672" start="21212" end="21233" title="William Gardner Pfann" label="William Gardner Pfann"/>
<link wikidata="Q219909" start="21257" end="21269" title="zone melting" label="zone melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q92787" start="21340" end="21356" title="Maurice Karnaugh" label="Maurice Karnaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q461528" start="21371" end="21383" title="Karnaugh map" label="Karnaugh map"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="21406" end="21423" title="Boolean algebra (logic)" label="Boolean algebraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428282" start="21533" end="21539" title="TRADIC" label="TRADIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="22294" end="22304" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040186" start="22350" end="22361" title="Carl Frosch" label="Carl Frosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955931" start="22456" end="22461" title="TAT-1" label="TAT-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q361047" start="22473" end="22507" title="transatlantic communications cable" label="transatlantic communications cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587669" start="22691" end="22702" title="Max Mathews" label="Max Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719098" start="22711" end="22716" title="MUSIC-N" label="MUSIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="22761" end="22777" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q92939" start="22779" end="22793" title="Robert C. Prim" label="Robert C. Prim"/>
<link wikidata="Q983361" start="22798" end="22812" title="Joseph Kruskal" label="Joseph Kruskal"/>
<link wikidata="Q504353" start="22827" end="22843" title="greedy algorithm" label="greedy algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19725982" start="22865" end="22888" title="network planning and design" label="computer network design"/>
<link wikidata="Q190503" start="23263" end="23278" title="Arthur Schawlow" label="Arthur Schawlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q184566" start="23283" end="23302" title="Charles Hard Townes" label="Charles Hard Townes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="23323" end="23328" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759109" start="23369" end="23383" title="Mohamed Atalla" label="Mohamed Atalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q249228" start="23388" end="23399" title="Dawon Kahng" label="Dawon Kahng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520588" start="23910" end="23924" title="planar process" label="planar process"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="24055" end="24059" title="Silicon dioxide" label="SiO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820346" start="24200" end="24209" title="Nike Zeus" label="Nike Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q120216" start="24469" end="24478" title="Ali Javan" label="Ali Javan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24543" end="24555" title="Rolf Seebach" label="Rolf Seebach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24575" end="24590" title="Dr. William R. Bennett Jr." label="William Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635447" start="24642" end="24651" title="gas laser" label="gas laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326477" start="24758" end="24777" title="electret microphone" label="electret microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q77235" start="24794" end="24812" title="Gerhard Sessler" label="Gerhard M. Sessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507196" start="24817" end="24830" title="James West (inventor)" label="James E. West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340677" start="24846" end="24860" title="John R. Pierce" label="John R. Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="24878" end="24902" title="communications satellite" label="communications satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q63114705" start="24934" end="24941" title="Telstar" label="Telstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362150" start="25726" end="25746" title="carbon dioxide laser" label="carbon dioxide laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q462446" start="25763" end="25774" title="Kumar Patel" label="Kumar Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4511499" start="25889" end="25904" title="Myriam Sarachik" label="Myriam Sarachik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156490" start="25948" end="25960" title="Kondo effect" label="Kondo effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q190770" start="25978" end="25996" title="Philip W. Anderson" label="Philip W. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="26142" end="26165" title="Nobel Prize for Physics" label="Nobel Prize for Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="26219" end="26246" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387961" start="26347" end="26359" title="Ken Knowlton" label="Ken Knowlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648184" start="26365" end="26380" title="A. Michael Noll" label="A. Michael Noll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387961" start="26442" end="26454" title="Ken Knowlton" label="Ken Knowlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835421" start="26496" end="26502" title="BEFLIX" label="BEFLIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q375889" start="26574" end="26616" title="orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing" label="orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883200" start="26730" end="26748" title="Bell Laboratories Building (Manhattan)" label="New York City site"/>
<link wikidata="Q604877" start="26773" end="26799" title="Westbeth Artists Community" label="Westbeth Artists Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q898542" start="26819" end="26841" title="molecular beam epitaxy" label="molecular beam epitaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45575" start="27011" end="27025" title="Dennis Ritchie" label="Dennis Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107006" start="27030" end="27042" title="Ken Thompson" label="Ken Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="27081" end="27085" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="27198" end="27219" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q73058" start="27242" end="27255" title="Willard Boyle" label="Willard Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76373" start="27260" end="27275" title="George E. Smith" label="George E. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662235" start="27361" end="27373" title="Aaron Marcus" label="Aaron Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="27656" end="27674" title="personal computing" label="personal computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173451" start="27872" end="27899" title="transistor–transistor logic" label="transistor–transistor logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q751464" start="27952" end="27954" title="1ESS switch" label="1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638898" start="27955" end="27962" title="4ESS switch" label="#4 TOLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648184" start="28699" end="28714" title="A. Michael Noll" label="A. Michael Noll"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="28874" end="28892" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q41624" start="28949" end="28970" title="Erna Schneider Hoover" label="Erna Schneider Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q913351" start="29002" end="29017" title="software patent" label="software patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q45575" start="29037" end="29051" title="Dennis Ritchie" label="Dennis Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="29096" end="29097" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q797302" start="29144" end="29145" title="B (programming language)" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961443" start="29172" end="29187" title="worse is better" label="worse is better"/>
<link wikidata="Q213970" start="29224" end="29227" title="AWK" label="AWK"/>
<link wikidata="Q62898" start="29260" end="29270" title="Alfred Aho" label="Alfred Aho"/>
<link wikidata="Q92959" start="29272" end="29288" title="Peter Weinberger" label="Peter Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q92608" start="29294" end="29309" title="Brian Kernighan" label="Brian Kernighan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755831" start="29346" end="29359" title="Marc Rochkind" label="Marc Rochkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141501" start="29373" end="29399" title="Source Code Control System" label="Source Code Control System"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="29411" end="29424" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="29454" end="29461" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="29510" end="29524" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905693" start="29530" end="29539" title="BELLMAC-8" label="BELLMAC-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="29604" end="29610" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134782" start="29631" end="29641" title="Bellmac 32" label="Bellmac 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105322" start="29723" end="29733" title="Oryx/Pecos" label="Oryx/Pecos"/>
<link wikidata="Q204896" start="29818" end="29821" title="PBX/IPBX" label="PBX"/>
<link wikidata="Q212433" start="30032" end="30037" title="Avaya" label="Avaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q725779" start="30091" end="30112" title="Plan 9 from Bell Labs" label="Plan 9 from Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281253" start="30163" end="30172" title="Radiodrum" label="Radiodrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q878344" start="30267" end="30271" title="Time-division multiple access" label="TDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926924" start="30425" end="30438" title="Blit (computer terminal)" label="Blit terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q517764" start="30466" end="30474" title="Rob Pike" label="Rob Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030113" start="31559" end="31589" title="fractional quantum Hall effect" label="fractional quantum Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q71015" start="31608" end="31621" title="Horst Ludwig Störmer" label="Horst Störmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189997" start="31663" end="31681" title="Robert B. Laughlin" label="Robert B. Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202138" start="31686" end="31700" title="Daniel C. Tsui" label="Daniel C. Tsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701527" start="31945" end="31979" title="terahertz time-domain spectroscopy" label="terahertz time-domain spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246305" start="31990" end="32016" title="Karmarkar&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Karmarkar&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q29664" start="32071" end="32089" title="Narendra Karmarkar" label="Narendra Karmarkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069593" start="32105" end="32128" title="Modification of Final Judgment" label="a divestiture agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695688" start="32217" end="32225" title="Bellcore" label="Bellcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695688" start="32231" end="32240" title="iconectiv" label="iconectiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q363589" start="32339" end="32361" title="local exchange carrier" label="local exchange carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654554" start="32549" end="32570" title="AT&amp;amp;T Technologies" label="AT&amp;amp;T Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641058" start="32610" end="32621" title="5ESS Switch" label="5ESS Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q163117" start="32792" end="32805" title="laser cooling" label="laser cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q172466" start="32847" end="32857" title="Steven Chu" label="Steven Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q295250" start="32948" end="32952" title="AMPL" label="AMPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344463" start="32971" end="32984" title="Robert Fourer" label="Robert Fourer"/>
<link wikidata="Q937629" start="33089" end="33117" title="National Medal of Technology" label="National Medal of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="33228" end="33231" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q92620" start="33266" end="33283" title="Bjarne Stroustrup" label="Bjarne Stroustrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="34004" end="34029" title="fiber-optic communication" label="fiber-optic communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q51823" start="34048" end="34053" title="SONET" label="SONET"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050570" start="34870" end="34875" title="TAT-8" label="TAT-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="34907" end="34924" title="fiber-optic cable" label="fiber-optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q26466125" start="35177" end="35194" title="Richard D. Gitlin" label="Richard D. Gitlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="35287" end="35310" title="digital subscriber line" label="digital subscriber line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116037" start="35669" end="35693" title="common-channel signaling" label="common-channel signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="35849" end="35854" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q26466125" start="36145" end="36162" title="Richard D. Gitlin" label="Richard D. Gitlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550028" start="36476" end="36491" title="Gerard Foschini" label="Gerard Foschini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407411" start="36982" end="37003" title="quantum cascade laser" label="quantum cascade laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q764570" start="37020" end="37036" title="Federico Capasso" label="Federico Capasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q462900" start="37038" end="37048" title="Alfred Cho" label="Alfred Cho"/>
<link wikidata="Q370071" start="37102" end="37112" title="Peter Shor" label="Peter Shor"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="37185" end="37196" title="lithography" label="lithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q908615" start="37312" end="37319" title="Inferno (operating system)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q128392" start="37404" end="37414" title="Concurrent computing" label="concurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q544927" start="37436" end="37441" title="Limbo (programming language)" label="Limbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="37672" end="37691" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Lucent Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654544" start="37784" end="37797" title="AT&amp;amp;T Labs" label="AT&amp;amp;T Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="37907" end="37911" title="RISC" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354195" start="38134" end="38156" title="Yokosuka Research Park" label="Yokosuka Research Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q200578" start="38160" end="38168" title="Yokosuka" label="Yokosuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="38266" end="38272" title="W-CDMA" label="W-CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="38328" end="38337" title="nanometer" label="nanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098813" start="38386" end="38400" title="Optical IP Switching" label="optical router"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619033" start="38839" end="38850" title="DNA machine" label="DNA machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929925" start="38997" end="39010" title="Dye laser" label="organic laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="39053" end="39064" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q901002" start="39135" end="39154" title="Organic electronics" label="plastic transistors"/>
<link wikidata="Q111187335" start="39199" end="39226" title="Schön scandal" label="Jan Hendrik Schön was fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272013" start="39345" end="39379" title="New Jersey Institute of Technology" label="New Jersey Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q984466" start="39429" end="39452" title="Murray Hill, New Jersey" label="Murray Hill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="39693" end="39712" title="solid-state physics" label="solid-state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="39755" end="39771" title="Gallium Arsenide" label="Gallium Arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098878" start="40076" end="40094" title="optical networking" label="optical networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177238" start="40201" end="40213" title="Jeong H. Kim" label="Jeong H. Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="40449" end="40456" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="40499" end="40513" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel-Lucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="40766" end="40781" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022711" start="40841" end="40845" title="CACI" label="CACI"/>
<link wikidata="Q639681" start="41624" end="41644" title="Network Architecture" label="Network Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="41736" end="41745" title="Broadband" label="Broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="42648" end="42669" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q19564487" start="43199" end="43212" title="Marcus Weldon" label="Marcus Weldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="43317" end="43358" title="Information and communications technology" label="Information and communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="43584" end="43600" title="Tel Aviv, Israel" label="Tel Aviv, Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351105" start="44116" end="44127" title="Eric Betzig" label="Eric Betzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="44332" end="44337" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51985" start="44554" end="44583" title="Technische Universität Berlin" label="Technische Universität Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q157808" start="44617" end="44647" title="Technical University of Munich" label="Technical University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44802" end="44826" title="Constellation shaping#Probabilistic Constellation Shaping" label="new modulation technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q708472" start="44977" end="44990" title="Arthur Ashkin" label="Arthur Ashkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q62898" start="45187" end="45197" title="Alfred Aho" label="Alfred Aho"/>
<link wikidata="Q92794" start="45202" end="45216" title="Jeffrey Ullman" label="Jeffrey Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="46376" end="46401" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="46652" end="46666" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corp." label="AT&amp;amp;T Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q1873176" start="46668" end="46687" title="Lucent Technologies" label="Lucent Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="46689" end="46703" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel-Lucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q133222" start="46855" end="46874" title="Clinton Davisson" label="Clinton J. Davisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q949" start="46962" end="46974" title="John Bardeen" label="John Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184577" start="46976" end="46994" title="Walter H. Brattain" label="Walter H. Brattain"/>
<link wikidata="Q163415" start="47000" end="47016" title="William Shockley" label="William Shockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="47077" end="47087" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190770" start="47098" end="47116" title="Philip W. Anderson" label="Philip W. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172877" start="47261" end="47276" title="Arno A. Penzias" label="Arno A. Penzias"/>
<link wikidata="Q171034" start="47281" end="47297" title="Robert Woodrow Wilson" label="Robert W. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="47385" end="47422" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="47461" end="47469" title="Universe" label="Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q172466" start="47523" end="47533" title="Steven Chu" label="Steven Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q71015" start="47640" end="47653" title="Horst Störmer" label="Horst Störmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189997" start="47655" end="47670" title="Robert Laughlin" label="Robert Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202138" start="47676" end="47687" title="Daniel Tsui" label="Daniel Tsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030113" start="47764" end="47794" title="fractional quantum Hall effect" label="fractional quantum Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q73058" start="47804" end="47820" title="Willard S. Boyle" label="Willard S. Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76373" start="47822" end="47837" title="George E. Smith" label="George E. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16389" start="47877" end="47891" title="Charles K. Kao" label="Charles K. Kao"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="47934" end="47955" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351105" start="48001" end="48012" title="Eric Betzig" label="Eric Betzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q708472" start="48156" end="48169" title="Arthur Ashkin" label="Arthur Ashkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194646" start="48339" end="48349" title="Louis Brus" label="Louis Brus"/>
<link wikidata="Q391237" start="48495" end="48508" title="John Hopfield" label="John Hopfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="48606" end="48618" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q92619" start="48677" end="48692" title="Richard Hamming" label="Richard Hamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107006" start="48810" end="48822" title="Ken Thompson" label="Ken Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q45575" start="48827" end="48841" title="Dennis Ritchie" label="Dennis Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="48904" end="48908" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q92638" start="48918" end="48931" title="Robert Tarjan" label="Robert Tarjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q62874" start="48937" end="48950" title="John Hopcroft" label="John Hopcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571662" start="49051" end="49061" title="Yann LeCun" label="Yann LeCun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572699" start="49066" end="49079" title="Yoshua Bengio" label="Yoshua Bengio"/>
<link wikidata="Q92894" start="49109" end="49124" title="Geoffrey Hinton" label="Geoffrey Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q62898" start="49166" end="49176" title="Alfred Aho" label="Alfred Aho"/>
<link wikidata="Q92794" start="49181" end="49195" title="Jeffrey Ullman" label="Jeffrey Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q678414" start="49277" end="49296" title="IEEE Medal of Honor" label="IEEE Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="49339" end="49388" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544764" start="49470" end="49496" title="Greenleaf Whittier Pickard" label="Greenleaf Whittier Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506886" start="49625" end="49637" title="G A Campbell" label="G A Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866926" start="49716" end="49733" title="Lloyd Espenschied" label="Lloyd Espenschied"/>
<link wikidata="Q529886" start="49950" end="49963" title="Ralph Hartley" label="Ralph Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q124357" start="50278" end="50289" title="Ralph Brown" label="Ralph Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q722425" start="50407" end="50422" title="Harald T. Friis" label="Harald T. Friis"/>
<link wikidata="Q316022" start="50620" end="50633" title="Harry Nyquist" label="Harry Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507068" start="50774" end="50794" title="George C. Southworth" label="George C. Southworth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50801" end="50821" title="John H. Hammond, Jr." label="John H. Hammond, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="50951" end="50965" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184566" start="51110" end="51127" title="Charles H. Townes" label="Charles H. Townes"/>
<link wikidata="Q949" start="51260" end="51272" title="John Bardeen" label="John Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q94031" start="51462" end="51477" title="Rudolf Kompfner" label="Rudolf Kompfner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340677" start="51644" end="51658" title="John R. Pierce" label="John R. Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q482434" start="51898" end="51914" title="H. Earle Vaughan" label="H. Earle Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163415" start="52099" end="52115" title="William Shockley" label="William Shockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q176026" start="52278" end="52295" title="Sidney Darlington" label="Sidney Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q382207" start="52404" end="52421" title="John Wilder Tukey" label="John Wilder Tukey"/>
<link wikidata="Q462446" start="52551" end="52568" title="C. Kumar N. Patel" label="C. Kumar N. Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q441794" start="52709" end="52725" title="Amos E. Joel Jr." label="Amos E. Joel Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q462900" start="52834" end="52847" title="Alfred Y. Cho" label="Alfred Y. Cho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528517" start="52939" end="52954" title="Herwig Kogelnik" label="Herwig Kogelnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122582" start="53163" end="53180" title="James L. Flanagan" label="James L. Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="53324" end="53334" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="53874" end="53895" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="54334" end="54346" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="54501" end="54514" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883201" start="54982" end="55006" title="Bell Laboratories Record" label="Bell Laboratories Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q127815" start="55488" end="55517" title="Bell System Technical Journal" label="Bell System Technical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q127815" start="56703" end="56730" title="Bell Labs Technical Journal" label="Bell Labs Technical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883201" start="56810" end="56826" title="Bell Labs Record" label="Bell Labs Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="56835" end="56856" title="Industrial laboratory" label="Industrial laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q92839" start="56859" end="56873" title="George Stibitz" label="George Stibitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630862" start="56953" end="56977" title="History of mobile phones" label="History of mobile phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794511" start="57044" end="57066" title="High speed photography" label="High speed photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030340" start="57073" end="57082" title="Wollensak" label="Wollensak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422983" start="57163" end="57193" title="Knolls Atomic Power Laboratory" label="Knolls Atomic Power Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520936" start="57196" end="57229" title="Simplified Message Desk Interface" label="Simplified Message Desk Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="57232" end="57242" title="Sound film" label="Sound film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672559" start="57324" end="57336" title="TWX Magazine" label="TWX Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421183" start="57419" end="57452" title="Experiments in Art and Technology" label="Experiments in Art and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="57555" end="57565" title="PARC (company)" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="57690" end="57708" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q113105" start="57741" end="57754" title="Gleick, James" label="Gleick, James"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57762" end="57807" title="The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood" label="The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58393" end="58461" title="The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of American Innovation" label="The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of American Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q765372" start="58482" end="58489" title="KQED-FM" label="KQED-FM"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3713" wikidata="Q92620" url="?curid=3713" title="Bjarne Stroustrup">
<text>Bjarne Stroustrup (; ; born 30 December 1950) is a Danish computer scientist, known for the development of the C++ programming language. He led the Large-scale Programming Research department at Bell Labs, served as a professor of computer science at Texas A&amp;M University, and spent over a decade at Morgan Stanley while also being a visiting professor at Columbia University. Since 2022 he has been a full professor at Columbia.

== Early life and education ==
Stroustrup was born in Aarhus, Denmark. His family was working class, and he attended local schools.

He attended Aarhus University from 1969 to 1975 and graduated with a Candidatus Scientiarum in mathematics with computer science. His interests focused on microprogramming and machine architecture. He learned the fundamentals of object-oriented programming from its inventor, Kristen Nygaard, who frequently visited Aarhus.

In 1979, he received his PhD in computer science from the University of Cambridge, where his research on distributed computing was supervised by David Wheeler.

==Career and research==
In 1979, Stroustrup began his career as a member of technical staff in the Computer Science Research Center of Bell Labs in Murray Hill, New Jersey. There, he began his work on C++ and programming techniques. Stroustrup was the head of AT&amp;T Bell Labs&#x27; Large-scale Programming Research department, from its creation until late 2002. In 1993, he was made a Bell Labs fellow and in 1996, an AT&amp;T Fellow.

From 2002 to 2014, Stroustrup was the College of Engineering Chair Professor in Computer Science at Texas A&amp;M University. From 2011, he was made a University Distinguished Professor.

From January 2014 to April 2022, Stroustrup was a technical fellow and managing director in the technology division of Morgan Stanley in New York City and a visiting professor in computer science at Columbia University.

As of July 2022, Stroustrup is a full professor of Computer Science at Columbia University.

===C++===
Stroustrup is best known for his work on C++. In 1979, he began developing C++ (initially called &quot;C with Classes&quot;). In his own words, he &quot;invented C++, wrote its early definitions, and produced its first implementation [...] chose and formulated the design criteria for C++, designed all its major facilities, and was responsible for the processing of extension proposals in the C++ standards committee.&quot; C++ was made generally available in 1985. For non-commercial use, the source code of the compiler and the foundation libraries was the cost of shipping (US$75); this was before Internet access was common. Stroustrup also published a textbook for the language in 1985, &quot;The C++ Programming Language&quot;.

The key language-technical areas of contribution of C++ are:

* A static type system with equal support for built-in types and user-defined types (that requires control of the construction, destruction, copying, and movement of objects; and operator overloading).
* Value and reference semantics. 
* Systematic and general resource management (RAII): constructors, destructor, and exceptions relying on them.
* Support for efficient object-oriented programming: based on the Simula model with statically checked interfaces, multiple inheritance, and efficient implementation based on virtual function tables.
* Support for flexible and efficient generic programming: templates with specialization and concepts.
* Support for compile-time programming: template metaprogramming and compile-time evaluated functions (&quot;constexpr functions&quot;).
* Direct use of machine and operating system resources.
* Concurrency support through libraries (where necessary, implemented using intrinsics).

Stroustrup documented his principles guiding the design of C++ and the evolution of the language in his 1994 book, &quot;The Design and Evolution of C++&quot;, and three papers for ACM&#x27;s History of Programming Languages conferences.

Stroustrup was a founding member of the C++ standards committee (from 1989, it was an ANSI committee and from 1991 an ISO committee) and has remained an active member ever since. For 24 years he chaired the subgroup chartered to handle proposals for language extensions (Evolution Working Group).

===Awards and honors===
Selected honors

* 2018: The Charles Stark Draper Prize from The US National Academy of Engineering for conceptualizing and developing the C++ programming language.
* 2018: The Computer Pioneer Award from The IEEE Computer Society for bringing object-oriented programming and generic programming to the mainstream with his design and implementation of the C++ programming language.
* 2017: The Faraday Medal from the IET (Institute of Engineering Technology) for significant contributions to the history of computing, in particular pioneering the C++ programming language.
* 2010: The University of Aarhus&#x27;s Rigmor og Carl Holst-Knudsens Videnskabspris.
* 2005: The William Procter Prize for Scientific Achievement from Sigma Xi (the scientific research society) as the first computer scientist ever.
* 1993: The ACM Grace Murray Hopper award for his early work laying the foundations for the C++ programming language. Based on those foundations and Dr. Stroustrup&#x27;s continuing efforts, C++ has become one of the most influential programming languages in the history of computing.

Fellowships

* Member of the National Academy of Engineering in 2004.
* Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) in 1994.
* Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) in 1994.
* Fellow of the Computer History Museum for his invention of the C++ programming language in 2015.
* Honorary Fellow of Churchill College, Cambridge in 2017.

Honorary doctorates and professorships

* He was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University Carlos III, Spain 2019.
* Stroustrup has been a noble doctor at ITMO University since 2013.
* Honorary Professor in Object Oriented Programming Languages, Department of Computer Science, University of Aarhus. 2010.

===Publications===
Stroustrup has written or co-written a number of publications, including the books:

* &quot;A Tour of C++&quot; (1st, 2nd and 3rd edition) 
* Programming: Principles and Practice &quot;Using C++&quot;
* &quot;The C++ Programming Language&quot; (1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th edition) 
* &quot;The Design and Evolution of C++&quot;
* &quot;The Annotated C++ Reference Manual&quot;.

In all, these books have been translated into 21 languages.

More than 100 academic articles, including:

*&quot;Thriving in a crowded and changing world&quot;
* &quot;Evolving a language in and for the real world&quot;
* B Stroustrup: What should we teach software developers? Why? CACM. January 2010. 
* Gabriel Dos Reis and Bjarne Stroustrup: A Principled, Complete, and Efficient Representation of C++. Journal of Mathematics in Computer Science Volume 5, Issue 3 (2011), Page 335–356 . Special issue on Polynomial System Solving, System and Control, and Software Science.
* Gabriel Dos Reis and Bjarne Stroustrup: General Constant Expressions for System Programming Languages. SAC-2010. The 25th ACM Symposium on Applied Computing. March 2010. 
* Y. Solodkyy, G. Dos Reis, and B. Stroustrup: Open and Efficient Type Switch for C++. Proc. OOPSLA&#x27;12. 
* Peter Pirkelbauer, Yuriy Solodkyy, Bjarne Stroustrup: Design and Evaluation of C++ Open Multi-Methods. In Science of Computer Programming (2009). Elsevier Journal. June 2009. .
* Gabriel Dos Reis and Bjarne Stroustrup: Specifying C++ Concepts. POPL06. January 2006. 
* B. Stroustrup: Exception Safety: Concepts and Techniques. In Springer Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science, LNCS-2022. ISSN 0302-9743. . April 2001.
* B Stroustrup: Generalizing Overloading for C++2000. Overload, Issue 25. 1 April 1998.
* B. Stroustrup: Why C++ isn&#x27;t just an Object-Oriented Programming Language. Addendum to OOPSLA&#x27;95 Proceedings. OOPS Messenger, vol 6 no 4, pp 1–13. October 1995. 
* B. Stroustrup: A History of C++: 1979–1991 Notices. Vol 28 No 3, pp 271–298. March 1993. Also, History of Programming languages (editors T.J. Begin and R.G. Gibson) Addison-Wesley, 1996.
* B. Stroustrup: What is Object-Oriented Programming? (1991 revised version). Proc. 1st European Software Festival. February 1991.
* B. Stroustrup: Data Abstraction in C. Bell Labs Technical Journal. vol 63. no 8 (Part 2), pp 1701–1732. October 1984. 
* B. Stroustrup: Classes: An Abstract Data Type Facility for the C Language. Sigplan Notices, January 1982. 

More than a hundred technical reports for the C++ standards committee (WG21)

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92620" start="0" end="17" title="Bjarne Stroustrup" label="Bjarne Stroustrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="58" end="76" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="111" end="114" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="195" end="204" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="251" end="275" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q334204" start="304" end="318" title="Morgan Stanley" label="Morgan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q94084" start="338" end="356" title="visiting professor" label="visiting professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="360" end="379" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="406" end="420" title="full professor" label="full professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="489" end="504" title="Aarhus, Denmark" label="Aarhus, Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="521" end="534" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="580" end="597" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383393" start="637" end="659" title="Cand.scient." label="Candidatus Scientiarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="663" end="674" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="680" end="696" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="797" end="824" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q92744" start="844" end="859" title="Kristen Nygaard" label="Kristen Nygaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="884" end="890" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="918" end="921" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="951" end="974" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="998" end="1019" title="distributed computing" label="distributed computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q92944" start="1038" end="1051" title="David Wheeler (computer scientist)" label="David Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="1189" end="1198" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q984466" start="1202" end="1225" title="Murray Hill, New Jersey" label="Murray Hill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="1314" end="1338" title="Bell Labs" label="AT&amp;amp;T Bell Labs&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="1573" end="1589" title="Computer Science" label="Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="1593" end="1617" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q334204" start="1800" end="1814" title="Morgan Stanley" label="Morgan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="2108" end="2109" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060395" start="2704" end="2732" title="The C++ Programming Language" label="The C++ Programming Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q332629" start="2982" end="3002" title="operator overloading" label="operator overloading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714630" start="3085" end="3089" title="Resource acquisition is initialization" label="RAII"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="3216" end="3222" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070739" start="3265" end="3285" title="multiple inheritance" label="multiple inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755692" start="3325" end="3348" title="Virtual method table" label="virtual function tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051282" start="3387" end="3406" title="generic programming" label="generic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q773763" start="3492" end="3516" title="template metaprogramming" label="template metaprogramming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063447" start="4321" end="4351" title="Charles Stark Draper Prize" label="The Charles Stark Draper Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="4357" end="4395" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="The US National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4363133" start="4469" end="4495" title="Computer Pioneer Award" label="The Computer Pioneer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q669561" start="4501" end="4526" title="IEEE Computer Society" label="The IEEE Computer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396110" start="4686" end="4703" title="Faraday Medal" label="The Faraday Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="5417" end="5448" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="5460" end="5466" title="Fellow" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="5474" end="5509" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="5541" end="5590" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="5623" end="5646" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q714740" start="5727" end="5755" title="Churchill College, Cambridge" label="Churchill College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342013" start="5929" end="5944" title="ITMO University" label="ITMO University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060395" start="6310" end="6338" title="The C++ Programming Language" label="The C++ Programming Language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3717" wikidata="Q1073" url="?curid=3717" title="Brain">
<text>The brain is an organ that serves as the center of the nervous system in all vertebrate and most invertebrate animals. It consists of nervous tissue and is typically located in the head (cephalization), usually near organs for special senses such as vision, hearing and olfaction. Being the most specialized organ, it is responsible for receiving information from the sensory nervous system, processing those information (thought, cognition, and intelligence) and the coordination of motor control (muscle activity and endocrine system).

While invertebrate brains arise from paired segmental ganglia (each of which is only responsible for the respective body segment) of the ventral nerve cord, vertebrate brains develop axially from the midline dorsal nerve cord as a vesicular enlargement at the rostral end of the neural tube, with centralized control over all body segments. All vertebrate brains can be embryonically divided into three parts: the forebrain (prosencephalon, subdivided into telencephalon and diencephalon), midbrain (mesencephalon) and hindbrain (rhombencephalon, subdivided into metencephalon and myelencephalon). The spinal cord, which directly interacts with somatic functions below the head, can be considered a caudal extension of the myelencephalon enclosed inside the vertebral column. Together, the brain and spinal cord constitute the central nervous system in all vertebrates.

In humans, the cerebral cortex contains approximately 14–16 billion neurons, and the estimated number of neurons in the cerebellum is 55–70 billion. Each neuron is connected by synapses to several thousand other neurons, typically communicating with one another via cytoplasmic processes known as dendrites and axons. Axons are usually myelinated and carry trains of rapid micro-electric signal pulses called action potentials to target specific recipient cells in other areas of the brain or distant parts of the body. The prefrontal cortex, which controls executive functions, is particularly well developed in humans.

Physiologically, brains exert centralized control over a body&#x27;s other organs. They act on the rest of the body both by generating patterns of muscle activity and by driving the secretion of chemicals called hormones. This centralized control allows rapid and coordinated responses to changes in the environment. Some basic types of responsiveness such as reflexes can be mediated by the spinal cord or peripheral ganglia, but sophisticated purposeful control of behavior based on complex sensory input requires the information integrating capabilities of a centralized brain.

The operations of individual brain cells are now understood in considerable detail but the way they cooperate in ensembles of millions is yet to be solved. Recent models in modern neuroscience treat the brain as a biological computer, very different in mechanism from a digital computer, but similar in the sense that it acquires information from the surrounding world, stores it, and processes it in a variety of ways.

This article compares the properties of brains across the entire range of animal species, with the greatest attention to vertebrates. It deals with the human brain insofar as it shares the properties of other brains. The ways in which the human brain differs from other brains are covered in the human brain article. Several topics that might be covered here are instead covered there because much more can be said about them in a human context. The most important that are covered in the human brain article are brain disease and the effects of brain damage.
== Structure ==
The shape and size of the brain varies greatly between species, and identifying common features is often difficult. Nevertheless, there are a number of principles of brain architecture that apply across a wide range of species. Some aspects of brain structure are common to almost the entire range of animal species; others distinguish &quot;advanced&quot; brains from more primitive ones, or distinguish vertebrates from invertebrates.

The simplest way to gain information about brain anatomy is by visual inspection, but many more sophisticated techniques have been developed. Brain tissue in its natural state is too soft to work with, but it can be hardened by immersion in alcohol or other fixatives, and then sliced apart for examination of the interior. Visually, the interior of the brain consists of areas of so-called grey matter, with a dark color, separated by areas of white matter, with a lighter color. Further information can be gained by staining slices of brain tissue with a variety of chemicals that bring out areas where specific types of molecules are present in high concentrations. It is also possible to examine the microstructure of brain tissue using a microscope, and to trace the pattern of connections from one brain area to another.

=== Cellular structure ===
The brains of all species are composed primarily of two broad classes of brain cells: neurons and glial cells. Glial cells (also known as &quot;glia&quot; or &quot;neuroglia&quot;) come in several types, and perform a number of critical functions, including structural support, metabolic support, insulation, and guidance of development. Neurons, however, are usually considered the most important cells in the brain. In humans, the cerebral cortex contains approximately 14–16 billion neurons, and the estimated number of neurons in the cerebellum is 55–70 billion. Each neuron is connected by synapses to several thousand other neurons. The property that makes neurons unique is their ability to send signals to specific target cells, sometimes over long distances. They send these signals by means of an axon, which is a thin protoplasmic fiber that extends from the cell body and projects, usually with numerous branches, to other areas, sometimes nearby, sometimes in distant parts of the brain or body. The length of an axon can be extraordinary: for example, if a pyramidal cell (an excitatory neuron) of the cerebral cortex were magnified so that its cell body became the size of a human body, its axon, equally magnified, would become a cable a few centimeters in diameter, extending more than a kilometer. These axons transmit signals in the form of electrochemical pulses called action potentials, which last less than a thousandth of a second and travel along the axon at speeds of 1–100 meters per second. Some neurons emit action potentials constantly, at rates of 10–100 per second, usually in irregular patterns; other neurons are quiet most of the time, but occasionally emit a burst of action potentials.

Axons transmit signals to other neurons by means of specialized junctions called synapses. A single axon may make as many as several thousand synaptic connections with other cells. When an action potential, traveling along an axon, arrives at a synapse, it causes a chemical called a neurotransmitter to be released. The neurotransmitter binds to receptor molecules in the membrane of the target cell.

Synapses are the key functional elements of the brain. The essential function of the brain is cell-to-cell communication, and synapses are the points at which communication occurs. The human brain has been estimated to contain approximately 100 trillion synapses; even the brain of a fruit fly contains several million. The functions of these synapses are very diverse: some are excitatory (exciting the target cell); others are inhibitory; others work by activating second messenger systems that change the internal chemistry of their target cells in complex ways. A large number of synapses are dynamically modifiable; that is, they are capable of changing strength in a way that is controlled by the patterns of signals that pass through them. It is widely believed that activity-dependent modification of synapses is the brain&#x27;s primary mechanism for learning and memory.

Most of the space in the brain is taken up by axons, which are often bundled together in what are called &quot;nerve fiber tracts&quot;. A myelinated axon is wrapped in a fatty insulating sheath of myelin, which serves to greatly increase the speed of signal propagation. (There are also unmyelinated axons). Myelin is white, making parts of the brain filled exclusively with nerve fibers appear as light-colored white matter, in contrast to the darker-colored grey matter that marks areas with high densities of neuron cell bodies.

== Evolution ==
=== Generic bilaterian nervous system ===

Except for a few primitive organisms such as sponges (which have no nervous system) and cnidarians (which have a diffuse nervous system consisting of a nerve net), all living multicellular animals are bilaterians, meaning animals with a bilaterally symmetric body plan (that is, left and right sides that are approximate mirror images of each other). All bilaterians are thought to have descended from a common ancestor that appeared late in the Cryogenian period, 700–650 million years ago, and it has been hypothesized that this common ancestor had the shape of a simple tubeworm with a segmented body. At a schematic level, that basic worm-shape continues to be reflected in the body and nervous system architecture of all modern bilaterians, including vertebrates. The fundamental bilateral body form is a tube with a hollow gut cavity running from the mouth to the anus, and a nerve cord with an enlargement (a ganglion) for each body segment, with an especially large ganglion at the front, called the brain. The brain is small and simple in some species, such as nematode worms; in other species, such as vertebrates, it is a large and very complex organ. Some types of worms, such as leeches, also have an enlarged ganglion at the back end of the nerve cord, known as a &quot;tail brain&quot;.

There are a few types of existing bilaterians that lack a recognizable brain, including echinoderms and tunicates. It has not been definitively established whether the existence of these brainless species indicates that the earliest bilaterians lacked a brain, or whether their ancestors evolved in a way that led to the disappearance of a previously existing brain structure.

=== Invertebrates ===

This category includes tardigrades, arthropods, molluscs, and numerous types of worms. The diversity of invertebrate body plans is matched by an equal diversity in brain structures.

Two groups of invertebrates have notably complex brains: arthropods (insects, crustaceans, arachnids, and others), and cephalopods (octopuses, squids, and similar molluscs). The brains of arthropods and cephalopods arise from twin parallel nerve cords that extend through the body of the animal. Arthropods have a central brain, the supraesophageal ganglion, with three divisions and large optical lobes behind each eye for visual processing. Cephalopods such as the octopus and squid have the largest brains of any invertebrates.

There are several invertebrate species whose brains have been studied intensively because they have properties that make them convenient for experimental work:
* Fruit flies (&quot;Drosophila&quot;), because of the large array of techniques available for studying their genetics, have been a natural subject for studying the role of genes in brain development. In spite of the large evolutionary distance between insects and mammals, many aspects of &quot;Drosophila&quot; neurogenetics have been shown to be relevant to humans. The first biological clock genes, for example, were identified by examining &quot;Drosophila&quot; mutants that showed disrupted daily activity cycles. A search in the genomes of vertebrates revealed a set of analogous genes, which were found to play similar roles in the mouse biological clock—and therefore almost certainly in the human biological clock as well. Studies done on Drosophila, also show that most neuropil regions of the brain are continuously reorganized throughout life in response to specific living conditions.
* The nematode worm &quot;Caenorhabditis elegans&quot;, like &quot;Drosophila&quot;, has been studied largely because of its importance in genetics. In the early 1970s, Sydney Brenner chose it as a model organism for studying the way that genes control development. One of the advantages of working with this worm is that the body plan is very stereotyped: the nervous system of the hermaphrodite contains exactly 302 neurons, always in the same places, making identical synaptic connections in every worm. Brenner&#x27;s team sliced worms into thousands of ultrathin sections and photographed each one under an electron microscope, then visually matched fibers from section to section, to map out every neuron and synapse in the entire body. The complete neuronal &quot;wiring diagram&quot; of &quot;C.elegans&quot; – its connectome was achieved. Nothing approaching this level of detail is available for any other organism, and the information gained has enabled a multitude of studies that would otherwise have not been possible.
* The sea slug &quot;Aplysia californica&quot; was chosen by Nobel Prize-winning neurophysiologist Eric Kandel as a model for studying the cellular basis of learning and memory, because of the simplicity and accessibility of its nervous system, and it has been examined in hundreds of experiments.

=== Vertebrates ===

The first vertebrates appeared over 500 million years ago (Mya) during the Cambrian period, and may have resembled the modern jawless fish (hagfish and lamprey) in form. Jawed vertebrates appeared by 445 Mya, tetrapods by 350 Mya, amniotes by 310 Mya and mammaliaforms by 200 Mya (approximately). Each vertebrate clade has an equally long evolutionary history, but the brains of modern fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals show a gradient of size and complexity that roughly follows the evolutionary sequence. All of these brains contain the same set of basic anatomical structures, but many are rudimentary in the hagfish, whereas in mammals the foremost part (forebrain, especially the telencephalon) is greatly developed and expanded.

Brains are most commonly compared in terms of their mass. The relationship between brain size, body size and other variables has been studied across a wide range of vertebrate species. As a rule of thumb, brain size increases with body size, but not in a simple linear proportion. In general, smaller animals tend to have proportionally larger brains, measured as a fraction of body size. For mammals, the relationship between brain volume and body mass essentially follows a power law with an exponent of about 0.75. This formula describes the central tendency, but every family of mammals departs from it to some degree, in a way that reflects in part the complexity of their behavior. For example, primates have brains 5 to 10 times larger than the formula predicts. Predators, who have to implement various hunting strategies against the ever changing anti-predator adaptations, tend to have larger brains relative to body size than their prey.
All vertebrate brains share a common underlying form, which appears most clearly during early stages of embryonic development. In its earliest form, the brain appears as three vesicular swellings at the front end of the neural tube; these swellings eventually become the forebrain (prosencephalon), midbrain (mesencephalon) and hindbrain (rhombencephalon), respectively. At the earliest stages of brain development, the three areas are roughly equal in size. In many aquatic/semiaquatic vertebrates such as fish and amphibians, the three parts remain similar in size in adults, but in terrestrial tetrapods such as mammals, the forebrain becomes much larger than the other parts, the hindbrain develops a bulky dorsal extension known as the cerebellum, and the midbrain becomes very small as a result.

The brains of vertebrates are made of very soft tissue. Living brain tissue is pinkish on the outside and mostly white on the inside, with subtle variations in color. Vertebrate brains are surrounded by a system of connective tissue membranes called meninges, which separate the skull from the brain. Cerebral arteries pierce the outer two layers of the meninges, the dura and arachnoid mater, into the subarachnoid space and perfuse the brain parenchyma via arterioles perforating into the innermost layer of the meninges, the pia mater. The endothelial cells in the cerebral blood vessel walls are joined tightly to one another, forming the blood–brain barrier, which blocks the passage of many toxins and pathogens (though at the same time blocking antibodies and some drugs, thereby presenting special challenges in treatment of diseases of the brain). As a result of the osmotic restriction by the blood-brain barrier, the metabolites within the brain are cleared mostly by bulk flow of the cerebrospinal fluid within the glymphatic system instead of via venules like other parts of the body.

Neuroanatomists usually divide the vertebrate brain into six main subregions: the telencephalon (the cerebral hemispheres), diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), mesencephalon (midbrain), cerebellum, pons and medulla oblongata, with the midbrain, pons and medulla often collectively called the brainstem. Each of these areas has a complex internal structure. Some parts, such as the cerebral cortex and the cerebellar cortex, are folded into convoluted gyri and sulci in order to maximize surface area within the available intracranial space. Other parts, such as the thalamus and hypothalamus, consist of many small clusters of nuclei known as &quot;ganglia&quot;. Thousands of distinguishable areas can be identified within the vertebrate brain based on fine distinctions of neural structure, chemistry, and connectivity.

Although the same basic components are present in all vertebrate brains, some branches of vertebrate evolution have led to substantial distortions of brain geometry, especially in the forebrain area. The brain of a shark shows the basic components in a straightforward way, but in teleost fishes (the great majority of existing fish species), the forebrain has become &quot;everted&quot;, like a sock turned inside out. In birds, there are also major changes in forebrain structure. These distortions can make it difficult to match brain components from one species with those of another species.

Here is a list of some of the most important vertebrate brain components, along with a brief description of their functions as currently understood:

* The medulla, along with the spinal cord, contains many small nuclei involved in a wide variety of sensory and involuntary motor functions such as vomiting, heart rate and digestive processes.
* The pons lies in the brainstem directly above the medulla. Among other things, it contains nuclei that control often voluntary but simple acts such as sleep, respiration, swallowing, bladder function, equilibrium, eye movement, facial expressions, and posture.
* The hypothalamus is a small region at the base of the forebrain, whose complexity and importance belies its size. It is composed of numerous small nuclei, each with distinct connections and neurochemistry. The hypothalamus is engaged in additional involuntary or partially voluntary acts such as sleep and wake cycles, eating and drinking, and the release of some hormones.
* The thalamus is a collection of nuclei with diverse functions: some are involved in relaying information to and from the cerebral hemispheres, while others are involved in motivation. The subthalamic area (zona incerta) seems to contain action-generating systems for several types of &quot;consummatory&quot; behaviors such as eating, drinking, defecation, and copulation.
* The cerebellum modulates the outputs of other brain systems, whether motor-related or thought related, to make them certain and precise. Removal of the cerebellum does not prevent an animal from doing anything in particular, but it makes actions hesitant and clumsy. This precision is not built-in but learned by trial and error. The muscle coordination learned while riding a bicycle is an example of a type of neural plasticity that may take place largely within the cerebellum. 10% of the brain&#x27;s total volume consists of the cerebellum and 50% of all neurons are held within its structure.
* The optic tectum allows actions to be directed toward points in space, most commonly in response to visual input. In mammals, it is usually referred to as the superior colliculus, and its best-studied function is to direct eye movements. It also directs reaching movements and other object-directed actions. It receives strong visual inputs, but also inputs from other senses that are useful in directing actions, such as auditory input in owls and input from the thermosensitive pit organs in snakes. In some primitive fishes, such as lampreys, this region is the largest part of the brain. The superior colliculus is part of the midbrain.
* The pallium is a layer of grey matter that lies on the surface of the forebrain and is the most complex and most recent evolutionary development of the brain as an organ. In reptiles and mammals, it is called the &quot;cerebral cortex&quot;. Multiple functions involve the pallium, including smell and spatial memory. In mammals, where it becomes so large as to dominate the brain, it takes over functions from many other brain areas. In many mammals, the cerebral cortex consists of folded bulges called gyri that create deep furrows or fissures called sulci. The folds increase the surface area of the cortex and therefore increase the amount of gray matter and the amount of information that can be stored and processed.
* The hippocampus, strictly speaking, is found only in mammals. However, the area it derives from, the medial pallium, has counterparts in all vertebrates. There is evidence that this part of the brain is involved in complex events such as spatial memory and navigation in fishes, birds, reptiles, and mammals.
* The basal ganglia are a group of interconnected structures in the forebrain. The primary function of the basal ganglia appears to be action selection: they send inhibitory signals to all parts of the brain that can generate motor behaviors, and in the right circumstances can release the inhibition, so that the action-generating systems are able to execute their actions. Reward and punishment exert their most important neural effects by altering connections within the basal ganglia.
* The olfactory bulb is a special structure that processes olfactory sensory signals and sends its output to the olfactory part of the pallium. It is a major brain component in many vertebrates, but is greatly reduced in humans and other primates (whose senses are dominated by information acquired by sight rather than smell).

==== Reptiles ====

Modern reptiles and mammals diverged from a common ancestor around 320 million years ago. The number of extant reptiles far exceeds the number of mammalian species, with 11,733 recognized species of reptiles compared to 5,884 extant mammals. Along with the species diversity, reptiles have diverged in terms of external morphology, from limbless to tetrapod gliders to armored chelonians, reflecting adaptive radiation to a diverse array of environments.

Morphological differences are reflected in the nervous system phenotype, such as: absence of lateral motor column neurons in snakes, which innervate limb muscles controlling limb movements; absence of motor neurons that innervate trunk muscles in tortoises; presence of innervation from the trigeminal nerve to pit organs responsible to infrared detection in snakes. Variation in size, weight, and shape of the brain can be found within reptiles. For instance, crocodilians have the largest brain volume to body weight proportion, followed by turtles, lizards, and snakes. Reptiles vary in the investment in different brain sections. Crocodilians have the largest telencephalon, while snakes have the smallest. Turtles have the largest diencephalon per body weight whereas crocodilians have the smallest. On the other hand, lizards have the largest mesencephalon.

Yet their brains share several characteristics revealed by recent anatomical, molecular, and ontogenetic studies. Vertebrates share the highest levels of similarities during embryological development, controlled by conserved transcription factors and signaling centers, including gene expression, morphological and cell type differentiation. In fact, high levels of transcriptional factors can be found in all areas of the brain in reptiles and mammals, with shared neuronal clusters enlightening brain evolution. Conserved transcription factors elucidate that evolution acted in different areas of the brain by either retaining similar morphology and function, or diversifying it.

Anatomically, the reptilian brain has less subdivisions than the mammalian brain, however it has numerous conserved aspects including the organization of the spinal cord and cranial nerve, as well as elaborated brain pattern of organization. Elaborated brains are characterized by migrated neuronal cell bodies away from the periventricular matrix, region of neuronal development, forming organized nuclear groups. Aside from reptiles and mammals, other vertebrates with elaborated brains include hagfish, galeomorph sharks, skates, rays, teleosts, and birds. Overall elaborated brains are subdivided in forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain.

The hindbrain coordinates and integrates sensory and motor inputs and outputs responsible for, but not limited to, walking, swimming, or flying. It contains input and output axons interconnecting the spinal cord, midbrain and forebrain transmitting information from the external and internal environments. The midbrain links sensory, motor, and integrative components received from the hindbrain, connecting it to the forebrain. The tectum, which includes the optic tectum and torus semicircularis, receives auditory, visual, and somatosensory inputs, forming integrated maps of the sensory and visual space around the animal. The tegmentum receives incoming sensory information and forwards motor responses to and from the forebrain. The isthmus connects the hindbrain with midbrain. The forebrain region is particularly well developed, is further divided into diencephalon and telencephalon. Diencephalon is related to regulation of eye and body movement in response to visual stimuli, sensory information, circadian rhythms, olfactory input, and autonomic nervous system.Telencephalon is related to control of movements, neurotransmitters and neuromodulators responsible for integrating inputs and transmitting outputs are present, sensory systems, and cognitive functions.

==== Birds ====
==== Mammals ====
The most obvious difference between the brains of mammals and other vertebrates is their size. On average, a mammal has a brain roughly twice as large as that of a bird of the same body size, and ten times as large as that of a reptile of the same body size.

Size, however, is not the only difference: there are also substantial differences in shape. The hindbrain and midbrain of mammals are generally similar to those of other vertebrates, but dramatic differences appear in the forebrain, which is greatly enlarged and also altered in structure. The cerebral cortex is the part of the brain that most strongly distinguishes mammals. In non-mammalian vertebrates, the surface of the cerebrum is lined with a comparatively simple three-layered structure called the pallium. In mammals, the pallium evolves into a complex six-layered structure called neocortex or &quot;isocortex&quot;. Several areas at the edge of the neocortex, including the hippocampus and amygdala, are also much more extensively developed in mammals than in other vertebrates.

The elaboration of the cerebral cortex carries with it changes to other brain areas. The superior colliculus, which plays a major role in visual control of behavior in most vertebrates, shrinks to a small size in mammals, and many of its functions are taken over by visual areas of the cerebral cortex. The cerebellum of mammals contains a large portion (the neocerebellum) dedicated to supporting the cerebral cortex, which has no counterpart in other vertebrates.

In placentals, there is a wide nerve tract connecting the cerebral hemispheres called the corpus callosum.

===== Primates =====


The brains of humans and other primates contain the same structures as the brains of other mammals, but are generally larger in proportion to body size. The encephalization quotient (EQ) is used to compare brain sizes across species. It takes into account the nonlinearity of the brain-to-body relationship. Humans have an average EQ in the 7-to-8 range, while most other primates have an EQ in the 2-to-3 range. Dolphins have values higher than those of primates other than humans, but nearly all other mammals have EQ values that are substantially lower.

Most of the enlargement of the primate brain comes from a massive expansion of the cerebral cortex, especially the prefrontal cortex and the parts of the cortex involved in vision. The visual processing network of primates includes at least 30 distinguishable brain areas, with a complex web of interconnections. It has been estimated that visual processing areas occupy more than half of the total surface of the primate neocortex. The prefrontal cortex carries out functions that include planning, working memory, motivation, attention, and executive control. It takes up a much larger proportion of the brain for primates than for other species, and an especially large fraction of the human brain.

== Development ==

The brain develops in an intricately orchestrated sequence of stages. It changes in shape from a simple swelling at the front of the nerve cord in the earliest embryonic stages, to a complex array of areas and connections. Neurons are created in special zones that contain stem cells, and then migrate through the tissue to reach their ultimate locations. Once neurons have positioned themselves, their axons sprout and navigate through the brain, branching and extending as they go, until the tips reach their targets and form synaptic connections. In a number of parts of the nervous system, neurons and synapses are produced in excessive numbers during the early stages, and then the unneeded ones are pruned away.

For vertebrates, the early stages of neural development are similar across all species. As the embryo transforms from a round blob of cells into a wormlike structure, a narrow strip of ectoderm running along the midline of the back is induced to become the neural plate, the precursor of the nervous system. The neural plate folds inward to form the neural groove, and then the lips that line the groove merge to enclose the neural tube, a hollow cord of cells with a fluid-filled ventricle at the center. At the front end, the ventricles and cord swell to form three vesicles that are the precursors of the prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain). At the next stage, the forebrain splits into two vesicles called the telencephalon (which will contain the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, and related structures) and the diencephalon (which will contain the thalamus and hypothalamus). At about the same time, the hindbrain splits into the metencephalon (which will contain the cerebellum and pons) and the myelencephalon (which will contain the medulla oblongata). Each of these areas contains proliferative zones where neurons and glial cells are generated; the resulting cells then migrate, sometimes for long distances, to their final positions.

Once a neuron is in place, it extends dendrites and an axon into the area around it. Axons, because they commonly extend a great distance from the cell body and need to reach specific targets, grow in a particularly complex way. The tip of a growing axon consists of a blob of protoplasm called a growth cone, studded with chemical receptors. These receptors sense the local environment, causing the growth cone to be attracted or repelled by various cellular elements, and thus to be pulled in a particular direction at each point along its path. The result of this pathfinding process is that the growth cone navigates through the brain until it reaches its destination area, where other chemical cues cause it to begin generating synapses. Considering the entire brain, thousands of genes create products that influence axonal pathfinding.

The synaptic network that finally emerges is only partly determined by genes, though. In many parts of the brain, axons initially &quot;overgrow&quot;, and then are &quot;pruned&quot; by mechanisms that depend on neural activity. In the projection from the eye to the midbrain, for example, the structure in the adult contains a very precise mapping, connecting each point on the surface of the retina to a corresponding point in a midbrain layer. In the first stages of development, each axon from the retina is guided to the right general vicinity in the midbrain by chemical cues, but then branches very profusely and makes initial contact with a wide swath of midbrain neurons. The retina, before birth, contains special mechanisms that cause it to generate waves of activity that originate spontaneously at a random point and then propagate slowly across the retinal layer. These waves are useful because they cause neighboring neurons to be active at the same time; that is, they produce a neural activity pattern that contains information about the spatial arrangement of the neurons. This information is exploited in the midbrain by a mechanism that causes synapses to weaken, and eventually vanish, if activity in an axon is not followed by activity of the target cell. The result of this sophisticated process is a gradual tuning and tightening of the map, leaving it finally in its precise adult form.

Similar things happen in other brain areas: an initial synaptic matrix is generated as a result of genetically determined chemical guidance, but then gradually refined by activity-dependent mechanisms, partly driven by internal dynamics, partly by external sensory inputs. In some cases, as with the retina-midbrain system, activity patterns depend on mechanisms that operate only in the developing brain, and apparently exist solely to guide development.

In humans and many other mammals, new neurons are created mainly before birth, and the infant brain contains substantially more neurons than the adult brain. There are, however, a few areas where new neurons continue to be generated throughout life. The two areas for which adult neurogenesis is well established are the olfactory bulb, which is involved in the sense of smell, and the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, where there is evidence that the new neurons play a role in storing newly acquired memories. With these exceptions, however, the set of neurons that is present in early childhood is the set that is present for life. Glial cells are different: as with most types of cells in the body, they are generated throughout the lifespan.

There has long been debate about whether the qualities of mind, personality, and intelligence can be attributed to heredity or to upbringing. Although many details remain to be settled, neuroscience shows that both factors are important. Genes determine both the general form of the brain and how it reacts to experience, but experience is required to refine the matrix of synaptic connections, resulting in greatly increased complexity. The presence or absence of experience is critical at key periods of development. Additionally, the quantity and quality of experience are important. For example, animals raised in enriched environments demonstrate thick cerebral cortices, indicating a high density of synaptic connections, compared to animals with restricted levels of stimulation.

== Physiology ==
The functions of the brain depend on the ability of neurons to transmit electrochemical signals to other cells, and their ability to respond appropriately to electrochemical signals received from other cells. The electrical properties of neurons are controlled by a wide variety of biochemical and metabolic processes, most notably the interactions between neurotransmitters and receptors that take place at synapses.

=== Neurotransmitters and receptors ===
Neurotransmitters are chemicals that are released at synapses when the local membrane is depolarised and Ca2+ enters into the cell, typically when an action potential arrives at the synapse – neurotransmitters attach themselves to receptor molecules on the membrane of the synapse&#x27;s target cell (or cells), and thereby alter the electrical or chemical properties of the receptor molecules. With few exceptions, each neuron in the brain releases the same chemical neurotransmitter, or combination of neurotransmitters, at all the synaptic connections it makes with other neurons; this rule is known as Dale&#x27;s principle. Thus, a neuron can be characterized by the neurotransmitters that it releases. The great majority of psychoactive drugs exert their effects by altering specific neurotransmitter systems. This applies to drugs such as cannabinoids, nicotine, heroin, cocaine, alcohol, fluoxetine, chlorpromazine, and many others.

The two neurotransmitters that are most widely found in the vertebrate brain are glutamate, which almost always exerts excitatory effects on target neurons, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which is almost always inhibitory. Neurons using these transmitters can be found in nearly every part of the brain. Because of their ubiquity, drugs that act on glutamate or GABA tend to have broad and powerful effects. Some general anesthetics act by reducing the effects of glutamate; most tranquilizers exert their sedative effects by enhancing the effects of GABA.

There are dozens of other chemical neurotransmitters that are used in more limited areas of the brain, often areas dedicated to a particular function. Serotonin, for example—the primary target of many antidepressant drugs and many dietary aids—comes exclusively from a small brainstem area called the raphe nuclei. Norepinephrine, which is involved in arousal, comes exclusively from a nearby small area called the locus coeruleus. Other neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine and dopamine have multiple sources in the brain but are not as ubiquitously distributed as glutamate and GABA.

=== Electrical activity ===
As a side effect of the electrochemical processes used by neurons for signaling, brain tissue generates electric fields when it is active. When large numbers of neurons show synchronized activity, the electric fields that they generate can be large enough to detect outside the skull, using electroencephalography (EEG) or magnetoencephalography (MEG). EEG recordings, along with recordings made from electrodes implanted inside the brains of animals such as rats, show that the brain of a living animal is constantly active, even during sleep. Each part of the brain shows a mixture of rhythmic and nonrhythmic activity, which may vary according to behavioral state. In mammals, the cerebral cortex tends to show large slow delta waves during sleep, faster alpha waves when the animal is awake but inattentive, and chaotic-looking irregular activity when the animal is actively engaged in a task, called beta and gamma waves. During an epileptic seizure, the brain&#x27;s inhibitory control mechanisms fail to function and electrical activity rises to pathological levels, producing EEG traces that show large wave and spike patterns not seen in a healthy brain. Relating these population-level patterns to the computational functions of individual neurons is a major focus of current research in neurophysiology.

=== Metabolism ===
All vertebrates have a blood–brain barrier that allows metabolism inside the brain to operate differently from metabolism in other parts of the body. The neurovascular unit regulates cerebral blood flow so that activated neurons can be supplied with energy. Glial cells play a major role in brain metabolism by controlling the chemical composition of the fluid that surrounds neurons, including levels of ions and nutrients.

Brain tissue consumes a large amount of energy in proportion to its volume, so large brains place severe metabolic demands on animals. The need to limit body weight in order, for example, to fly, has apparently led to selection for a reduction of brain size in some species, such as bats. Most of the brain&#x27;s energy consumption goes into sustaining the electric charge (membrane potential) of neurons. Most vertebrate species devote between 2% and 8% of basal metabolism to the brain. In primates, however, the percentage is much higher—in humans it rises to 20–25%. The energy consumption of the brain does not vary greatly over time, but active regions of the cerebral cortex consume somewhat more energy than inactive regions; this forms the basis for the functional brain imaging methods of PET, fMRI, and NIRS. The brain typically gets most of its energy from oxygen-dependent metabolism of glucose (i.e., blood sugar), but ketones provide a major alternative source, together with contributions from medium chain fatty acids (caprylic and heptanoic acids), lactate, acetate, and possibly amino acids.

== Function ==
Information from the sense organs is collected in the brain. There it is used to determine what actions the organism is to take. The brain processes the raw data to extract information about the structure of the environment. Next it combines the processed information with information about the current needs of the animal and with memory of past circumstances. Finally, on the basis of the results, it generates motor response patterns. These signal-processing tasks require intricate interplay between a variety of functional subsystems.

The function of the brain is to provide coherent control over the actions of an animal. A centralized brain allows groups of muscles to be co-activated in complex patterns; it also allows stimuli impinging on one part of the body to evoke responses in other parts, and it can prevent different parts of the body from acting at cross-purposes to each other.

=== Perception ===
The human brain is provided with information about light, sound, the chemical composition of the atmosphere, temperature, the position of the body in space (proprioception), the chemical composition of the bloodstream, and more. In other animals additional senses are present, such as the infrared heat-sense of snakes, the magnetic field sense of some birds, or the electric field sense mainly seen in aquatic animals.

Each sensory system begins with specialized receptor cells, such as photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye, or vibration-sensitive hair cells in the cochlea of the ear. The axons of sensory receptor cells travel into the spinal cord or brain, where they transmit their signals to a first-order sensory nucleus dedicated to one specific sensory modality. This primary sensory nucleus sends information to higher-order sensory areas that are dedicated to the same modality. Eventually, via a way-station in the thalamus, the signals are sent to the cerebral cortex, where they are processed to extract the relevant features, and integrated with signals coming from other sensory systems.

=== Motor control ===
Motor systems are areas of the brain that are involved in initiating body movements, that is, in activating muscles. Except for the muscles that control the eye, which are driven by nuclei in the midbrain, all the voluntary muscles in the body are directly innervated by motor neurons in the spinal cord and hindbrain. Spinal motor neurons are controlled both by neural circuits intrinsic to the spinal cord, and by inputs that descend from the brain. The intrinsic spinal circuits implement many reflex responses, and contain pattern generators for rhythmic movements such as walking or swimming. The descending connections from the brain allow for more sophisticated control.

The brain contains several motor areas that project directly to the spinal cord. At the lowest level are motor areas in the medulla and pons, which control stereotyped movements such as walking, breathing, or swallowing. At a higher level are areas in the midbrain, such as the red nucleus, which is responsible for coordinating movements of the arms and legs. At a higher level yet is the primary motor cortex, a strip of tissue located at the posterior edge of the frontal lobe. The primary motor cortex sends projections to the subcortical motor areas, but also sends a massive projection directly to the spinal cord, through the pyramidal tract. This direct corticospinal projection allows for precise voluntary control of the fine details of movements. Other motor-related brain areas exert secondary effects by projecting to the primary motor areas. Among the most important secondary areas are the premotor cortex, supplementary motor area, basal ganglia, and cerebellum. In addition to all of the above, the brain and spinal cord contain extensive circuitry to control the autonomic nervous system which controls the movement of the smooth muscle of the body.

=== Sleep ===

Many animals alternate between sleeping and waking in a daily cycle. Arousal and alertness are also modulated on a finer time scale by a network of brain areas. A key component of the sleep system is the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), a tiny part of the hypothalamus located directly above the point at which the optic nerves from the two eyes cross. The SCN contains the body&#x27;s central biological clock. Neurons there show activity levels that rise and fall with a period of about 24 hours, circadian rhythms: these activity fluctuations are driven by rhythmic changes in expression of a set of &quot;clock genes&quot;. The SCN continues to keep time even if it is excised from the brain and placed in a dish of warm nutrient solution, but it ordinarily receives input from the optic nerves, through the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT), that allows daily light-dark cycles to calibrate the clock.

The SCN projects to a set of areas in the hypothalamus, brainstem, and midbrain that are involved in implementing sleep-wake cycles. An important component of the system is the reticular formation, a group of neuron-clusters scattered diffusely through the core of the lower brain. Reticular neurons send signals to the thalamus, which in turn sends activity-level-controlling signals to every part of the cortex. Damage to the reticular formation can produce a permanent state of coma.

Sleep involves great changes in brain activity. Until the 1950s it was generally believed that the brain essentially shuts off during sleep, but this is now known to be far from true; activity continues, but patterns become very different. There are two types of sleep: &quot;REM sleep&quot; (with dreaming) and &quot;NREM&quot; (non-REM, usually without dreaming) sleep, which repeat in slightly varying patterns throughout a sleep episode. Three broad types of distinct brain activity patterns can be measured: REM, light NREM and deep NREM. During deep NREM sleep, also called slow wave sleep, activity in the cortex takes the form of large synchronized waves, whereas in the waking state it is noisy and desynchronized. Levels of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin drop during slow wave sleep, and fall almost to zero during REM sleep; levels of acetylcholine show the reverse pattern.

=== Homeostasis ===
For any animal, survival requires maintaining a variety of parameters of bodily state within a limited range of variation: these include temperature, water content, salt concentration in the bloodstream, blood glucose levels, blood oxygen level, and others. The ability of an animal to regulate the internal environment of its body—the milieu intérieur, as the pioneering physiologist Claude Bernard called it—is known as homeostasis (Greek for &quot;standing still&quot;). Maintaining homeostasis is a crucial function of the brain. The basic principle that underlies homeostasis is negative feedback: any time a parameter diverges from its set-point, sensors generate an error signal that evokes a response that causes the parameter to shift back toward its optimum value. (This principle is widely used in engineering, for example in the control of temperature using a thermostat.)

In vertebrates, the part of the brain that plays the greatest role is the hypothalamus, a small region at the base of the forebrain whose size does not reflect its complexity or the importance of its function. The hypothalamus is a collection of small nuclei, most of which are involved in basic biological functions. Some of these functions relate to arousal or to social interactions such as sexuality, aggression, or maternal behaviors; but many of them relate to homeostasis. Several hypothalamic nuclei receive input from sensors located in the lining of blood vessels, conveying information about temperature, sodium level, glucose level, blood oxygen level, and other parameters. These hypothalamic nuclei send output signals to motor areas that can generate actions to rectify deficiencies. Some of the outputs also go to the pituitary gland, a tiny gland attached to the brain directly underneath the hypothalamus. The pituitary gland secretes hormones into the bloodstream, where they circulate throughout the body and induce changes in cellular activity.

=== Motivation ===
The individual animals need to express survival-promoting behaviors, such as seeking food, water, shelter, and a mate. The motivational system in the brain monitors the current state of satisfaction of these goals, and activates behaviors to meet any needs that arise. The motivational system works largely by a reward–punishment mechanism. When a particular behavior is followed by favorable consequences, the reward mechanism in the brain is activated, which induces structural changes inside the brain that cause the same behavior to be repeated later, whenever a similar situation arises. Conversely, when a behavior is followed by unfavorable consequences, the brain&#x27;s punishment mechanism is activated, inducing structural changes that cause the behavior to be suppressed when similar situations arise in the future.

Most organisms studied to date use a reward–punishment mechanism: for instance, worms and insects can alter their behavior to seek food sources or to avoid dangers. In vertebrates, the reward-punishment system is implemented by a specific set of brain structures, at the heart of which lie the basal ganglia, a set of interconnected areas at the base of the forebrain. The basal ganglia are the central site at which decisions are made: the basal ganglia exert a sustained inhibitory control over most of the motor systems in the brain; when this inhibition is released, a motor system is permitted to execute the action it is programmed to carry out. Rewards and punishments function by altering the relationship between the inputs that the basal ganglia receive and the decision-signals that are emitted. The reward mechanism is better understood than the punishment mechanism, because its role in drug abuse has caused it to be studied very intensively. Research has shown that the neurotransmitter dopamine plays a central role: addictive drugs such as cocaine, amphetamine, and nicotine either cause dopamine levels to rise or cause the effects of dopamine inside the brain to be enhanced.

=== Learning and memory ===
Almost all animals are capable of modifying their behavior as a result of experience—even the most primitive types of worms. Because behavior is driven by brain activity, changes in behavior must somehow correspond to changes inside the brain. Already in the late 19th century theorists like Santiago Ramón y Cajal argued that the most plausible explanation is that learning and memory are expressed as changes in the synaptic connections between neurons. Until 1970, however, experimental evidence to support the synaptic plasticity hypothesis was lacking. In 1971 Tim Bliss and Terje Lømo published a paper on a phenomenon now called long-term potentiation: the paper showed clear evidence of activity-induced synaptic changes that lasted for at least several days. Since then technical advances have made these sorts of experiments much easier to carry out, and thousands of studies have been made that have clarified the mechanism of synaptic change, and uncovered other types of activity-driven synaptic change in a variety of brain areas, including the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, basal ganglia, and cerebellum. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and physical activity appear to play a beneficial role in the process.

Neuroscientists currently distinguish several types of learning and memory that are implemented by the brain in distinct ways:

* Working memory is the ability of the brain to maintain a temporary representation of information about the task that an animal is currently engaged in. This sort of dynamic memory is thought to be mediated by the formation of cell assemblies—groups of activated neurons that maintain their activity by constantly stimulating one another.
* Episodic memory is the ability to remember the details of specific events. This sort of memory can last for a lifetime. Much evidence implicates the hippocampus in playing a crucial role: people with severe damage to the hippocampus sometimes show amnesia, that is, inability to form new long-lasting episodic memories.
* Semantic memory is the ability to learn facts and relationships. This sort of memory is probably stored largely in the cerebral cortex, mediated by changes in connections between cells that represent specific types of information.
* Instrumental learning is the ability for rewards and punishments to modify behavior. It is implemented by a network of brain areas centered on the basal ganglia.
* Motor learning is the ability to refine patterns of body movement by practicing, or more generally by repetition. A number of brain areas are involved, including the premotor cortex, basal ganglia, and especially the cerebellum, which functions as a large memory bank for microadjustments of the parameters of movement.

== Research ==


The field of neuroscience encompasses all approaches that seek to understand the brain and the rest of the nervous system. Psychology seeks to understand mind and behavior, and neurology is the medical discipline that diagnoses and treats diseases of the nervous system. The brain is also the most important organ studied in psychiatry, the branch of medicine that works to study, prevent, and treat mental disorders. Cognitive science seeks to unify neuroscience and psychology with other fields that concern themselves with the brain, such as computer science (artificial intelligence and similar fields) and philosophy.

The oldest method of studying the brain is anatomical, and until the middle of the 20th century, much of the progress in neuroscience came from the development of better cell stains and better microscopes. Neuroanatomists study the large-scale structure of the brain as well as the microscopic structure of neurons and their components, especially synapses. Among other tools, they employ a plethora of stains that reveal neural structure, chemistry, and connectivity. In recent years, the development of immunostaining techniques has allowed investigation of neurons that express specific sets of genes. Also, &quot;functional neuroanatomy&quot; uses medical imaging techniques to correlate variations in human brain structure with differences in cognition or behavior.

Neurophysiologists study the chemical, pharmacological, and electrical properties of the brain: their primary tools are drugs and recording devices. Thousands of experimentally developed drugs affect the nervous system, some in highly specific ways. Recordings of brain activity can be made using electrodes, either glued to the scalp as in EEG studies, or implanted inside the brains of animals for extracellular recordings, which can detect action potentials generated by individual neurons. Because the brain does not contain pain receptors, it is possible using these techniques to record brain activity from animals that are awake and behaving without causing distress. The same techniques have occasionally been used to study brain activity in human patients with intractable epilepsy, in cases where there was a medical necessity to implant electrodes to localize the brain area responsible for epileptic seizures. Functional imaging techniques such as fMRI are also used to study brain activity; these techniques have mainly been used with human subjects, because they require a conscious subject to remain motionless for long periods of time, but they have the great advantage of being noninvasive.

Another approach to brain function is to examine the consequences of damage to specific brain areas. Even though it is protected by the skull and meninges, surrounded by cerebrospinal fluid, and isolated from the bloodstream by the blood–brain barrier, the delicate nature of the brain makes it vulnerable to numerous diseases and several types of damage. In humans, the effects of strokes and other types of brain damage have been a key source of information about brain function. Because there is no ability to experimentally control the nature of the damage, however, this information is often difficult to interpret. In animal studies, most commonly involving rats, it is possible to use electrodes or locally injected chemicals to produce precise patterns of damage and then examine the consequences for behavior.

Computational neuroscience encompasses two approaches: first, the use of computers to study the brain; second, the study of how brains perform computation. On one hand, it is possible to write a computer program to simulate the operation of a group of neurons by making use of systems of equations that describe their electrochemical activity; such simulations are known as &quot;biologically realistic neural networks&quot;. On the other hand, it is possible to study algorithms for neural computation by simulating, or mathematically analyzing, the operations of simplified &quot;units&quot; that have some of the properties of neurons but abstract out much of their biological complexity. The computational functions of the brain are studied both by computer scientists and neuroscientists.

Computational neurogenetic modeling is concerned with the study and development of dynamic neuronal models for modeling brain functions with respect to genes and dynamic interactions between genes.

Recent years have seen increasing applications of genetic and genomic techniques to the study of the brain and a focus on the roles of neurotrophic factors and physical activity in neuroplasticity. The most common subjects are mice, because of the availability of technical tools. It is now possible with relative ease to &quot;knock out&quot; or mutate a wide variety of genes, and then examine the effects on brain function. More sophisticated approaches are also being used: for example, using Cre-Lox recombination it is possible to activate or deactivate genes in specific parts of the brain, at specific times.

Recent years have also seen rapid advances in single-cell sequencing technologies, and these have been used to leverage the cellular heterogeneity of the brain as a means of better understanding the roles of distinct cell types in disease and biology (as well as how genomic variants influence individual cell types). In 2024, investigators studied a large integrated dataset of almost 3 million nuclei from the human prefrontal cortext from 388 individuals. In doing so, they annotated 28 cell types to evaluate expression and chromatin variation across gene families and drug targets. They identified about half a million cell type–specific regulatory elements and about 1.5 million single-cell expression quantitative trait loci (i.e., genomic variants with strong statistical associations with changes in gene expression within specific cell types), which were then used to build cell-type regulatory networks (the study also describes cell-to-cell communication networks). These networks were found to manifest cellular changes in aging and neuropsychiatric disorders. As part of the same investigation, a machine learning model was designed to accurately impute single-cell expression (this model prioritized ~250 disease-risk genes and drug targets with associated cell types).

=== History ===

The oldest brain to have been discovered was in Armenia in the Areni-1 cave complex. The brain, estimated to be over 5,000 years old, was found in the skull of a 12 to 14-year-old girl. Although the brains were shriveled, they were well preserved due to the climate found inside the cave.

Early philosophers were divided as to whether the seat of the soul lies in the brain or heart. Aristotle favored the heart, and thought that the function of the brain was merely to cool the blood. Democritus, the inventor of the atomic theory of matter, argued for a three-part soul, with intellect in the head, emotion in the heart, and lust near the liver. The unknown author of &quot;On the Sacred Disease&quot;, a medical treatise in the Hippocratic Corpus, came down unequivocally in favor of the brain, writing:

The Roman physician Galen also argued for the importance of the brain, and theorized in some depth about how it might work. Galen traced out the anatomical relationships among brain, nerves, and muscles, demonstrating that all muscles in the body are connected to the brain through a branching network of nerves. He postulated that nerves activate muscles mechanically by carrying a mysterious substance he called &quot;pneumata psychikon&quot;, usually translated as &quot;animal spirits&quot;. Galen&#x27;s ideas were widely known during the Middle Ages, but not much further progress came until the Renaissance, when detailed anatomical study resumed, combined with the theoretical speculations of René Descartes and those who followed him. Descartes, like Galen, thought of the nervous system in hydraulic terms. He believed that the highest cognitive functions are carried out by a non-physical &quot;res cogitans&quot;, but that the majority of behaviors of humans, and all behaviors of animals, could be explained mechanistically.

The first real progress toward a modern understanding of nervous function, though, came from the investigations of Luigi Galvani (1737–1798), who discovered that a shock of static electricity applied to an exposed nerve of a dead frog could cause its leg to contract. Since that time, each major advance in understanding has followed more or less directly from the development of a new technique of investigation. Until the early years of the 20th century, the most important advances were derived from new methods for staining cells. Particularly critical was the invention of the Golgi stain, which (when correctly used) stains only a small fraction of neurons, but stains them in their entirety, including cell body, dendrites, and axon. Without such a stain, brain tissue under a microscope appears as an impenetrable tangle of protoplasmic fibers, in which it is impossible to determine any structure. In the hands of Camillo Golgi, and especially of the Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the new stain revealed hundreds of distinct types of neurons, each with its own unique dendritic structure and pattern of connectivity.

In the first half of the 20th century, advances in electronics enabled investigation of the electrical properties of nerve cells, culminating in work by Alan Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley, and others on the biophysics of the action potential, and the work of Bernard Katz and others on the electrochemistry of the synapse. These studies complemented the anatomical picture with a conception of the brain as a dynamic entity. Reflecting the new understanding, in 1942 Charles Sherrington visualized the workings of the brain waking from sleep:

The invention of electronic computers in the 1940s, along with the development of mathematical information theory, led to a realization that brains can potentially be understood as information processing systems. This concept formed the basis of the field of cybernetics, and eventually gave rise to the field now known as computational neuroscience. The earliest attempts at cybernetics were somewhat crude in that they treated the brain as essentially a digital computer in disguise, as for example in John von Neumann&#x27;s 1958 book, &quot;The Computer and the Brain&quot;. Over the years, though, accumulating information about the electrical responses of brain cells recorded from behaving animals has steadily moved theoretical concepts in the direction of increasing realism.

One of the most influential early contributions was a 1959 paper titled &quot;What the frog&#x27;s eye tells the frog&#x27;s brain&quot;: the paper examined the visual responses of neurons in the retina and optic tectum of frogs, and came to the conclusion that some neurons in the tectum of the frog are wired to combine elementary responses in a way that makes them function as &quot;bug perceivers&quot;. A few years later David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel discovered cells in the primary visual cortex of monkeys that become active when sharp edges move across specific points in the field of view—a discovery for which they won a Nobel Prize. Follow-up studies in higher-order visual areas found cells that detect binocular disparity, color, movement, and aspects of shape, with areas located at increasing distances from the primary visual cortex showing increasingly complex responses. Other investigations of brain areas unrelated to vision have revealed cells with a wide variety of response correlates, some related to memory, some to abstract types of cognition such as space.

Theorists have worked to understand these response patterns by constructing mathematical models of neurons and neural networks, which can be simulated using computers. Some useful models are abstract, focusing on the conceptual structure of neural algorithms rather than the details of how they are implemented in the brain; other models attempt to incorporate data about the biophysical properties of real neurons. No model on any level is yet considered to be a fully valid description of brain function, though. The essential difficulty is that sophisticated computation by neural networks requires distributed processing in which hundreds or thousands of neurons work cooperatively—current methods of brain activity recording are only capable of isolating action potentials from a few dozen neurons at a time.

Furthermore, even single neurons appear to be complex and capable of performing computations. So, brain models that do not reflect this are too abstract to be representative of brain operation; models that do try to capture this are very computationally expensive and arguably intractable with present computational resources. However, the Human Brain Project is trying to build a realistic, detailed computational model of the entire human brain. The wisdom of this approach has been publicly contested, with high-profile scientists on both sides of the argument.

In the second half of the 20th century, developments in chemistry, electron microscopy, genetics, computer science, functional brain imaging, and other fields progressively opened new windows into brain structure and function. In the United States, the 1990s were officially designated as the &quot;Decade of the Brain&quot; to commemorate advances made in brain research, and to promote funding for such research.

In the 21st century, these trends have continued, and several new approaches have come into prominence, including multielectrode recording, which allows the activity of many brain cells to be recorded all at the same time; genetic engineering, which allows molecular components of the brain to be altered experimentally; genomics, which allows variations in brain structure to be correlated with variations in DNA properties and neuroimaging.

== Society and culture ==
=== As food ===
Animal brains are used as food in numerous cuisines.

=== In rituals ===
Some archaeological evidence suggests that the mourning rituals of European Neanderthals also involved the consumption of the brain.

The Fore people of Papua New Guinea are known to eat human brains. In funerary rituals, those close to the dead would eat the brain of the deceased to create a sense of immortality. A prion disease called kuru has been traced to this.

== See also ==
*Aging brain
*Brain–computer interface
*Brain health and pollution
*Central nervous system disease
*Gut–brain axis
*List of neuroscience databases
*Neurological disorder
*Optogenetics
*Outline of neuroscience
== References ==
== External links ==

* The Brain from Top to Bottom, at McGill University
* &quot;The Brain&quot;, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Vivian Nutton, Jonathan Sawday &amp; Marina Wallace (&quot;In Our Time&quot;, May 8, 2008)
* Our Quest to Understand the Brain – with Matthew Cobb Royal Institution lecture. Archived at Ghostarchive.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="4" end="9" title="Brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="16" end="21" title="organ (biology)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="55" end="69" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="77" end="87" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="97" end="109" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="110" end="116" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q203850" start="134" end="148" title="nervous tissue" label="nervous tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640" start="181" end="185" title="head" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054543" start="187" end="200" title="cephalization" label="cephalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574866" start="227" end="241" title="special senses" label="special senses"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="250" end="256" title="visual perception" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="258" end="265" title="hearing" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="270" end="279" title="olfaction" label="olfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="347" end="358" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q11101" start="368" end="390" title="sensory nervous system" label="sensory nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="422" end="429" title="thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="431" end="440" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="446" end="458" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996165" start="484" end="497" title="motor control" label="motor control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="499" end="505" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="519" end="535" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632811" start="583" end="600" title="segmental ganglia" label="segmental ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423946" start="655" end="667" title="segmentation (biology)" label="body segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029020" start="676" end="694" title="ventral nerve cord" label="ventral nerve cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298795" start="747" end="764" title="dorsal nerve cord" label="dorsal nerve cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299613" start="770" end="779" title="brain vesicle" label="vesicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="799" end="806" title="rostral (anatomical term)" label="rostral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127402" start="818" end="829" title="neural tube" label="neural tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="836" end="846" title="centralize" label="centralize"/>
<link wikidata="Q507027" start="953" end="962" title="forebrain" label="forebrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="996" end="1009" title="telencephalon" label="telencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192419" start="1014" end="1026" title="diencephalon" label="diencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="1029" end="1037" title="midbrain" label="midbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="1039" end="1052" title="mesencephalon" label="mesencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137072" start="1058" end="1067" title="hindbrain" label="hindbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137072" start="1069" end="1084" title="rhombencephalon" label="rhombencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500793" start="1102" end="1115" title="metencephalon" label="metencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456825" start="1120" end="1134" title="myelencephalon" label="myelencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="1141" end="1152" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q505535" start="1184" end="1191" title="somatic nervous system" label="somatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="1297" end="1313" title="vertebral column" label="vertebral column"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="1366" end="1388" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1413" end="1418" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="1425" end="1440" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="1530" end="1540" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="1587" end="1594" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q130417269" start="1676" end="1695" title="cytoplasmic process" label="cytoplasmic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821248" start="1707" end="1715" title="dendrite" label="dendrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="1721" end="1725" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="1746" end="1756" title="myelinated" label="myelinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="1819" end="1835" title="action potential" label="action potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="1934" end="1951" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="1968" end="1986" title="executive function" label="executive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="2032" end="2047" title="Physiologically" label="Physiologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="2244" end="2251" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="2336" end="2347" title="natural environment" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="2392" end="2398" title="reflex" label="reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q108158" start="2450" end="2457" title="ganglia" label="ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064646" start="2828" end="2847" title="biological computer" label="biological computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="2884" end="2900" title="digital computer" label="digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="3187" end="3198" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062122" start="3548" end="3561" title="brain disease" label="brain disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="3581" end="3593" title="brain damage" label="brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422013" start="4307" end="4316" title="fixation (histology)" label="fixatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="4440" end="4451" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="4494" end="4506" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="4741" end="4767" title="histology" label="examine the microstructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243699" start="4977" end="4987" title="brain cell" label="brain cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="4990" end="4996" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="5002" end="5013" title="neuroglia" label="glial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="5337" end="5352" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="5442" end="5452" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="5499" end="5506" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="5711" end="5715" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116409" start="5975" end="5989" title="pyramidal cell" label="pyramidal cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="6709" end="6716" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="6912" end="6928" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208467" start="6975" end="6983" title="receptor (biochemistry)" label="receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058397" start="7125" end="7151" title="cell–cell interaction" label="cell-to-cell communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q899814" start="7498" end="7521" title="second messenger system" label="second messenger system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="7548" end="7557" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551556" start="7805" end="7848" title="synaptic plasticity" label="activity-dependent modification of synapses"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="8111" end="8117" title="myelin" label="myelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="8326" end="8338" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="8374" end="8385" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="8551" end="8557" title="sponge" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="8594" end="8602" title="cnidaria" label="cnidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762173" start="8658" end="8667" title="nerve net" label="nerve net"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173" start="8707" end="8716" title="bilateria" label="bilateria"/>
<link wikidata="Q598159" start="8743" end="8764" title="bilateral symmetry" label="bilaterally symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q32831" start="8765" end="8774" title="body plan" label="body plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q507402" start="8952" end="8962" title="Cryogenian" label="Cryogenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q108158" start="9422" end="9430" title="ganglion" label="ganglion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="9576" end="9584" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q43012" start="9698" end="9703" title="leech" label="leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="9897" end="9907" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q165118" start="9913" end="9921" title="tunicate" label="tunicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173" start="10042" end="10053" title="bilaterians" label="bilaterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194" start="10233" end="10243" title="tardigrade" label="tardigrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="10246" end="10255" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="10258" end="10266" title="Mollusca" label="molluscs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="10471" end="10481" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="10484" end="10492" title="arachnid" label="arachnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="10512" end="10522" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="10536" end="10541" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q734185" start="10726" end="10750" title="supraesophageal ganglion" label="supraesophageal ganglion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340030" start="10783" end="10796" title="optic lobe (arthropod)" label="optical lobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="11195" end="11203" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165278" start="11398" end="11411" title="neurogenetics" label="neurogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14908739" start="11475" end="11485" title="clock gene" label="clock gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981429" start="11867" end="11875" title="neuropil" label="neuropil"/>
<link wikidata="Q91703" start="12011" end="12033" title="Caenorhabditis elegans" label="Caenorhabditis elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q234463" start="12154" end="12168" title="Sydney Brenner" label="Sydney Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="12183" end="12197" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q303479" start="12368" end="12381" title="hermaphrodite" label="hermaphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292103" start="12808" end="12818" title="connectome" label="connectome"/>
<link wikidata="Q136564" start="13039" end="13046" title="Aplysia" label="Aplysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155529" start="13117" end="13128" title="Eric Kandel" label="Eric Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="13175" end="13183" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="13188" end="13194" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="13348" end="13358" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="13397" end="13400" title="mya (unit)" label="Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="13413" end="13428" title="Cambrian period" label="Cambrian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q161095" start="13464" end="13476" title="jawless fish" label="jawless fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q75713" start="13478" end="13485" title="hagfish" label="hagfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q261485" start="13490" end="13497" title="lamprey" label="lamprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26214" start="13508" end="13524" title="Jawed vertebrate" label="Jawed vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="13547" end="13555" title="tetrapod" label="tetrapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q181537" start="13569" end="13576" title="amniote" label="amniote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082668" start="13593" end="13605" title="mammaliaform" label="mammaliaform"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="13651" end="13656" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="13677" end="13686" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="13724" end="13728" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="13730" end="13739" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="13742" end="13749" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="13752" end="13756" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="13762" end="13768" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q507027" start="14009" end="14018" title="forebrain" label="forebrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="14035" end="14048" title="telencephalon" label="telencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="14138" end="14142" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q646427" start="14148" end="14160" title="encephalization quotient" label="relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030681" start="14169" end="14179" title="brain size" label="brain size"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398821" start="14276" end="14289" title="rule of thumb" label="rule of thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="14562" end="14571" title="power law" label="power law"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="14580" end="14588" title="exponentiation" label="exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="14787" end="14794" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="14856" end="14864" title="Predator" label="Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028018" start="14897" end="14915" title="hunting strategies" label="hunting strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702288" start="14928" end="14941" title="evolutionary arms race" label="ever changing"/>
<link wikidata="Q277614" start="14942" end="14966" title="anti-predator adaptation" label="anti-predator adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28962" start="15139" end="15160" title="embryonic development" label="embryonic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299613" start="15211" end="15229" title="brain vesicle" label="vesicular swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127402" start="15255" end="15266" title="neural tube" label="neural tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q507027" start="15306" end="15315" title="forebrain" label="forebrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q507027" start="15317" end="15331" title="prosencephalon" label="prosencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="15334" end="15342" title="midbrain" label="midbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="15344" end="15357" title="mesencephalon" label="mesencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137072" start="15374" end="15389" title="rhombencephalon" label="rhombencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756633" start="15502" end="15509" title="aquatic animal" label="aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715289" start="15510" end="15521" title="semiaquatic" label="semiaquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80994" start="15605" end="15610" title="adult" label="adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="15620" end="15631" title="terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="15632" end="15640" title="tetrapod" label="tetrapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="15746" end="15752" title="dorsal (anatomy)" label="dorsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="15776" end="15786" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="16053" end="16070" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587185" start="16071" end="16080" title="biological membrane" label="membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="16088" end="16096" title="meninges" label="meninges"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="16117" end="16122" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064093" start="16139" end="16156" title="Cerebral arteries" label="Cerebral arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394389" start="16206" end="16210" title="dura mater" label="dura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647112" start="16215" end="16230" title="arachnoid mater" label="arachnoid mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="16241" end="16259" title="subarachnoid space" label="subarachnoid space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266915" start="16264" end="16271" title="perfusion" label="perfuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q270524" start="16276" end="16292" title="brain parenchyma" label="brain parenchyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q501908" start="16297" end="16306" title="arteriole" label="arteriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647118" start="16366" end="16375" title="pia mater" label="pia mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q111140" start="16381" end="16397" title="endothelial cell" label="endothelial cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="16481" end="16500" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="16535" end="16540" title="toxin" label="toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="16546" end="16554" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="16590" end="16600" title="antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q54237" start="16714" end="16721" title="osmotic" label="osmotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="16766" end="16776" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295893" start="16817" end="16826" title="bulk flow" label="bulk flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="16834" end="16853" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15474254" start="16865" end="16882" title="glymphatic system" label="glymphatic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q388209" start="16898" end="16904" title="venule" label="venule"/>
<link wikidata="Q948647" start="16937" end="16952" title="Neuroanatomy" label="Neuroanatomists"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="17019" end="17032" title="telencephalon" label="telencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q551808" start="17038" end="17058" title="cerebral hemispheres" label="cerebral hemispheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q192419" start="17061" end="17073" title="diencephalon" label="diencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="17075" end="17083" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="17088" end="17100" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="17103" end="17116" title="mesencephalon" label="mesencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="17129" end="17139" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192570" start="17141" end="17145" title="pons" label="pons"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="17150" end="17167" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla oblongata"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="17235" end="17244" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="17324" end="17339" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758383" start="17394" end="17398" title="gyri" label="gyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560248" start="17403" end="17408" title="sulcus (neuroanatomy)" label="sulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379273" start="17430" end="17442" title="surface area" label="surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710207" start="17464" end="17482" title="intracranial space" label="intracranial space"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="18047" end="18054" title="teleostei" label="teleost"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="18520" end="18527" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q192570" start="18714" end="18718" title="pons" label="pons"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="18977" end="18989" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="19353" end="19361" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752103" start="19555" end="19567" title="zona incerta" label="zona incerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="19728" end="19738" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="20136" end="20153" title="neuroplasticity" label="neural plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109417" start="20329" end="20341" title="superior colliculus" label="optic tectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109417" start="20484" end="20503" title="superior colliculus" label="superior colliculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q929262" start="20805" end="20814" title="pit organ" label="pit organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q261485" start="20861" end="20868" title="lamprey" label="lamprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602063" start="20972" end="20979" title="Pallium (neuroanatomy)" label="pallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="21260" end="21265" title="olfaction" label="smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560550" start="21270" end="21284" title="spatial memory" label="spatial memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758383" start="21473" end="21477" title="gyrus" label="gyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560248" start="21522" end="21527" title="Sulcus (neuroanatomy)" label="sulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="21698" end="21709" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="22009" end="22022" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677422" start="22138" end="22154" title="action selection" label="action selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q644945" start="22498" end="22512" title="olfactory bulb" label="olfactory bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="22848" end="22855" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="22861" end="22867" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705160" start="23178" end="23186" title="Slender glass lizard" label="limbless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142794" start="23190" end="23206" title="Draco (lizard)" label="tetrapod gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="23210" end="23228" title="Turtle" label="armored chelonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="23359" end="23368" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q929262" start="23608" end="23618" title="Infrared sensing in snakes" label="pit organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193603" start="24255" end="24266" title="Ontogeny" label="ontogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131683" start="24336" end="24349" title="Embryology" label="embryological"/>
<link wikidata="Q4995178" start="24377" end="24386" title="Conserved sequence" label="conserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="24387" end="24407" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359122" start="24413" end="24430" title="Developmental signaling center" label="signaling centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="25271" end="25278" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="25284" end="25290" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q75713" start="25342" end="25349" title="hagfish" label="hagfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="25351" end="25368" title="Shark" label="galeomorph sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q837104" start="25370" end="25376" title="Skate (fish)" label="skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495741" start="25378" end="25382" title="Batoidea" label="rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="25384" end="25391" title="teleost" label="teleost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="25398" end="25402" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="26495" end="26511" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="26535" end="26559" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="27484" end="27492" title="cerebrum" label="cerebrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602063" start="27565" end="27572" title="pallium (neuroanatomy)" label="pallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q726562" start="27650" end="27659" title="neocortex" label="neocortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="27760" end="27768" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109417" start="27939" end="27958" title="superior colliculus" label="superior colliculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154883" start="28209" end="28222" title="neocerebellum" label="neocerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="28320" end="28329" title="placental" label="placental"/>
<link wikidata="Q223851" start="28407" end="28422" title="corpus callosum" label="corpus callosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="28452" end="28468" title="human brain" label="brains of humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="28479" end="28486" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q646427" start="28605" end="28629" title="encephalization quotient" label="encephalization quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="29121" end="29138" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="29179" end="29185" title="Visual perception" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="29443" end="29460" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073839" start="29496" end="29504" title="foresight (psychology)" label="planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="29506" end="29520" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="29522" end="29532" title="motivation" label="motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="29534" end="29543" title="attention" label="attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="29549" end="29566" title="executive functions" label="executive control"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="30001" end="30010" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q272474" start="30632" end="30640" title="ectoderm" label="ectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q210861" start="30682" end="30689" title="cellular differentiation" label="induced"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314823" start="30704" end="30716" title="neural plate" label="neural plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267382" start="30797" end="30810" title="neural groove" label="neural groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127402" start="30872" end="30883" title="neural tube" label="neural tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q507027" start="31055" end="31069" title="forebrain" label="prosencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="31083" end="31096" title="midbrain" label="mesencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137072" start="31113" end="31128" title="hindbrain" label="rhombencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="31211" end="31224" title="cerebrum" label="telencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192419" start="31313" end="31325" title="diencephalon" label="diencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500793" start="31432" end="31445" title="metencephalon" label="metencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456825" start="31499" end="31513" title="myelencephalon" label="myelencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="31538" end="31555" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla oblongata"/>
<link wikidata="Q559423" start="32040" end="32051" title="growth cone" label="growth cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="32529" end="32533" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="32982" end="32988" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456827" start="34738" end="34750" title="neurogenesis" label="neurogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q545787" start="34844" end="34857" title="dentate gyrus" label="dentate gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="35265" end="35269" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773859" start="35322" end="35347" title="Nature versus nurture" label="heredity or to upbringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054611" start="35825" end="35846" title="Environmental enrichment (neural)" label="enriched environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q389844" start="36225" end="36246" title="membrane potential" label="electrical properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="36471" end="36487" title="Neurotransmitter" label="Neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="36576" end="36580" title="Calcium" label="Ca2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q841276" start="37077" end="37098" title="Dale&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Dale&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="37201" end="37218" title="psychoactive drug" label="psychoactive drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q422936" start="37317" end="37329" title="cannabinoids" label="cannabinoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="37331" end="37339" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="37341" end="37347" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="37349" end="37356" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="37358" end="37365" title="Alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="37367" end="37377" title="fluoxetine" label="fluoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="37379" end="37393" title="chlorpromazine" label="chlorpromazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="37494" end="37503" title="glutamic acid" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="37574" end="37597" title="gamma-aminobutyric acid" label="gamma-aminobutyric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755101" start="37831" end="37850" title="General anaesthetic" label="general anesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="38127" end="38136" title="Serotonin" label="Serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="38177" end="38197" title="Antidepressant" label="antidepressant drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061493" start="38277" end="38289" title="raphe nuclei" label="raphe nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="38291" end="38305" title="Norepinephrine" label="Norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470452" start="38391" end="38406" title="locus coeruleus" label="locus coeruleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="38440" end="38453" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="38458" end="38466" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="38885" end="38907" title="electroencephalography" label="electroencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q384188" start="38917" end="38939" title="magnetoencephalography" label="magnetoencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623205" start="39319" end="39329" title="delta wave" label="delta wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469782" start="39352" end="39362" title="alpha wave" label="alpha wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q831014" start="39499" end="39503" title="Beta wave" label="beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623017" start="39508" end="39518" title="gamma wave" label="gamma wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="39531" end="39548" title="epilepsy" label="epileptic seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q660910" start="39892" end="39907" title="neurophysiology" label="neurophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="39952" end="39971" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q104829857" start="40083" end="40101" title="neurovascular unit" label="neurovascular unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="40187" end="40198" title="Neuroglia" label="Glial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="40638" end="40642" title="bats" label="bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q389844" start="40730" end="40748" title="membrane potential" label="membrane potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955834" start="41155" end="41158" title="Brain positron emission tomography" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="41160" end="41164" title="fMRI" label="fMRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q30920485" start="41170" end="41174" title="Near infrared spectroscopy" label="NIRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="41256" end="41263" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q746183" start="41289" end="41296" title="ketone bodies" label="ketones"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="41379" end="41389" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q409564" start="41392" end="41400" title="Caprylic acid" label="caprylic"/>
<link wikidata="Q297592" start="41405" end="41414" title="Heptanoic acid" label="heptanoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="41423" end="41430" title="lactic acid" label="lactate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="41432" end="41439" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="41454" end="41464" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166073" start="41622" end="41631" title="multisensory integration" label="processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129066" start="42558" end="42572" title="proprioception" label="proprioception"/>
<link wikidata="Q929262" start="42690" end="42719" title="Infrared sensing in snakes" label="infrared heat-sense of snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q582477" start="42725" end="42745" title="Magnetoception" label="magnetic field sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326528" start="42768" end="42788" title="Electroreception" label="electric field sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q748049" start="42890" end="42908" title="photoreceptor cell" label="photoreceptor cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="42917" end="42923" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364" start="42931" end="42934" title="eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566641" start="42959" end="42968" title="hair cell" label="hair cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q317857" start="42977" end="42984" title="cochlea" label="cochlea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362" start="42992" end="42995" title="ear" label="ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q11101" start="43110" end="43137" title="sensory system" label="first-order sensory nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q371870" start="43164" end="43180" title="Stimulus modality" label="sensory modality"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="43337" end="43345" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166073" start="43455" end="43465" title="Multisensory integration" label="integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915553" start="43537" end="43549" title="Motor system" label="Motor system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996165" start="43595" end="43620" title="motor control" label="initiating body movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133903" start="43808" end="43820" title="motor neuron" label="motor neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="44034" end="44040" title="reflex" label="reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054066" start="44064" end="44082" title="central pattern generator" label="pattern generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537379" start="44114" end="44121" title="walking" label="walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467704" start="44125" end="44133" title="Aquatic locomotion" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="44411" end="44420" title="breathing" label="breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q211669" start="44425" end="44435" title="swallowing" label="swallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751717" start="44494" end="44505" title="red nucleus" label="red nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707" start="44606" end="44626" title="primary motor cortex" label="primary motor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q968731" start="44849" end="44864" title="pyramidal tract" label="pyramidal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998090" start="45121" end="45136" title="premotor cortex" label="premotor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467403" start="45138" end="45162" title="supplementary motor area" label="supplementary motor area"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="45164" end="45177" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="45183" end="45193" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="45297" end="45321" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="45357" end="45370" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156516" start="45604" end="45627" title="suprachiasmatic nucleus" label="suprachiasmatic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186029" start="45713" end="45725" title="optic nerves" label="optic nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="45897" end="45913" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918596" start="46210" end="46234" title="retinohypothalamic tract" label="retinohypothalamic tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q750588" start="46480" end="46499" title="reticular formation" label="reticular formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211402" start="47067" end="47076" title="Rapid eye movement sleep" label="REM sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q36348" start="47089" end="47094" title="dream" label="dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752878" start="47109" end="47113" title="Non-rapid eye movement sleep" label="NREM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3964845" start="47371" end="47386" title="slow wave sleep" label="slow wave sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="47547" end="47561" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="47566" end="47575" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="47657" end="47670" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589914" start="48054" end="48070" title="milieu intérieur" label="milieu intérieur"/>
<link wikidata="Q208230" start="48103" end="48117" title="Claude Bernard" label="Claude Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="48140" end="48151" title="homeostasis" label="homeostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="48153" end="48158" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="48302" end="48319" title="negative feedback" label="negative feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q187665" start="48590" end="48600" title="thermostat" label="thermostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="48678" end="48690" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="49438" end="49453" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q670713" start="50101" end="50117" title="reward system" label="reward mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q150526" start="52035" end="52057" title="Santiago Ramón y Cajal" label="Santiago Ramón y Cajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551556" start="52257" end="52276" title="synaptic plasticity" label="synaptic plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807064" start="52309" end="52318" title="Tim Bliss" label="Tim Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088330" start="52323" end="52333" title="Terje Lømo" label="Terje Lømo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805481" start="52379" end="52401" title="long-term potentiation" label="long-term potentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123045" start="52898" end="52902" title="BDNF" label="BDNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q747883" start="52908" end="52925" title="physical activity" label="physical activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="53106" end="53120" title="Working memory" label="Working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277874" start="53332" end="53347" title="Hebbian theory" label="cell assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646" start="53446" end="53461" title="Episodic memory" label="Episodic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="53694" end="53701" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18650" start="53768" end="53783" title="Semantic memory" label="Semantic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q847079" start="54001" end="54022" title="Operant conditioning" label="Instrumental learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q852461" start="54165" end="54179" title="Motor learning" label="Motor learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998090" start="54331" end="54346" title="premotor cortex" label="premotor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="54626" end="54636" title="Psychology" label="Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="54680" end="54689" title="neurology" label="neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="54828" end="54838" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="54903" end="54918" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="54921" end="54938" title="Cognitive science" label="Cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="55048" end="55064" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="55066" end="55089" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="55114" end="55124" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q948647" start="55170" end="55180" title="Neuroanatomy" label="anatomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859258" start="55632" end="55646" title="immunostaining" label="immunostaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="55779" end="55794" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="56240" end="56243" title="electroencephalography" label="EEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571762" start="56299" end="56312" title="extracellular" label="extracellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="56681" end="56689" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="56801" end="56818" title="epileptic seizure" label="epileptic seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474590" start="56821" end="56839" title="Functional imaging" label="Functional imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="56859" end="56863" title="Functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="fMRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="57177" end="57183" title="Brain damage" label="damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="57254" end="57262" title="meninges" label="meninges"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="57278" end="57297" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037925" start="57928" end="57954" title="Computational neuroscience" label="Computational neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157333" start="58723" end="58758" title="Computational neurogenetic modeling" label="Computational neurogenetic modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064187" start="59057" end="59077" title="neurotrophic factors" label="neurotrophic factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="59103" end="59118" title="neuroplasticity" label="neuroplasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994856" start="59419" end="59440" title="Cre-Lox recombination" label="Cre-Lox recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="60891" end="60898" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007510" start="60906" end="60926" title="Areni-1 cave complex" label="Areni-1 cave complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="61228" end="61237" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="61330" end="61340" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091533" start="61520" end="61541" title="On the Sacred Disease" label="On the Sacred Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135155" start="61575" end="61593" title="Hippocratic Corpus" label="Hippocratic Corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="61672" end="61677" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="62353" end="62367" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589" start="62806" end="62819" title="Luigi Galvani" label="Luigi Galvani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332446" start="63210" end="63218" title="staining" label="staining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196894" start="63273" end="63284" title="Golgi&amp;#x27;s method" label="Golgi stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q150630" start="63614" end="63627" title="Camillo Golgi" label="Camillo Golgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150526" start="63674" end="63696" title="Santiago Ramón y Cajal" label="Santiago Ramón y Cajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q193650" start="63988" end="64000" title="Alan Lloyd Hodgkin" label="Alan Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104607" start="64002" end="64015" title="Andrew Huxley" label="Andrew Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4517" start="64087" end="64099" title="Bernard Katz" label="Bernard Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q213504" start="64295" end="64314" title="Charles Scott Sherrington" label="Charles Sherrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="64467" end="64485" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="64631" end="64642" title="cybernetics" label="cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037925" start="64695" end="64721" title="computational neuroscience" label="computational neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="64876" end="64892" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727248" start="64917" end="64943" title="The Computer and the Brain" label="The Computer and the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="65354" end="65360" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109417" start="65365" end="65377" title="superior colliculus" label="optic tectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q295644" start="65584" end="65595" title="David H. Hubel" label="David Hubel"/>
<link wikidata="Q271421" start="65600" end="65614" title="Torsten Wiesel" label="Torsten Wiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681118" start="65874" end="65893" title="binocular disparity" label="binocular disparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299350" start="66333" end="66370" title="Nervous system network models" label="models of neurons and neural networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143116" start="67399" end="67418" title="Human Brain Project" label="Human Brain Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183548" start="67924" end="67943" title="Decade of the Brain" label="Decade of the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952355" start="68155" end="68179" title="multielectrode array" label="multielectrode recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="68264" end="68283" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="68362" end="68370" title="genomics" label="genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="68451" end="68454" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="68470" end="68482" title="neuroimaging" label="neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="68605" end="68619" title="archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="68667" end="68673" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="68676" end="68687" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437095" start="68738" end="68742" title="Fore (people)" label="Fore"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="68753" end="68769" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="68903" end="68914" title="immortality" label="immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q47051" start="68918" end="68923" title="prion" label="prion"/>
<link wikidata="Q274615" start="68939" end="68943" title="Kuru (disease)" label="kuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692577" start="68986" end="68997" title="Aging brain" label="Aging brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q897410" start="68999" end="69023" title="Brain–computer interface" label="Brain–computer interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q124842282" start="69025" end="69051" title="Brain health and pollution" label="Brain health and pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062122" start="69053" end="69083" title="Central nervous system disease" label="Central nervous system disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077315" start="69085" end="69099" title="Gut–brain axis" label="Gut–brain axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335205" start="69101" end="69131" title="List of neuroscience databases" label="List of neuroscience databases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="69133" end="69154" title="Neurological disorder" label="Neurological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q781492" start="69156" end="69168" title="Optogenetics" label="Optogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112690" start="69170" end="69193" title="Outline of neuroscience" label="Outline of neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="69311" end="69322" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149655" start="69398" end="69409" title="In Our Time (radio series)" label="In Our Time"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3719" wikidata="Q23725" url="?curid=3719" title="Byzantium">
<text>Byzantium () or Byzantion () was an ancient Greek city in classical antiquity that became known as Constantinople in late antiquity and Istanbul today. The Greek name &quot;Byzantion&quot; and its Latinization &quot;Byzantium&quot; continued to be used as a name of Constantinople sporadically and to varying degrees during the thousand-year existence of the Eastern Roman Empire, which also became known by the former name of the city as the Byzantine Empire. Byzantium was colonized by Greeks from Megara in the 7th century BC and remained primarily Greek-speaking until its conquest by the Ottoman Empire in AD 1453.

==Etymology==

The etymology of &quot;Byzantium&quot; is unknown. It has been suggested that the name is of Thracian origin. It may be derived from the Thracian personal name Byzas which means &quot;he-goat&quot;. Ancient Greek legend refers to the Greek king Byzas, the leader of the Megarian colonists and founder of the city. The name &quot;Lygos&quot; for the city, which likely corresponds to an earlier Thracian settlement, is mentioned by Pliny the Elder in his &quot;Natural History&quot;.

&quot;Byzántios,&quot; plural &quot;Byzántioi&quot; (, ; adjective the same) referred to Byzantion&#x27;s inhabitants, also used as an ethnonym for the people of the city and as a family name. In the Middle Ages, &quot;Byzántion&quot; was also a synecdoche for the eastern Roman Empire. (An ellipsis of ). &quot;Byzantinós&quot; (, ) denoted an inhabitant of the empire. The Anglicization of Latin &quot;Byzantinus&quot; yielded &quot;Byzantine&quot;, with 15th and 16th century forms including &quot;Byzantin&quot;, &quot;Bizantin(e)&quot;, &quot;Bezantin(e)&quot;, and &quot;Bysantin&quot; as well as &quot;Byzantian&quot; and &quot;Bizantian&quot;.

The name &quot;Byzantius&quot; and &quot;Byzantinus&quot; were applied from the 9th century to gold Byzantine coinage, reflected in the French &quot;besant&quot; (&quot;d&#x27;or&quot;), Italian &quot;bisante&quot;, and English &quot;besant&quot;, &quot;byzant&quot;, or &quot;bezant&quot;. The English usage, derived from Old French &quot;besan&quot; (pl. &quot;besanz&quot;), and relating to the coin, dates from the 12th century.

Later, the name &quot;Byzantium&quot; became common in the West to refer to the Eastern Roman Empire, whose capital was Constantinople. As a term for the east Roman state as a whole, &quot;Byzantium&quot; was introduced by the historian Hieronymus Wolf only in 1555, a century after the last remnants of the empire, whose inhabitants continued to refer to their polity as the Roman Empire (), had ceased to exist.

Other places were historically known as &quot;Byzántion&quot; (Βυζάντιον) – a city in Libya mentioned by Stephanus of Byzantium and another on the western coast of India referred to by the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea; in both cases the names were probably adaptations of names in local languages. Faustus of Byzantium was from a city of that name in Cilicia.

==History==

The origins of Byzantium are shrouded in legend. Tradition says that Byzas of Megara (a city-state near Athens) founded the city when he sailed northeast across the Aegean Sea. The date is usually given as 667 BC on the authority of Herodotus, who states the city was founded 17 years after Chalcedon. Eusebius, who wrote almost 800 years later, dates the founding of Chalcedon to 685/4 BC, but he also dates the founding of Byzantium to 656 BC (or a few years earlier depending on the edition). Herodotus&#x27; dating was later favored by Constantine the Great, who celebrated Byzantium&#x27;s 1,000th anniversary between the years 333 and 334.

Byzantium was mainly a trading city due to its location at the Black Sea&#x27;s only entrance. Byzantium later conquered Chalcedon, across the Bosphorus on the Asiatic side.

The city was taken by the Persian Empire at the time of the Scythian campaign (513 BC) of Emperor Darius I (r. 522–486 BC), and was added to the administrative province of Skudra. Though Achaemenid control of the city was never as stable as compared to other cities in Thrace, it was considered, alongside Sestos, to be one of the foremost Achaemenid ports on the European coast of the Bosphorus and the Hellespont.

Byzantium was besieged by Greek forces during the Peloponnesian War. As part of Sparta&#x27;s strategy for cutting off grain supplies to Athens during their siege of Athens, Sparta took control of the city in 411 BC, to bring the Athenians into submission. The Athenian military later retook the city in 408 BC, when the Spartans had withdrawn following their settlement.

After siding with Pescennius Niger against the victorious Septimius Severus, the city was besieged by Roman forces and suffered extensive damage in AD 196. Byzantium was rebuilt by Septimius Severus, now emperor, and quickly regained its previous prosperity. It was bound to Perinthus during the period of Septimius Severus. After the war, Byzantium lost its city status and free city privileges, but Caracalla persuaded Severus to restore these rights. In appreciation, the Byzantines named Caracalla an archon of their city. The strategic and highly defensible (due to being surrounded by water on almost all sides) location of Byzantium attracted Roman Emperor Constantine I who, in AD 330, refounded it as an imperial residence inspired by Rome itself, known as Nova Roma. Later the city was called Constantinople (Greek Κωνσταντινούπολις, &quot;Konstantinoupolis&quot;, &quot;city of Constantine&quot;).

This combination of imperialism and location would affect Constantinople&#x27;s role as the nexus between the continents of Europe and Asia. It was a commercial, cultural, and diplomatic centre and for centuries formed the capital of the Byzantine Empire, which decorated the city with numerous monuments, some still standing today. With its strategic position, Constantinople controlled the major trade routes between Asia and Europe, as well as the passage from the Mediterranean Sea to the Black Sea. On May 29, 1453, the city was conquered by the Ottoman Turks, and again became the capital of a powerful state, the Ottoman Empire. The Turks called the city &quot;Istanbul&quot; (although it was not officially renamed until 1930); the name derives from the Greek phrase &quot;στην πόλη&quot;, which means &quot;to the city&quot;. To this day it remains the largest and most populous city in Turkey, although Ankara is now the national capital.

== Emblem ==

By the late Hellenistic or early Roman period (1st century BC), the star and crescent motif was associated to some degree with Byzantium; even though it became more widely used as the royal emblem of Mithradates VI Eupator (who for a time incorporated the city into his empire).

Some Byzantine coins of the 1st century BC and later show the head of Artemis with bow and quiver, and feature a crescent with what appears to be an eight-rayed star on the reverse. 
According to accounts which vary in some of the details, in 340 BC the Byzantines and their allies the Athenians were under siege by the troops of Philip of Macedon. On a particularly dark and wet night Philip attempted a surprise attack but was thwarted by the appearance of a bright light in the sky. This light is occasionally described by subsequent interpreters as a meteor, sometimes as the moon, and some accounts also mention the barking of dogs. However, the original accounts mention only a bright light in the sky, without specifying the moon. To commemorate the event the Byzantines erected a statue of Hecate &quot;lampadephoros&quot; (light-bearer or bringer). This story survived in the works of Hesychius of Miletus, who in all probability lived in the time of Justinian I. His works survive only in fragments preserved in Photius and the tenth century lexicographer Suidas. The tale is also related by Stephanus of Byzantium, and Eustathius.

Devotion to Hecate was especially favored by the Byzantines for her aid in having protected them from the incursions of Philip of Macedon. Her symbols were the crescent and star, and the walls of her city were her provenance. This contradicts claims that only the symbol of the crescent was meant to symbolize Hecate, whereas the star was only added later in order to symbolize the Virgin Mary, as Constantine I is said to have rededicated the city to her in the year 330.

It is unclear precisely how the symbol Hecate/Artemis, one of many goddesses would have been transferred to the city itself, but it seems likely to have been an effect of being credited with the intervention against Philip and the subsequent honors. This was a common process in ancient Greece, as in &quot;Athens&quot; where the city was named after &quot;Athena&quot; in honor of such an intervention in time of war.

Cities in the Roman Empire often continued to issue their own coinage. &quot;Of the many themes that were used on local coinage, celestial and astral symbols often appeared, mostly stars or crescent moons.&quot; The wide variety of these issues, and the varying explanations for the significance of the star and crescent on Roman coinage precludes their discussion here. It is, however, apparent that by the time of the Romans, coins featuring a star or crescent in some combination were not at all rare.

==People==
*Homerus, tragedian, lived in the early 3rd century BC
*Philo, engineer, lived 
*Epigenes of Byzantium, astrologer, lived in the 3rd–2nd century BC
*Aristophanes of Byzantium, a scholar who flourished in Alexandria, 3rd–2nd century BC
*Myro, a Hellenistic female poet

==See also==
* Sarayburnu, which is the geographic location of ancient Byzantium
* Timeline of Istanbul history

== Notes ==
==References==
==Sources==
* Harris, Jonathan, &quot;Constantinople: Capital of Byzantium&quot; (Hambledon/Continuum, London, 2007). 
*Jeffreys, Elizabeth and Michael, and Moffatt, Ann, &quot;Byzantine Papers: Proceedings of the First Australian Byzantine Studies Conference, Canberra, 17–19 May 1978&quot; (Australian National University, Canberra, 1979).
* Istanbul Historical Information – Istanbul Informative Guide To The City. Retrieved January 6, 2005.
* The Useful Information about Istanbul . Retrieved January 6, 2005.
* &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1991) 
*Yeats, William Butler, &quot;Sailing to Byzantium&quot;,
==External links==
* Byzantine &amp; Christian Museum at byzantinemuseum.gr
* Coins of the Byzantine empire at wegm.com
* History of money FAQs at galmarley.com – description of Byzantine monetary system, fifth century BC
* Society for the Promotion of Byzantine Studies at www.byzantium.ac.uk 
* Vasilief, A History of the Byzantine Empire, at ellopos.net – hyperlinked with notes and more resources, at Elpenor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="0" end="9" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="16" end="25" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="36" end="49" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="50" end="54" title="Polis" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="58" end="77" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="99" end="113" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="117" end="131" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="136" end="144" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q466126" start="197" end="209" title="Romanization of Greek" label="Latinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020238" start="258" end="280" title="Names of Constantinople" label="name of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="359" end="379" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="488" end="494" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="500" end="506" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="573" end="585" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="its conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="593" end="607" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36793" start="729" end="737" title="Thracian language" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q863859" start="881" end="886" title="Byzas" label="Byzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q32357" start="965" end="970" title="Lygos" label="Lygos"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="1030" end="1038" title="Thracian" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1067" end="1082" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="1096" end="1111" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="1255" end="1263" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1320" end="1331" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q190068" start="1366" end="1376" title="synecdoche" label="synecdoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1385" end="1405" title="eastern Roman Empire" label="eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189743" start="1411" end="1419" title="Ellipsis (linguistics)" label="ellipsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763564" start="1495" end="1508" title="Anglicisation of names" label="Anglicization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018755" start="1873" end="1890" title="Byzantine coinage" label="Byzantine coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q649847" start="2050" end="2056" title="bezant" label="bezant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2287" end="2307" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q61631" start="2444" end="2459" title="Hieronymus Wolf" label="Hieronymus Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370577" start="2708" end="2713" title="Ancient Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="2727" end="2749" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q664162" start="2811" end="2841" title="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea" label="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q109973609" start="2922" end="2942" title="Faustus of Byzantium" label="Faustus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="2975" end="2982" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863859" start="3067" end="3072" title="Byzas" label="Byzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="3076" end="3082" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="3102" end="3108" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="3163" end="3173" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="3231" end="3240" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q337381" start="3289" end="3298" title="Chalcedon" label="Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="3300" end="3308" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="3538" end="3559" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="3708" end="3717" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="3846" end="3860" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717681" start="3880" end="3897" title="European Scythian campaign of Darius I" label="Scythian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="3918" end="3926" title="Darius I" label="Darius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q845205" start="3992" end="3998" title="Skudra" label="Skudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4007" end="4017" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="4089" end="4095" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q593737" start="4126" end="4132" title="Sestos" label="Sestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="4224" end="4234" title="Hellespont" label="Hellespont"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="4287" end="4304" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="4317" end="4323" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q777189" start="4498" end="4515" title="Athenian military" label="Athenian military"/>
<link wikidata="Q201053" start="4628" end="4644" title="Pescennius Niger" label="Pescennius Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="4668" end="4685" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815679" start="4885" end="4894" title="Perinthus" label="Perinthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="5011" end="5020" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="5260" end="5273" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="5274" end="5287" title="Constantine I (emperor)" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q13089982" start="5376" end="5385" title="New Rome" label="Nova Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="5413" end="5427" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="5758" end="5774" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="5988" end="6005" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="6013" end="6022" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="6071" end="6084" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6140" end="6154" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="6416" end="6422" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="6433" end="6439" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="6496" end="6507" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592503" start="6552" end="6569" title="star and crescent" label="star and crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q185126" start="6684" end="6706" title="Mithradates VI Eupator" label="Mithradates VI Eupator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380487" start="6750" end="6760" title="Kingdom of Pontus" label="his empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="6834" end="6841" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="7050" end="7059" title="Classical Athens" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="7094" end="7111" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="7319" end="7325" title="meteor" label="meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="7562" end="7568" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q703544" start="7658" end="7678" title="Hesychius of Miletus" label="Hesychius of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="7724" end="7735" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q243187" start="7786" end="7793" title="Photius" label="Photius"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="7830" end="7836" title="Suda" label="Suidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="7866" end="7888" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q453465" start="7894" end="7904" title="Eustathius of Thessalonica" label="Eustathius"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="7919" end="7925" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8815" end="8827" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q724800" start="9319" end="9326" title="Homerus of Byzantium" label="Homerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334570" start="9374" end="9379" title="Philo of Byzantium" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q287423" start="9399" end="9420" title="Epigenes of Byzantium" label="Epigenes of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q313018" start="9467" end="9492" title="Aristophanes of Byzantium" label="Aristophanes of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="9522" end="9532" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q541746" start="9554" end="9558" title="Moero" label="Myro"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="9562" end="9573" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247633" start="9602" end="9612" title="Sarayburnu" label="Sarayburnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152390" start="9670" end="9698" title="Timeline of Istanbul history" label="Timeline of Istanbul history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3721" wikidata="Q4284296" url="?curid=3721" title="Biotic">
<text>Biotics describe living or once living components of a community; for example organisms, such as animals and plants.

Biotic may refer to:
*Life, the condition of living organisms
*Biology, the study of life
*Biotic material, which is derived from living organisms
*Biotic components in ecology
*Biotic potential, an organism&#x27;s reproductive capacity
*Biotic community, all the interacting organisms living together in a specific habitat
*Biotic energy, a vital force theorized by biochemist Benjamin Moore
*Biotic Baking Brigade, an unofficial group of pie-throwing activists

==See also==
*Abiotic
*Antibiotics are agents that either kill bacteria or inhibit their growth 
*Prebiotic (nutrition) are non-digestible food ingredients that stimulate the growth or activity of bacteria in the digestive system
*Probiotics consist of a live culture of bacteria that inhibit or interfere with colonization by microbial pathogens
*Synbiotics refer to nutritional supplements combining probiotics and prebiotics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4284296" start="118" end="124" title="Biotic" label="Biotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="140" end="144" title="Life" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="181" end="188" title="Biology" label="Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915356" start="209" end="224" title="Biotic material" label="Biotic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="266" end="282" title="Biotic component" label="Biotic component"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491865" start="296" end="312" title="Biotic potential" label="Biotic potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q184806" start="356" end="372" title="Biotic community" label="Biotic community"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889034" start="443" end="456" title="Biotic energy" label="Biotic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q718541" start="512" end="533" title="Biotic Baking Brigade" label="Biotic Baking Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q461335" start="596" end="603" title="Abiotic" label="Abiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="605" end="616" title="Antibiotics" label="Antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q218870" start="680" end="701" title="Prebiotic (nutrition)" label="Prebiotic (nutrition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="813" end="822" title="Probiotic" label="Probiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375654" start="930" end="940" title="Synbiotics" label="Synbiotics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3722" wikidata="Q5086" url="?curid=3722" title="Berlin Wall">
<text>The Berlin Wall (, ) was a guarded concrete barrier that encircled West Berlin from 1961 to 1989, separating it from East Berlin and the German Democratic Republic (GDR; East Germany). Construction of the Berlin Wall was commenced by the government of the GDR on 13 August 1961. It included guard towers placed along large concrete walls, accompanied by a wide area (later known as the &quot;death strip&quot;) that contained anti-vehicle trenches, beds of nails and other defenses. The primary intention for the Wall&#x27;s construction was to prevent East German citizens from fleeing to the West.

The Soviet Bloc propaganda portrayed the Wall as protecting its population from &quot;fascist elements conspiring to prevent the will of the people&quot; from building a communist state in the GDR. The authorities officially referred to the Berlin Wall as the &quot;Anti-Fascist Protection Rampart&quot; (, ). Conversely, West Berlin&#x27;s city government sometimes referred to it as the &quot;Wall of Shame&quot;, a term coined by mayor Willy Brandt in reference to the Wall&#x27;s restriction on freedom of movement. Along with the separate and much longer inner German border, which demarcated the border between East and West Germany, it came to symbolize physically the Iron Curtain that separated the Western Bloc and Soviet satellite states of the Eastern Bloc during the Cold War.

Before the Wall&#x27;s erection, 3.5 million East Germans circumvented Eastern Bloc emigration restrictions and defected from the GDR, many by crossing over the border from East Berlin into West Berlin; from there they could then travel to West Germany and to other Western European countries. Between 1961 and 1989, the deadly force associated with the Wall prevented almost all such emigration. During this period, over 100,000 people attempted to escape, and over 5,000 people succeeded in escaping over the Wall, with an estimated death toll of those murdered by East German authorities ranging from 136 to more than 200 in and around Berlin.

In 1989, a series of revolutions in nearby Eastern Bloc countries (Poland and Hungary in particular) and the events of the &quot;Pan-European Picnic&quot; set in motion a peaceful development during which the Iron Curtain largely broke, rulers in the East came under public pressure to cease their repressive policies. After several weeks of civil unrest, the East German government announced on 9 November 1989 that all GDR citizens could visit the FRG and West Berlin. Crowds of East Germans crossed and climbed onto the Wall, joined by West Germans on the other side, and souvenir hunters chipped away parts of the Wall over the next few weeks. The Brandenburg Gate, a few meters from the Berlin Wall, reopened on 22 December 1989, with demolition of the Wall beginning on 13 June 1990 and concluding in 1994. The fall of the Berlin Wall paved the way for German reunification, which formally took place on 3 October 1990.

==Background==
===Post-war Germany===

After the end of World War II in Europe, what remained of pre-war Germany west of the Oder-Neisse line was divided into four occupation zones (as per the Potsdam Agreement), each one controlled by one of the four occupying Allied powers: the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the Soviet Union. The capital, Berlin, as the seat of the Allied Control Council, was similarly subdivided into four sectors despite the city&#x27;s location, which was fully within the Soviet zone.

Within two years, political divisions increased between the Soviets and the other occupying powers. These included the Soviets&#x27; refusal to agree to reconstruction plans making post-war Germany self-sufficient, and to a detailed accounting of industrial plants, goods and infrastructure—some of which had already been removed by the Soviets. France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Benelux countries later met to combine the non-Soviet zones of Germany into one zone for reconstruction, and to approve the extension of the Marshall Plan.

=== Eastern Bloc and the Berlin airlift ===
Following the defeat of Nazi Germany in World War II, the Soviet Union engineered the installation of communist regimes in most of the countries occupied by Soviet military forces at the end of the War, including Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, and the GDR, which together with Albania formed the Comecon in 1949 and later a military alliance, the Warsaw Pact. The beginning of the Cold War saw the Eastern Bloc of the Soviet Union confront the Western Bloc of the United States, with the latter grouping becoming largely united in 1949 under NATO and the former grouping becoming largely united in 1955 under the Warsaw Pact. As the Soviet Union already had an armed presence and political domination all over its eastern satellite states by 1955, the pact has been long considered &quot;superfluous&quot;, and because of the rushed way in which it was conceived, NATO officials labeled it a &quot;cardboard castle&quot;. There was no direct military confrontation between the two organizations; instead, the conflict was fought on an ideological basis and through proxy wars. Both NATO and the Warsaw Pact led to the expansion of military forces and their integration into the respective blocs. The Warsaw Pact&#x27;s largest military engagement was the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia, its own member state, in August 1968.

Since the end of the War, the USSR installed a Soviet-style regime in the Soviet occupation zone of Germany and later founded the GDR, with the country&#x27;s political system based on a centrally planned socialist economic model with nationalized means of production, and with repressive secret police institutions, under party dictatorship of the SED (Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands; Socialist Unity Party of Germany) similar to the party dictatorship of the Soviet Communist Party in the USSR.

At the same time, a parallel country was established under the control of the Western powers in the zones of post-war Germany occupied by them, culminating in the foundation of the Federal Republic of Germany in 1949, which initially claimed to be the sole legitimate power in all of Germany, East and West. The material standard of living in the Western zones of Berlin began to improve quickly, and residents of the Soviet zone soon began leaving for the West in large numbers, fleeing hunger, poverty and repression in the Soviet Zone for a better life in the West. Soon residents of other parts of the Soviet zone began to escape to the West through Berlin, and this migration, called in Germany &quot;Republikflucht&quot;, deprived the Soviet zone not only of working forces desperately needed for post-war reconstruction but disproportionately of highly educated people, which came to be known as the &quot;Brain Drain&quot;.

In 1948, in response to moves by the Western powers to establish a separate, federal system of government in the Western zones, and to extend the US Marshall Plan of economic assistance to Germany, the Soviets instituted the Berlin Blockade, preventing people, food, materials and supplies from arriving in West Berlin by land routes through the Soviet zone. The United States, the United Kingdom, France, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and several other countries began a massive &quot;airlift&quot;, supplying West Berlin with food and other supplies. The Soviets mounted a public relations campaign against the Western policy change. Communists attempted to disrupt the elections of 1948, preceding large losses therein, while 300,000 Berliners demonstrated for the international airlift to continue. In May 1949, Stalin lifted the blockade, permitting the resumption of Western shipments to Berlin.

The German Democratic Republic (the &quot;GDR&quot;; East Germany) was declared on 7 October 1949. On that day, the USSR ended the Soviet military government which had governed the Soviet Occupation Zone (Sowetische Besatzungszone) since the end of the War and handed over legal power to the Provisorische Volkskammer under the new Constitution of the GDR which came into force that day. However, until 1955, the Soviets maintained considerable legal control over the GDR state, including the regional governments, through the Sowetische Kontrollkommission and maintained a presence in various East German administrative, military, and secret police structures. Even after legal sovereignty of the GDR was restored in 1955, the Soviet Union continued to maintain considerable influence over administration and lawmaking in the GDR through the Soviet embassy and through the implicit threat of force which could be exercised through the continuing large Soviet military presence in the GDR, which was used to repress protests in East Germany bloodily in June 1953.

East Germany differed from West Germany (Federal Republic of Germany), which developed into a Western capitalist country with a social market economy and a democratic parliamentary government. Continual economic growth starting in the 1950s fueled a 20-year &quot;economic miracle&quot; (). As West Germany&#x27;s economy grew, and its standard of living steadily improved, many East Germans wanted to move to West Germany.

===Emigration westward in the early 1950s===

After the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe at the end of World War II, the majority of those living in the newly acquired areas of the Eastern Bloc aspired to independence and wanted the Soviets to leave. Taking advantage of the zonal border between occupied zones in Germany, the number of GDR citizens moving to West Germany totaled 187,000 in 1950; 165,000 in 1951; 182,000 in 1952; and 331,000 in 1953. One reason for the sharp 1953 increase was fear of potential further Sovietization, given the increasingly paranoid actions of Joseph Stalin in late 1952 and early 1953. In the first six months of 1953, 226,000 had fled.

==Erection of the inner German border==

By the early 1950s, the Soviet approach to controlling national movement, restricting emigration, was emulated by most of the rest of the Eastern Bloc, including East Germany. The restrictions presented a quandary for some Eastern Bloc states, which had been more economically advanced and open than the Soviet Union, such that crossing borders seemed more natural—especially where no prior border existed between East and West Germany.

Up until 1952, the demarcation lines between East Germany and the western occupied zones could be easily crossed in most places. On 1 April 1952, East German leaders met the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin in Moscow; during the discussions, Stalin&#x27;s foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov proposed that the East Germans should &quot;introduce a system of passes for visits of West Berlin residents to the territory of East Berlin [so as to stop] free movement of Western agents&quot; in the GDR. Stalin agreed, calling the situation &quot;intolerable&quot;. He advised the East Germans to build up their border defenses, telling them that &quot;The demarcation line between East and West Germany should be considered a border—and not just any border, but a dangerous one ... The Germans will guard the line of defence with their lives.&quot;

Consequently, the inner German border between the two German states was closed, and a barbed-wire fence erected. The border between the Western and Eastern sectors of Berlin, however, remained open, although traffic between the Soviet and the Western sectors was somewhat restricted. This resulted in Berlin becoming a magnet for East Germans desperate to escape life in the GDR, and also a flashpoint for tension between the United States and the Soviet Union.

In 1955, the Soviets gave East Germany authority over civilian movement in Berlin, passing control to a regime not recognized in the West. Initially, East Germany granted &quot;visits&quot; to allow its residents access to West Germany. However, following the defection of large numbers of East Germans (known as &quot;Republikflucht&quot;) under this regime, the new East German state legally restricted virtually all travel to the West in 1956. Soviet East German ambassador Mikhail Pervukhin observed that &quot;the presence in Berlin of an open and essentially uncontrolled border between the socialist and capitalist worlds unwittingly prompts the population to make a comparison between both parts of the city, which unfortunately does not always turn out in favour of Democratic [East] Berlin.&quot;

===Berlin emigration loophole===
With the closing of the inner German border officially in 1952, the border in Berlin remained considerably more accessible because it was administered by all four occupying powers. Accordingly, Berlin became the main route by which East Germans left for the West. On 11 December 1957, East Germany introduced a new passport law that reduced the overall number of refugees leaving Eastern Germany.

It had the unintended result of drastically increasing the percentage of those leaving through West Berlin from 60% to well over 90% by the end of 1958. Those caught trying to leave East Berlin were subjected to heavy penalties, but with no physical barrier and subway train access still available to West Berlin, such measures were ineffective. The Berlin sector border was essentially a &quot;loophole&quot; through which Eastern Bloc citizens could still escape. The 3.5 million East Germans who had left by 1961 totalled approximately 20% of the entire East German population.

An important reason that passage between East Germany and West Berlin was not stopped earlier was that doing so would cut off much of the railway traffic in East Germany. Construction of a new railway bypassing West Berlin, the Berlin outer ring, commenced in 1951. Following the completion of the railway in 1961, closing the border became a more practical proposition.

===Brain drain===
The emigrants tended to be young and well-educated, leading to the &quot;brain drain&quot; feared by officials in East Germany. Yuri Andropov, then the CPSU Director on Relations with Communist and Workers&#x27; Parties of Socialist Countries, wrote an urgent letter on 28 August 1958 to the Central Committee about the significant 50% increase in the number of East German intelligentsia among the refugees. Andropov reported that, while the East German leadership stated that they were leaving for economic reasons, testimony from refugees indicated that the reasons were more political than material. He stated &quot;the flight of the intelligentsia has reached a particularly critical phase.&quot;

By 1960, the combination of World War II and the massive emigration westward left East Germany with only 61% of its population of working age, compared to 70.5% before the war. The loss was disproportionately heavy among professionals: engineers, technicians, physicians, teachers, lawyers, and skilled workers. The direct cost of manpower losses to East Germany (and corresponding gain to the West) has been estimated at $7 billion to $9 billion, with East German party leader Walter Ulbricht later claiming that West Germany owed him $17 billion in compensation, including reparations as well as manpower losses. In addition, the drain of East Germany&#x27;s young population potentially cost it over 22.5 billion marks in lost educational investment. The brain drain of professionals had become so damaging to the political credibility and economic viability of East Germany that the re-securing of the German communist frontier was imperative.

The exodus of emigrants from East Germany presented two minor potential benefits: an easy way to smuggle East German secret agents to West Germany, and a reduction in the number of citizens hostile to the communist regime. Neither of these advantages, however, proved particularly useful.

==Start of the construction (1961)==

On 15 June 1961, First Secretary of the Socialist Unity Party and GDR State Council chairman Walter Ulbricht stated in an international press conference, (No one has the intention of erecting a wall!). It was the first time the colloquial term (wall) had been used in this context.

The transcript of a telephone call between Nikita Khrushchev and Ulbricht, on 1 August in the same year, suggests that the initiative for the construction of the Wall came from Khrushchev. However, other sources suggest that Khrushchev had initially been wary about building a wall, fearing negative Western reaction. Nevertheless, Ulbricht had pushed for a border closure for some time, arguing that East Germany&#x27;s existence was at stake.

Khrushchev had become emboldened upon seeing US president John F. Kennedy&#x27;s youth and inexperience, which he considered a weakness. In the 1961 Vienna summit, Kennedy made the error of admitting that the US would not actively oppose the building of a barrier. A feeling of miscalculation and failure immediately afterwards was admitted by Kennedy in a candid interview with &quot;New York Times&quot; columnist James &quot;Scotty&quot; Reston. On Saturday, 12 August 1961, the leaders of the GDR attended a garden party at a government guesthouse in , in a wooded area to the north of East Berlin. There, Ulbricht signed the order to close the border and erect a wall.

At midnight, the police and units of the East German army began to close the border and, by Sunday morning, 13 August, the border with West Berlin was closed. East German troops and workers had begun to tear up streets running alongside the border to make them impassable to most vehicles and to install barbed wire entanglements and fences along the around the three western sectors, and the that divided West and East Berlin. The date of 13 August became commonly referred to as Barbed Wire Sunday in Germany.

The barrier was built inside East Berlin on East German territory to ensure that it did not encroach on West Berlin at any point. Generally, the Wall was only slightly inside East Berlin, but in a few places it was some distance from the legal border, most notably at Potsdamer Bahnhof and the Lenné Triangle that is now much of the Potsdamer Platz development.

Later, the initial barrier was built up into the Wall proper, the first concrete elements and large blocks being put in place on 17 August. During the construction of the Wall, National People&#x27;s Army (NVA) and Combat Groups of the Working Class (KdA) soldiers stood in front of it with orders to shoot anyone who attempted to defect. Additionally, chain fences, walls, minefields and other obstacles were installed along the length of East Germany&#x27;s western border with West Germany proper. A wide no man&#x27;s land was cleared as well to provide a better overview and a clear line of fire at fleeing refugees.

===Immediate effects===
With the closing of the east–west sector boundary in Berlin, the vast majority of East Germans could no longer travel or emigrate to West Germany. Berlin soon went from being the easiest place to make an unauthorized crossing between East and West Germany to being the most difficult. Many families were split, while East Berliners employed in the West were cut off from their jobs. West Berlin became an isolated exclave in a hostile land. West Berliners demonstrated against the Wall, led by their Mayor () Willy Brandt, who criticized the United States for failing to respond and went so far as to suggest to Washington what to do next. Kennedy was furious. Allied intelligence agencies had hypothesized about a wall to stop the flood of refugees, but the main candidate for its location was around the perimeter of the city. In 1961, Secretary of State Dean Rusk proclaimed, &quot;The Wall certainly ought not to be a permanent feature of the European landscape. I see no reason why the Soviet Union should think it is to their advantage in any way to leave there that monument to communist failure.&quot;

United States and UK sources had expected the Soviet sector to be sealed off from West Berlin but were surprised by how long the East Germans took for such a move. They considered the Wall as an end to concerns about a GDR/Soviet retaking or capture of the whole of Berlin; the Wall would presumably have been an unnecessary project if such plans were afloat. Thus, they concluded that the possibility of a Soviet military conflict over Berlin had decreased.

The East German government claimed that the Wall was an &quot;anti-fascist protective rampart&quot; () intended to dissuade aggression from the West. Another official justification was the activities of Western agents in Eastern Europe. The Eastern German government also claimed that West Berliners were buying out state-subsidized goods in East Berlin. East Germans and others greeted such statements with skepticism, as most of the time, the border was only closed for citizens of East Germany traveling to the West, but not for residents of West Berlin travelling to the East. The construction of the Wall had caused considerable hardship to families divided by it. Most people believed that the Wall was mainly a means of preventing the citizens of East Germany from entering or fleeing to West Berlin.

===Secondary response===
The National Security Agency was the only American intelligence agency that was aware that East Germany was to take action to deal with the brain drain problem. On 9 August 1961, the NSA intercepted an advance warning information of the Socialist Unity Party&#x27;s plan to close the intra-Berlin border between East and West Berlin completely for foot traffic. The interagency intelligence Berlin Watch Committee assessed that this intercept &quot;might be the first step in a plan to close the border.&quot; This warning did not reach John F. Kennedy until noon on 13 August 1961, while he was vacationing in his yacht off the Kennedy Compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. While Kennedy was angry that he had no advance warning, he was relieved that the East Germans and the Soviets had only divided Berlin without taking any action against West Berlin&#x27;s access to the West. However, he denounced the Berlin Wall, whose erection worsened the relations between the United States and the Soviet Union.

In response to the erection of the Berlin Wall, a retired general, Lucius D. Clay, was appointed by Kennedy as his special advisor with ambassadorial rank. Clay had been the Military Governor of the US Zone of Occupation in Germany during the period of the Berlin Blockade and had ordered the first measures in what became the Berlin Airlift. He was immensely popular with the residents of West Berlin, and his appointment was an unambiguous sign that Kennedy would not compromise on the status of West Berlin. As a symbolic gesture, Kennedy sent Clay and Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson to West Berlin. They landed at Tempelhof Airport on the afternoon of Saturday, 19 August 1961 and were greeted enthusiastically by the local population.

They arrived in a city defended by three Allied brigades—one each from the UK (Berlin Infantry Brigade), the US (Berlin Brigade), and France (Forces Françaises à Berlin). On 16 August, Kennedy had given the order for them to be reinforced. Early on 19 August, the 1st Battle Group, 18th Infantry Regiment (commanded by Colonel Glover S. Johns Jr.) was alerted.

On Sunday morning, U.S. troops marched from West Germany through East Germany, bound for West Berlin. Lead elements—arranged in a column of 491 vehicles and trailers carrying 1,500 men, divided into five march units—left the Helmstedt-Marienborn checkpoint at 06:34. At Marienborn, the Soviet checkpoint next to Helmstedt on the West German-East German border, US personnel were counted by guards. The column was long, and covered from Marienborn to Berlin in full battle gear. East German police watched from beside trees next to the autobahn all the way along.

The front of the convoy arrived at the outskirts of Berlin just before noon, to be met by Clay and Johnson, before parading through the streets of Berlin in front of a large crowd. At 04:00 on 21 August, Lyndon Johnson left West Berlin in the hands of General Frederick O. Hartel and his brigade of 4,224 officers and men. &quot;For the next three and a half years, American battalions would rotate into West Berlin, by autobahn, at three-month intervals to demonstrate Allied rights to the city&quot;.

The creation of the Wall had important implications for both German states. By stemming the exodus of people from East Germany, the East German government was able to reassert its control over the country: despite discontent with the Wall, economic problems caused by dual currency and the black market were largely eliminated. The economy in the GDR began to grow. However, the Wall proved a public relations disaster for the communist bloc as a whole. Western powers portrayed it as a symbol of communist tyranny, particularly after East German border guards shot and killed would-be defectors. Such fatalities were later treated as acts of murder by the reunified Germany.

==Structure and adjacent areas==
===Layout and modifications===

The Berlin Wall was more than long. In June 1962, a second, parallel fence, also known as a &quot;hinterland&quot; wall (inner wall), was built some farther into East German territory. The houses contained between the wall and fences were razed and the inhabitants relocated, thus establishing what later became known as the &quot;death strip&quot;. The death strip was covered with raked sand or gravel, rendering footprints easy to notice, easing the detection of trespassers and also enabling officers to see which guards had neglected their task; it offered no cover; and, most importantly, it offered clear fields of fire for the Wall guards.

Through the years, the Berlin Wall evolved through four versions:
*Wire fence and concrete block wall (1961)
*Improved wire fence (1962–1965)
*Improved concrete wall (1965–1975)
* (Border Wall 75) (1975–1989)

The &quot;fourth-generation Wall&quot;, known officially as &quot;&quot; (retaining wall element UL 12.11), was the final and most sophisticated version of the Wall. Begun in 1975 and completed about 1980, it was constructed from 45,000 separate sections of reinforced concrete, each high and wide, and cost DDM16,155,000 or about US$3,638,000. The concrete provisions added to this version of the Wall were done to prevent escapees from driving their cars through the barricades. At strategic points, the Wall was constructed to a somewhat weaker standard, so that East German and Soviet armored vehicles could easily break through in the event of war.

The top of the wall was lined with a smooth pipe, intended to make it more difficult to scale. The Wall was reinforced by mesh fencing, signal fencing, anti-vehicle trenches, barbed wire, dogs on long lines, &quot;beds of nails&quot; (also known as &quot;Stalin&#x27;s Carpet&quot;) under balconies hanging over the &quot;death strip&quot;, over 116 watchtowers, and 20 bunkers with hundreds of guards. This version of the Wall is the one most commonly seen in photographs, and surviving fragments of the Wall in Berlin and elsewhere around the world are generally pieces of the fourth-generation Wall. The layout came to resemble the inner German border in most technical aspects, except that the Berlin Wall had no landmines nor spring-guns. Maintenance was performed on the outside of the wall by personnel who accessed the area outside it either via ladders or via hidden doors within the wall. These doors could not be opened by a single person, needing two separate keys in two separate keyholes to unlock.

As was the case with the inner German border, an unfortified strip of Eastern territory was left outside the wall. This outer strip was used by workers to paint over graffiti and perform other maintenance on the outside of the wall Unlike the inner German border, however, the outer strip was usually no more than four meters wide, and, in photos from the era, the exact location of the actual border in many places appears not even to have been marked. Also in contrast with the inner German border, little interest was shown by East German law enforcement in keeping outsiders off the outer strip; sidewalks of West Berlin streets even ran inside it.

Despite the East German government&#x27;s general policy of benign neglect, vandals were known to have been pursued in the outer strip, and even arrested. In 1986, defector and political activist Wolfram Hasch and four other defectors were standing inside the outer strip defacing the wall when East German personnel emerged from one of the hidden doors to apprehend them. All but Hasch escaped back into the western sector. Hasch himself was arrested, dragged through the door into the death strip, and later convicted of illegally crossing the &quot;de jure&quot; border outside the wall. Graffiti artist Thierry Noir has reported having often been pursued there by East German soldiers. While some graffiti artists were chased off the outer strip, others, such as Keith Haring, were seemingly tolerated.

===Surrounding municipalities===
Besides the sector-sector boundary within Berlin itself, the Wall also separated West Berlin from the present-day state of Brandenburg. The following present-day municipalities, listed in counter-clockwise direction, share a border with the former West Berlin:
*Oberhavel: Mühlenbecker Land , Glienicke/Nordbahn, Hohen Neuendorf, Hennigsdorf
*Havelland: Schönwalde-Glien, Falkensee, Dallgow-Döberitz
*Potsdam (urban district)
*Potsdam-Mittelmark: Stahnsdorf, Kleinmachnow, Teltow
*Teltow-Fläming: Großbeeren, Blankenfelde-Mahlow
*Dahme-Spreewald: Schönefeld 

==Official crossings and usage==


There were nine border crossings between East and West Berlin. These allowed visits by West Berliners, other West Germans, Western foreigners and Allied personnel into East Berlin, as well as visits by GDR citizens and citizens of other socialist countries into West Berlin, provided that they held the necessary permits. These crossings were restricted according to which nationality was allowed to use it (East Germans, West Germans, West Berliners, other countries). The best known was the vehicle and pedestrian checkpoint at the corner of Friedrichstraße and Zimmerstraße (Checkpoint Charlie), which was restricted to Allied personnel and foreigners.

Several other border crossings existed between West Berlin and surrounding East Germany. These could be used for transit between West Germany and West Berlin, for visits by West Berliners into East Germany, for transit into countries neighbouring East Germany (Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Denmark), and for visits by East Germans into West Berlin carrying a permit. After the 1972 agreements, new crossings were opened to allow West Berlin waste to be transported into East German dumps, as well as some crossings for access to West Berlin&#x27;s exclaves (see &quot;Steinstücken&quot;).

Four autobahns connected West Berlin to West Germany, including Berlin-Helmstedt autobahn, which entered East German territory between the towns of Helmstedt and Marienborn (Checkpoint Alpha), and which entered West Berlin at Dreilinden (Checkpoint Bravo for the Allied forces) in southwestern Berlin. Access to West Berlin was also possible by railway (four routes) and by boat for commercial shipping via canals and rivers.

Non-German Westerners could cross the border at Friedrichstraße station in East Berlin and at Checkpoint Charlie. When the Wall was erected, Berlin&#x27;s complex public transit networks, the S-Bahn and U-Bahn, were divided with it. Some lines were cut in half; many stations were shut down. Three western lines traveled through brief sections of East Berlin territory, passing through eastern stations (called &quot;&quot;, or ghost stations) without stopping. Both the eastern and western networks converged at , which became a major crossing point for those (mostly Westerners) with permission to cross.

===Crossing===

West Germans and citizens of other Western countries could generally visit East Germany, often after applying for a visa at an East German embassy several weeks in advance. Visas for day trips restricted to East Berlin were issued without previous application in a simplified procedure at the border crossing. However, East German authorities could refuse entry permits without stating a reason. In the 1980s, visitors from the western part of the city who wanted to visit the eastern part had to exchange at least DM 25 into East German currency at the poor exchange rate of 1:1. It was forbidden to export East German currency from the East, but money not spent could be left at the border for possible future visits. Tourists crossing from the west had to also pay for a visa, which cost DM 5; West Berliners did not have to pay this fee.

West Berliners initially could not visit East Berlin or East Germany at all—all crossing points were closed to them between 26 August 1961 and 17 December 1963. In 1963, negotiations between East and West resulted in a limited possibility for visits during the Christmas season that year (). Similar, very limited arrangements were made in 1964, 1965 and 1966.

In 1971, with the Four Power Agreement on Berlin, agreements were reached that allowed West Berliners to apply for visas to enter East Berlin and East Germany regularly, comparable to the regulations already in force for West Germans. However, East German authorities could still refuse entry permits.
East Berliners and East Germans could not, at first, travel to West Berlin or West Germany at all. This regulation remained in force essentially until the fall of the Wall, but over the years several exceptions to these rules were introduced, the most significant being:
*Elderly pensioners could travel to the West starting in 1964
*Visits of relatives for important family matters
*People who had to travel to the West for professional reasons (for example, artists, truck drivers, musicians, writers, etc.)

For each of these exceptions, GDR citizens had to apply for individual approval, which was never guaranteed. In addition, even if travel was approved, GDR travellers could exchange only a very small number of East German Marks into Deutsche Marks (DM), thus limiting the financial resources available for them to travel to the West. This led to the West German practice of granting a small amount of DM annually (&quot;Begrüßungsgeld&quot;, or welcome money) to GDR citizens visiting West Germany and West Berlin to help alleviate this situation.

Citizens of other East European countries were in general subject to the same prohibition of visiting Western countries as East Germans, though the applicable exception (if any) varied from country to country.

Allied military personnel and civilian officials of the Allied forces could enter and exit East Berlin without submitting to East German passport controls, purchasing a visa or being required to exchange money. Likewise, Soviet military patrols could enter and exit West Berlin. This was a requirement of the post-war Four Powers Agreements. A particular area of concern for the Western Allies involved official dealings with East German authorities when crossing the border, since Allied policy did not recognize the authority of the GDR to regulate Allied military traffic to and from West Berlin, as well as the Allied presence within Greater Berlin, including entry into, exit from, and presence within East Berlin.

The Allies held that only the Soviet Union, and not the GDR, had the authority to regulate Allied personnel in such cases. For this reason, elaborate procedures were established to prevent inadvertent recognition of East German authority when engaged in travel through the GDR and when in East Berlin. Special rules applied to travel by Western Allied military personnel assigned to the military liaison missions accredited to the commander of Soviet forces in East Germany, located in Potsdam.

Allied personnel were restricted by policy when travelling by land to the following routes:

;Transit between West Germany and West Berlin:
*Road: The Helmstedt–Berlin autobahn (A2) (checkpoints Alpha and Bravo respectively). Soviet military personnel manned these checkpoints and processed Allied personnel for travel between the two points.
*Rail: Western Allied military personnel and civilian officials of the Allied forces were forbidden to use commercial train service between West Germany and West Berlin, because of GDR passport and customs controls when using them. Instead, the Allied forces operated a series of official (duty) trains that traveled between their respective duty stations in West Germany and West Berlin. When transiting the GDR, the trains would follow the route between Helmstedt and Griebnitzsee, just outside West Berlin. In addition to persons traveling on official business, authorized personnel could also use the duty trains for personal travel on a space-available basis. The trains traveled only at night, and as with transit by car, Soviet military personnel handled the processing of duty train travelers. (See History of the Berlin S-Bahn.)

;Entry into and exit from East Berlin:
*Checkpoint Charlie (as a pedestrian or riding in a vehicle)

As with military personnel, special procedures applied to travel by diplomatic personnel of the Western Allies accredited to their respective embassies in the GDR. This was intended to prevent inadvertent recognition of East German authority when crossing between East and West Berlin, which could jeopardize the overall Allied position governing the freedom of movement by Allied forces personnel within all Berlin.

Ordinary citizens of the Western Allied powers, not formally affiliated with the Allied forces, were authorized to use all designated transit routes through East Germany to and from West Berlin. Regarding travel to East Berlin, such persons could also use the Friedrichstraße train station to enter and exit the city, in addition to Checkpoint Charlie. In these instances, such travelers, unlike Allied personnel, had to submit to East German border controls.

===Defection attempts===

During the years of the Wall, around 5,000 people successfully defected to West Berlin. The number of people who died trying to cross the Wall, or as a result of the Wall&#x27;s existence, has been disputed. The most vocal claims by Alexandra Hildebrandt, director of the Checkpoint Charlie Museum and widow of the museum&#x27;s founder, estimated the death toll to be well above 200. A historic research group at the Centre for Contemporary History (ZZF) in Potsdam has confirmed at least 140 deaths. Prior official figures listed 98 as being killed.

The East German government issued shooting orders (&quot;Schießbefehl&quot;) to border guards dealing with defectors, though such orders are not the same as &quot;shoot to kill&quot; orders. GDR officials denied issuing the latter. In an October 1973 order later discovered by researchers, guards were instructed that people attempting to cross the Wall were criminals and needed to be shot:
Early successful escapes involved people jumping the initial barbed wire or leaping out of apartment windows along the line, but these ended as the Wall was fortified. East German authorities no longer permitted apartments near the Wall to be occupied, and any building near the Wall had its windows boarded and later bricked up. On 15 August 1961, Conrad Schumann was the first East German border guard to escape by jumping the barbed wire to West Berlin.

On 22 August 1961, Ida Siekmann was the first casualty at the Berlin Wall: she died after she jumped out of her third floor apartment at 48 Bernauer Strasse. The first person to be shot and killed while trying to cross to West Berlin was Günter Litfin, a twenty-four-year-old tailor. He attempted to swim across the Spree to West Berlin on 24 August 1961, the same day that East German police had received shoot-to-kill orders to prevent anyone from escaping.

Another dramatic escape was carried out in April 1963 by Wolfgang Engels, a 19-year-old civilian employee of the &quot;Nationale Volksarmee&quot; (NVA). Engels stole a Soviet armored personnel carrier from a base where he was deployed and drove it right into the Wall. He was fired at and seriously wounded by border guards. But a West German policeman intervened, firing his weapon at the East German border guards. The policeman removed Engels from the vehicle, which had become entangled in the barbed wire.
East Germans successfully defected by a variety of methods: digging long tunnels under the Wall, waiting for favorable winds and taking a hot air balloon, sliding along aerial wires, flying ultralights and, in one instance, simply driving a sports car at full speed through the basic, initial fortifications. When a metal beam was placed at checkpoints to prevent this kind of defection, up to four people (two in the front seats and possibly two in the boot) drove under the bar in a sports car that had been modified to allow the roof and windscreen to come away when it made contact with the beam. They lay flat and kept driving forward. The East Germans then built zig-zagging roads at checkpoints. The sewer system predated the Wall, and some people escaped through the sewers, in a number of cases with assistance from the Unternehmen Reisebüro. In September 1962, 29 people escaped through a tunnel to the west. At least 70 tunnels were dug under the wall; only 19 were successful in allowing fugitives—about 400 persons—to escape. The East German authorities eventually used seismographic and acoustic equipment to detect the practice. In 1962, they planned an attempt to use explosives to destroy one tunnel, but this was not carried out as it was apparently sabotaged by a member of the Stasi.

An airborne escape was made by Thomas Krüger, who landed a Zlin Z 42M light aircraft of the &quot;Gesellschaft für Sport und Technik&quot;, an East German youth military training organization, at RAF Gatow. His aircraft, registration DDR-WOH, was dismantled and returned to the East Germans by road, complete with humorous slogans painted on it by airmen of the Royal Air Force, such as &quot;Wish you were here&quot; and &quot;Come back soon&quot;.

If an escapee was wounded in a crossing attempt and lay on the death strip, no matter how close they were to the Western wall, Westerners could not intervene for fear of triggering engaging fire from the &#x27;Grepos&#x27;, the East Berlin border guards. The guards often let fugitives bleed to death in the middle of this ground, as in the most notorious failed attempt, that of Peter Fechter (aged 18) at a point near Zimmerstrasse in East Berlin. He was shot and bled to death, in full view of the Western media, on 17 August 1962. Fechter&#x27;s death created negative publicity worldwide that led the leaders of East Berlin to place more restrictions on shooting in public places and provide medical care for possible &quot;would-be escapers&quot;. The last person to be shot and killed while trying to cross the border was Chris Gueffroy on 6 February 1989, while the final person to die in an escape attempt was Winfried Freudenberg who was killed when his homemade natural gas-filled balloon crashed on 8 March 1989.

The Wall gave rise to a widespread sense of desperation and oppression in East Berlin, as expressed in the private thoughts of one resident, who confided to her diary &quot;Our lives have lost their spirit... we can do nothing to stop them.&quot;

==Concerts by Western artists and growing anti-Wall sentiment==
===David Bowie, 1987===
On 6 June 1987, David Bowie, who earlier for several years lived and recorded in West Berlin, played a concert close to the Wall. This was attended by thousands of Eastern concertgoers across the Wall, followed by violent rioting in East Berlin. According to Tobias Ruther, these protests in East Berlin were the first in the sequence of riots that led to those of November 1989. Although other factors were probably more influential in the fall of the Wall, upon his death in 2016, the German Foreign Office tweeted &quot;Good-bye, David Bowie. You are now among #Heroes. Thank you for helping to bring down the #wall.&quot;

===Bruce Springsteen, 1988===
On 19 July 1988, 16 months before the Wall came down, Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band, played Rocking the Wall, a live concert in East Berlin, which was attended by 300,000 in person and broadcast on television. Springsteen spoke to the crowd in German, saying: &quot;I&#x27;m not here for or against any government. I&#x27;ve come to play rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll for you in the hope that one day all the barriers will be torn down&quot;. East Germany and its FDJ youth organization were worried they were losing an entire generation. They hoped that by letting Springsteen in, they could improve their sentiment among East Germans. However, this strategy of &quot;one step backwards, two steps forwards&quot; backfired, and the concert only made East Germans hungrier for more of the freedoms that Springsteen epitomized.

===David Hasselhoff, 1989===
On 31 December 1989, American TV actor and pop music singer David Hasselhoff was the headlining performer for the Freedom Tour Live concert, which was attended by over 500,000 people on both sides of the Wall. The live concert footage was directed by music video director Thomas Mignone and aired on broadcast television station Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen ZDF throughout Europe. During shooting, film crew personnel pulled people up from both sides to stand and celebrate on top of the wall. Hasselhoff sang his number one hit song &quot;Looking for Freedom&quot; on a platform at the end of a twenty-meter steel crane that swung above and over the Wall adjacent to the Brandenburg Gate. A small museum was created in 2008 to celebrate Hasselhoff in the basement of the Circus Hostel.

==Comments by politicians==


On 26 June 1963, 22 months after the erection of the Berlin Wall, U.S. President John F. Kennedy visited West Berlin. Speaking from a platform erected on the steps of Rathaus Schöneberg for an audience of 450,000 and straying from the prepared script, he declared in his &quot;Ich bin ein Berliner&quot; speech the support of the United States for West Germany and the people of West Berlin in particular:

The message was aimed as much at the Soviets as it was at Berliners and was a clear statement of U.S. policy in the wake of the construction of the Berlin Wall. The speech is considered one of Kennedy&#x27;s best, both a significant moment in the Cold War and a high point of the New Frontier. It was a great morale boost for West Berliners, who lived in an exclave deep inside East Germany and feared a possible East German occupation.

British prime minister Margaret Thatcher commented in 1982:

In a speech at the Brandenburg Gate commemorating the 750th anniversary of Berlin on 12 June 1987, U.S. President Ronald Reagan challenged Mikhail Gorbachev, then the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, to tear down the Wall as a symbol of increasing freedom in the Eastern Bloc:

In January 1989, GDR leader Erich Honecker predicted that the Wall would stand for 50 or 100 more years if the conditions that had caused its construction did not change.

==Fall ==
Due to the increasing economic problems in the Eastern Bloc and the failure of the USSR to intervene in relation to the individual communist states, the brackets of the Eastern Bloc slowly began to loosen from the end of the 1980s. One example is the fall of the communist government in neighboring Poland&#x27;s 1989 Polish parliamentary election. Also in June 1989, the Hungarian government began dismantling the electrified fence along its border with Austria (with Western TV crews present) although the border was still very closely guarded and escape was almost impossible.

The opening of a border gate between Austria and Hungary at the Pan-European Picnic on 19 August 1989, which was based on an idea by Otto von Habsburg to test the reaction of Mikhail Gorbachev, then triggered a peaceful chain reaction, at the end of which there was no longer the GDR and the Eastern Bloc had disintegrated. Because with the non-reaction of the USSR and the GDR to the mass exodus, the media-informed Eastern Europeans could feel the increasing loss of power of their governments and more and more East Germans were now trying to flee via Hungary. Erich Honecker explained to the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; regarding the Pan-European Picnic and thus showed his people his own inaction: &quot;Habsburg distributed leaflets far into Poland, on which the East German holidaymakers were invited to a picnic. When they came to the picnic, they were given gifts, food and Deutsche Mark, and then they were persuaded to come to the West.&quot; Then, in September, more than 13,000 East German tourists escaped through Hungary to Austria. This set up a chain of events. The Hungarians prevented many more East Germans from crossing the border and returned them to Budapest. These East Germans flooded the West German embassy and refused to return to East Germany.
The East German government responded by disallowing any further travel to Hungary but allowed those already there to return to East Germany. This triggered similar events in neighboring Czechoslovakia. This time, however, the East German authorities allowed people to leave, provided that they did so by train through East Germany. This was followed by mass demonstrations within East Germany itself. Protest demonstrations spread throughout East Germany in September 1989. Initially, protesters were mostly people wanting to leave to the West, chanting (&quot;We want out!&quot;). Then protestors began to chant (&quot;We are staying here!&quot;). This was the start of what East Germans generally call the &quot;Peaceful Revolution&quot; of late 1989. The protest demonstrations grew considerably by early November. The movement neared its height on 4 November, when half a million people gathered to demand political change, at the Alexanderplatz demonstration, East Berlin&#x27;s large public square and transportation hub. On 9 October 1989, the police and army units were given permission to use force against those assembled, but this did not deter the church service and march from taking place, which gathered 70,000 people.

The longtime leader of East Germany, Erich Honecker, resigned on 18 October 1989 and was replaced by Egon Krenz that day.

The wave of refugees leaving East Germany for the West kept increasing. By early November refugees were finding their way to Hungary via Czechoslovakia, or via the West German Embassy in Prague. This was tolerated by the new Krenz government, because of long-standing agreements with the communist Czechoslovak government, allowing free travel across their common border. However, this movement of people grew so large it caused difficulties for both countries. To ease the difficulties, the politburo led by Krenz decided on 9 November to allow refugees to exit directly through crossing points between East Germany and West Germany, including between East and West Berlin. Later the same day, the ministerial administration modified the proposal to include private, round-trip, and travel. The new regulations were to take effect the next day.

Günter Schabowski, the party boss in East Berlin and the spokesman for the SED Politburo, had the task of announcing the new regulations. However, he had not been involved in the discussions about the new regulations and had not been fully updated. Shortly before a press conference on 9 November, he was handed a note announcing the changes, but given no further instructions on how to handle the information. These regulations had only been completed a few hours earlier and were to take effect the following day, so as to allow time to inform the border guards. But this starting time delay was not communicated to Schabowski. At the end of the press conference, Schabowski read out loud the note he had been given. A reporter, ANSA&#x27;s Riccardo Ehrman, asked when the regulations would take effect. After a few seconds&#x27; hesitation, Schabowski replied, &quot;As far as I know, it takes effect immediately, without delay&quot;. After further questions from journalists, he confirmed that the regulations included the border crossings through the Wall into West Berlin, which he had not mentioned until then. He repeated that it was immediate in an interview with American journalist Tom Brokaw.

Excerpts from Schabowski&#x27;s press conference were the lead story on West Germany&#x27;s two main news programs that night—at 7:17 p.m. on ZDF&#x27;s &quot;heute&quot; and at 8 p.m. on ARD&#x27;s &quot;Tagesschau&quot;. As ARD and ZDF had broadcast to nearly all of East Germany since the late 1950s and had become accepted by the East German authorities, the news was broadcast there as well simultaneously. Later that night, on ARD&#x27;s &quot;Tagesthemen&quot;, anchorman Hanns Joachim Friedrichs proclaimed, &quot;This 9 November is a historic day. The GDR has announced that, starting immediately, its borders are open to everyone. The gates in the Wall stand open wide.&quot;

After hearing the broadcast, East Germans began gathering at the Wall, at the six checkpoints between East and West Berlin, demanding that border guards immediately open the gates. The surprised and overwhelmed guards made many hectic telephone calls to their superiors about the problem. At first, they were ordered to find the &quot;more aggressive&quot; people gathered at the gates and stamp their passports with a special stamp that barred them from returning to East Germany—in effect, revoking their citizenship. However, this still left thousands of people demanding to be let through &quot;as Schabowski said we can&quot;. It soon became clear that no one among the East German authorities would take personal responsibility for issuing orders to use lethal force, so the vastly outnumbered soldiers had no way to hold back the huge crowd of East German citizens. Finally, at 10:45 p.m. on 9 November, Harald Jäger, the commander of the Bornholmer Straße border crossing yielded, allowing the guards to open the checkpoints and allowing people through with little or no identity checking. As the &quot;Ossis&quot; swarmed through, they were greeted by &quot;Wessis&quot; waiting with flowers and champagne amid wild rejoicing. Soon afterward, a crowd of West Berliners jumped on top of the Wall, and were soon joined by East German youngsters. The evening of 9 November 1989 is known as the night the Wall came down.

Another border crossing to the south may have been opened earlier. An account by Heinz Schäfer indicates that he also acted independently and ordered the opening of the gate at Waltersdorf-Rudow a couple of hours earlier. This may explain reports of East Berliners appearing in West Berlin earlier than the opening of the Bornholmer Straße border crossing.

Thirty years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, &quot;The Guardian&quot; collected short stories from 9 November 1989 by five German writers who reflect on the day. In this, Kathrin Schmidt remembers comically: &quot;I downed almost an entire bottle of schnapps&quot;.

==Legacy==

Little is left of the Wall at its original site, which was destroyed almost in its entirety. Three long sections are still standing: an piece of the first (westernmost) wall at the Topography of Terror, site of the former Gestapo headquarters, halfway between Checkpoint Charlie and Potsdamer Platz; a longer section of the second (easternmost) wall along the Spree River near the , nicknamed East Side Gallery; and a third section that is partly reconstructed, in the north at Bernauer Straße, which was turned into a memorial in 1998. Other isolated fragments, lampposts, other elements, and a few watchtowers also remain in various parts of the city.
*The former leadership in the Schlesischen Busch in the vicinity of the Puschkinallee—the listed, twelve-meter high watchtower stands in a piece of the wall strip, which has been turned into a park, near the Lohmühleninsel.
*The former &quot;Kieler Eck&quot; (Kiel Corner) on Kieler Strasse in Mitte, close to the Berlin-Spandau Schifffahrtskanal—the tower is protected as a historic monument and now surrounded on three sides by new buildings. It houses a memorial site named after the Wallopfer Günter Litfin, who was shot at Humboldthafen in August 1961. The memorial site, which is run by the initiative of his brother Jürgen Liftin, can be viewed after registration.
*The former management office at Nieder Neuendorf, in the district of Hennigsdorf of the same name—here is the permanent exhibition on the history of the border installations between the two German states.
*The former management station at Bergfelde, today the district of Hohen Neuendorf—The tower is located in an already reforested area of the border strip and is used together with surrounding terrain as a nature protection tower by the Deutschen Waldjugend.
*The only one of the much slimmer observation towers (BT-11) in the Erna-Berger-Strasse also in Mitte—however, was moved by a few meters for construction work and is no longer in the original location; There is an exhibition about the wall in the area of the Potsdamer Platz in planning.
Nothing still accurately represents the Wall&#x27;s original appearance better than a very short stretch at Bernauer Straße associated with the Berlin Wall Documentation Center. Other remnants are badly damaged by souvenir seekers. Fragments of the Wall were taken, and some were sold around the world. Appearing both with and without certificates of authenticity, these fragments are now a staple on the online auction service eBay as well as German souvenir shops. Today, the eastern side is covered in graffiti that did not exist while the Wall was guarded by the armed soldiers of East Germany. Previously, graffiti appeared only on the western side. Along some tourist areas of the city centre, the city government has marked the location of the former Wall by a row of cobblestones in the street. In most places only the &quot;first&quot; wall is marked, except near Potsdamer Platz where the stretch of both walls is marked, giving visitors an impression of the dimension of the barrier system.

After the fall of the Berlin Wall, there were initiatives that they want to preserve the death strip walkways and redevelop them into a hiking and cycling area, known as . It is part of the initiative by the Berlin Senate since 11 October 2001.

===Cultural differences===
For many years after reunification, people in Germany talked about cultural differences between East and West Germans (colloquially &quot;Ossis&quot; and &quot;Wessis&quot;), sometimes described as &quot;Mauer im Kopf&quot; (The wall in the head). A September 2004 poll found that 25 percent of West Germans and 12 percent of East Germans wished that East and West should be separated again by a &quot;Wall&quot;. A poll taken in October 2009 on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Wall indicated, however, that only about a tenth of the population was still unhappy with the unification (8 percent in the East; 12 percent in the West). Although differences are still perceived between East and West, Germans make similar distinctions between North and South.

A 2009 poll conducted by Russia&#x27;s VTsIOM, found that more than half of all Russians do not know who built the Berlin Wall. Ten percent of people surveyed thought Berlin residents built it themselves. Six percent said Western powers built it and four percent thought it was a &quot;bilateral initiative&quot; of the Soviet Union and the West. Fifty-eight percent said they did not know who built it, with just 24 percent correctly naming the Soviet Union and its then-communist ally East Germany.

===Wall segments around the world===

Not all segments of the Wall were ground up as the Wall was being torn down. Many segments have been given to various institutions around the world. They can be found, for instance, in presidential and historical museums, lobbies of hotels and corporations, at universities and government buildings, and in public spaces in different countries of the world.

===50th anniversary commemoration===
On 13 August 2011, Germany marked the 50th anniversary of East Germany beginning the erection of the Berlin Wall. Chancellor Angela Merkel joined with President Christian Wulff and Berlin Mayor Klaus Wowereit at the Bernauer Straße memorial park to remember lives and liberty. Speeches extolled freedom and a minute of silence at noon honored those who died trying to flee to the West. &quot;It is our shared responsibility to keep the memory alive and to pass it on to the coming generations as a reminder to stand up for freedom and democracy to ensure that such injustice may never happen again.&quot; entreated Mayor Wowereit. &quot;It has been shown once again: Freedom is invincible at the end. No wall can permanently withstand the desire for freedom&quot;, proclaimed President Wulff.
===Polling===
A small minority still support the wall or even support rebuilding the wall back up. In 2008 a poll found that 11% of participants from the former West Berlin and 12% form the former East Berlin said it would be better if the wall was still in place. 

A November 2009 poll found that 12% of Germans said the wall should be rebuilt. The poll also found that in the former West German states support was at 12% and in the former East German states it was 13%. A September 2009 poll found 15% of Germans supported a wall, while in the west it was 16% and in the east it was at 10%.

A 2010 poll from Emnid for Bild, found that 24% of West Germans and 23% of East Germans wished for the wall still being in place.

A 2019 poll from Berliner Zeitung on the 30th anniversary, found that 8% of Berliners supported the idea if the wall was still standing, The overwhelming majority of Berliners at 87% however supported the fall of the wall. The poll also found that 28% of the Alternative for Germany (AfD) and 16% of Free Democratic Party (FDP) supporters supported bringing back the wall. A 2019 Yougov poll found that 13% of Germans wanted the wall back, in the West support was at 14% and in the East it was 13%. 

A 2019 poll from Forsa found 35% of Berliners thought the construction of the Wall was not so wrong with supporters of the Left Party at 74%.

==Related media==
===Documentaries===
Documentary films specifically about the Berlin Wall include:
*&quot;The Tunnel&quot; (December 1962), an NBC News Special documentary film.
*&quot;The Road to the Wall&quot; (1962), a documentary film.
*&quot;Something to Do with the Wall&quot; (1991), a documentary about the fall of the Berlin Wall by Ross McElwee and Marilyn Levine, originally conceived as a commemoration of the 25th anniversary of its construction.
*&quot;Rabbit à la Berlin&quot; (2009), a documentary film, directed by Bartek Konopka, told from the point of view of a group of wild rabbits that inhabited the zone between the two walls.
*&quot;The American Sector&quot; (2020), a documentary by Courtney Stephens and Pacho Velez that tracks down the wall segments located in the U.S.

===Feature films===
Fictional films featuring the Berlin Wall have included:
*&quot;Escape from East Berlin&quot; (1962), American-West German film inspired by story of 29 East Germans that tunneled under the wall
*&quot;The Spy Who Came in from the Cold&quot; (1965), a Cold War classic set on both sides of The Wall, from the eponymous book by John le Carré, directed by Martin Ritt.
*&quot;The Boy and the Ball and the Hole in the Wall&quot; (1965), Spanish-Mexican co-production.
*&quot;Funeral in Berlin&quot; (1966), a spy movie starring Michael Caine, directed by Guy Hamilton.
*&quot;Casino Royale&quot; (1967), a film featuring a segment centred on a house apparently bisected by the Wall.
*&quot;The Wicked Dreams of Paula Schultz&quot; (1968), a Cold War spy farce about an Olympic athlete who defects, directed by George Marshall.
*&quot;Berlin Tunnel 21&quot; (1981), a made-for-TV movie about a former American officer leading an attempt to build a tunnel underneath The Wall as a rescue route.
*&quot;Night Crossing&quot; (1982), a British-American drama film starring John Hurt, Jane Alexander, and Beau Bridges, based on the true story of the Strelzyk and Wetzel families, who on 16 September 1979, attempted to escape from East Germany to West Germany in a homemade hot air balloon, during the days of the Inner German border-era.
*&quot;The Innocent&quot; (1993), a film about the joint CIA/MI6 operation to build a tunnel under East Berlin in the 1950s, directed by John Schlesinger.
*&quot;Sonnenallee&quot; (1999), a German comedy film about life in East Berlin in the late 1970s, directed by Leander Haußmann.
*&quot;The Tunnel&quot; (2001), a dramatization of a collaborative tunnel under the Wall, filmed by Roland Suso Richter.
*&quot;Good Bye Lenin!&quot; (2003), film set during German unification that depicts the fall of the Wall through archive footage
*&quot;Open The Wall&quot; (2014), featuring a dramatized story of the East-German border guard who was the first to let East Berliners cross the border to West Berlin on 9 November 1989.
*&quot;Bridge of Spies&quot; (2015), featuring a dramatized subplot about Frederic Pryor, in which an American economics graduate student visits his German girlfriend in East Berlin just as the Berlin Wall is being built. He tries to bring her back into West Berlin but is stopped by Stasi agents and arrested as a spy.

===Literature===
Some novels specifically about the Berlin Wall include:
*John le Carré, &quot;The Spy Who Came in from the Cold&quot; (1963), classic Cold War spy fiction.
*Len Deighton, &quot;Berlin Game&quot; (1983), classic Cold War spy fiction
*T.H.E. Hill, &quot;The Day Before the Berlin Wall: Could We Have Stopped It? – An Alternate History of Cold War Espionage&quot;, 2010 – based on a legend told in Berlin in the 1970s.
*John Marks&#x27; &quot;The Wall&quot; (1999) in which an American spy defects to the East just hours before the Wall falls.
*Marcia Preston&#x27;s &quot;West of the Wall&quot; (2007, published as &quot;Trudy&#x27;s Promise&quot; in North America), in which the heroine, left behind in East Berlin, waits for news of her husband after he makes his escape over the Berlin Wall.
*Peter Schneider&#x27;s &quot;The Wall Jumper&quot;, (1984; German: &quot;Der Mauerspringer&quot;, 1982), the Wall plays a central role in this novel set in Berlin of the 1980s.

===Music===
Music related to the Berlin Wall includes:
*&quot;Stationary Traveller&quot; (1984), a concept album by Camel that takes the theme of families and friends split up by the building of the Berlin Wall.
*&quot;West of the Wall&quot;, a 1962 top 40 hit by Toni Fisher, which tells the tale of two lovers separated by the newly built Berlin Wall.
*&quot;Holidays in the Sun&quot;, a song by the English punk rock band Sex Pistols which prominently mentions the Wall, specifically singer Johnny Rotten&#x27;s fantasy of digging a tunnel under it.
*David Bowie&#x27;s &quot;Heroes&quot; (1977), inspired by the image of a couple kissing at the Berlin Wall (in reality, the couple was his producer Tony Visconti and backup singer Antonia Maaß). The song (which, along with the album of the same name, was recorded in Berlin), makes lyrical references to the kissing couple, and to the &quot;Wall of Shame&quot; (&quot;the shame was on the other side&quot;). Upon Bowie&#x27;s death, the Federal Foreign Office paid homage to Bowie on Twitter:see also above
*&quot;&quot; (1984), a song by the Dutch pop band , about the differences between East and West Berlin during the period of the Berlin Wall.
*&quot;Chippin&#x27; Away&quot; (1990), a song by Tom Fedora, performed by Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash on the Berlin Wall, which appeared on Graham Nash&#x27;s solo album &quot;Innocent Eyes&quot; (1986).
*&quot;Berliners&quot;, a song by Roy Harper from his 1990 album &quot;Once&quot; (lyrics include &quot;They built a wall, boys, it stayed up for thirty years&quot;). The song uses a BBC news broadcast describing the fall of the wall.
*&quot;Hedwig and the Angry Inch,&quot; a rock opera whose genderqueer protagonist Hedwig Robinson was born in East Berlin and later, living in the United States, describes herself as &quot;the new Berlin Wall&quot; standing between &quot;East and West, slavery and freedom, man and woman, top and bottom.&quot; As a result, she says, people are moved to &quot;decorate&quot; her with &quot;blood, graffiti and spit.&quot; (1998)
*The music video for Liza Fox&#x27;s song &quot;Free&quot; (2013) contains video clips of the fall of the Berlin Wall.

===Visual art===
Artworks related to the Berlin Wall include:

*In 1982, the West-German artist &quot;&quot; created about 500 artworks along the former border strip around West Berlin as part of his work series &quot;Border Injuries&quot;. On one of his actions he tore down a large part of the Wall, installed a prepared foil of 3x2m in it, and finished the painting there before the border soldiers on patrol could detect him. This performance was recorded on video. His actions are well-documented both in newspapers from that time and in recent scientific publications.
*&quot;The Day the Wall Came Down&quot;, 1996 and 1998 sculptures by Veryl Goodnight, which depict five horses leaping over actual pieces of the Berlin Wall.

===Games===
Video games related to the Berlin Wall include:
*&quot;The Berlin Wall&quot; (1991), a video game.
*&quot;Ostalgie: The Berlin Wall&quot; (2018), video game by Kremlingames, where the player, playing as the leader of the GDR from 1989 to 1991, can take down the Berlin Wall themselves or as a result of events in the game, or keep the wall intact as long as the country exists.

== See also ==
*Berlin Crisis of 1961 (October 1961)
*Chapel of Reconciliation
*Deborah Kennedy, American artist whose works were featured on the wall before its fall
*Dissolution of the Soviet Union (1991)
*East Germany balloon escape
*Green Line (Lebanon)
*Inner German border
*Israeli annexation of East Jerusalem
*Korean Demilitarized Zone
**Military Demarcation Line
*List of walls
*Operation Gold
*Peace lines
*Removal of Hungary&#x27;s border fence with Austria
*&quot;The Wall – Live in Berlin&quot; (rock opera/concert, 21 July 1990)
*World Freedom Day (United States)
== Notes ==
==References==
===Sources===

*Childs, David (2001). &quot;The Fall of the GDR: Germany&#x27;s Road To Unity&quot;, Longman, Pearsoned.co.uk. 
*Childs, David (1986) [1983]. &quot;The GDR: Moscow&#x27;s German Ally&quot;, London: George Allen &amp; Unwin, .
*Childs, David (2001). &quot;The Fall of the GDR&quot;, Longman. Amazon.co.uk 
*Childs, David (2000). &quot;The Two Red Flags: European Social Democracy &amp; Soviet Communism Since 1945&quot;, Routledge. 
*Childs, David (1991). &quot;Germany in the Twentieth Century&quot;, (From pre-1918 to the restoration of German unity), Batsford, Third edition. 
*Childs, David (1987). &quot;East Germany to the 1990s Can It Resist Glasnost?&quot;, The Economist Intelligence Unit. . WorldCat.org 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Luftbildatlas. &quot;Entlang der Berliner Mauer. Karten, Pläne und Fotos&quot;. Hans Wolfgang Hoffmann / Philipp Meuser (eds.) Berlin 2009. 
*Sarotte, Mary Elise (2014). &quot;Collapse: The Accidental Opening of the Berlin Wall&quot;, New York: Basic Books, 
*Sarotte, Mary Elise (2014) [1989]. &quot;The Struggle to Create Post-Cold War Europe&quot; (Second Edition) Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
==External links==



*
*
*
*
*Berlin Wall on OpenStreetMap (zoomable and scrollable)
*Other resources:
**Berlin Wall image group on Flickr
**Berlin Wall Online, historical chronicle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="4" end="15" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q27627826" start="44" end="51" title="Separation barrier" label="barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="67" end="78" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="117" end="128" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="137" end="163" title="East Germany" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="205" end="211" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q947103" start="291" end="302" title="guard tower" label="guard tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="553" end="564" title="East Germany" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q28241" start="579" end="598" title="Emigration from the Eastern Bloc" label="fleeing to the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="605" end="616" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Soviet Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="617" end="627" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481595" start="687" end="694" title="Fascist (insult)" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="771" end="786" title="Communism" label="communist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231031" start="996" end="1009" title="Wall of Shame" label="Wall of Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="1040" end="1052" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="1100" end="1119" title="freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q700754" start="1161" end="1180" title="inner German border" label="inner German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="1277" end="1289" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="1309" end="1321" title="Western Bloc" label="Western Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1333" end="1349" title="Satellite state#Soviet Union" label="satellite states"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1381" end="1389" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28241" start="1463" end="1499" title="Eastern Bloc emigration and defection" label="Eastern Bloc emigration restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="2049" end="2072" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="a series of revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="2107" end="2113" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16410" start="2118" end="2125" title="Hungarian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q160056" start="2169" end="2188" title="Pan-European Picnic" label="Pan-European Picnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="2423" end="2451" title="Fall of the Berlin Wall" label="announced on 9 November 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q82425" start="2692" end="2708" title="Brandenburg Gate" label="Brandenburg Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="2899" end="2919" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="3016" end="3045" title="end of World War II in Europe" label="end of World War II in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="3092" end="3108" title="Oder-Neisse line" label="Oder-Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="3160" end="3177" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Potsdam Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="3229" end="3242" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3298" end="3310" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="3325" end="3331" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="3352" end="3374" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="3895" end="3902" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="4036" end="4049" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="4413" end="4420" title="Comecon" label="Comecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="4464" end="4475" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4498" end="4506" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="4515" end="4527" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="4561" end="4573" title="Western Bloc" label="Western Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4581" end="4594" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="4659" end="4663" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="4730" end="4741" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090550" start="4778" end="4817" title="Soviet Empire" label="armed presence and political domination"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="4839" end="4854" title="satellite state" label="satellite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="5182" end="5191" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="5372" end="5410" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55300" start="5525" end="5558" title="Soviet occupation zone of Germany" label="Soviet occupation zone of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="5800" end="5803" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="SED"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="6282" end="6300" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="7043" end="7056" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="7119" end="7134" title="Berlin Blockade" label="Berlin Blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="7201" end="7212" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7292" end="7298" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="7300" end="7306" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="7308" end="7317" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="7319" end="7330" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="7381" end="7388" title="Berlin airlift" label="airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="8814" end="8860" title="East German uprising of 1953" label="protests in East Germany bloodily in June 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="8904" end="8931" title="West Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="8957" end="8964" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="8991" end="9012" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="9019" end="9029" title="democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="9127" end="9143" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="economic miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="9472" end="9484" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q601151" start="9813" end="9826" title="Sovietization" label="Sovietization"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="9871" end="9884" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132899" start="10713" end="10731" title="Vyacheslav Molotov" label="Vyacheslav Molotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q700754" start="11304" end="11323" title="inner German border" label="inner German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q695699" start="12068" end="12082" title="Republikflucht" label="Republikflucht"/>
<link wikidata="Q338538" start="12226" end="12243" title="Mikhail Pervukhin" label="Mikhail Pervukhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q68646" start="13250" end="13256" title="Berlin U-Bahn" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995606" start="13383" end="13391" title="loophole" label="loophole"/>
<link wikidata="Q563551" start="13798" end="13815" title="Berlin outer ring" label="Berlin outer ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="14027" end="14050" title="Human capital flight" label="&amp;quot;brain drain&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="14088" end="14101" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="14112" end="14116" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="CPSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628" start="15141" end="15156" title="Walter Ulbricht" label="Walter Ulbricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="15980" end="16001" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="Socialist Unity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q652009" start="16006" end="16023" title="State Council of East Germany" label="GDR State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628" start="16033" end="16048" title="Walter Ulbricht" label="Walter Ulbricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="16266" end="16283" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="16727" end="16742" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q668939" start="16818" end="16831" title="Vienna summit" label="Vienna summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363899" start="17085" end="17116" title="James Reston" label="James &amp;quot;Scotty&amp;quot; Reston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17181" end="17193" title="Party#Garden party" label="garden party"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687224" start="17825" end="17843" title="Barbed Wire Sunday" label="Barbed Wire Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299678" start="18125" end="18142" title="Berlin Potsdamer Bahnhof" label="Potsdamer Bahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q152252" start="18190" end="18205" title="Potsdamer Platz" label="Potsdamer Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155740" start="18397" end="18424" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q644693" start="18435" end="18469" title="Combat Groups of the Working Class" label="Combat Groups of the Working Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="18728" end="18746" title="no man&amp;#x27;s land" label="no man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="19281" end="19288" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="19376" end="19388" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q313258" start="19724" end="19733" title="Dean Rusk" label="Dean Rusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="21276" end="21300" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="21509" end="21537" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="Socialist Unity Party&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389603" start="21901" end="21917" title="Kennedy Compound" label="Kennedy Compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060635" start="21921" end="21948" title="Hyannis Port, Massachusetts" label="Hyannis Port, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q369360" start="22350" end="22364" title="Lucius D. Clay" label="Lucius D. Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="22610" end="22624" title="Berlin Airlift" label="Berlin Airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="22854" end="22871" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9686" start="22903" end="22920" title="Tempelhof International Airport" label="Tempelhof Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q31883713" start="23105" end="23128" title="Berlin Infantry Brigade" label="Berlin Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q127558" start="23139" end="23153" title="Berlin Brigade" label="Berlin Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q327575" start="23168" end="23194" title="Forces Françaises à Berlin" label="Forces Françaises à Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029270" start="23308" end="23330" title="18th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="18th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q667587" start="23658" end="23668" title="Marienborn" label="Marienborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q486562" start="23700" end="23709" title="Helmstedt" label="Helmstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="23923" end="23931" title="autobahn" label="autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q157011" start="26365" end="26368" title="East German mark" label="DDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q148571" start="26839" end="26846" title="fence" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192065" start="26887" end="26898" title="barbed wire" label="barbed wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562620" start="26926" end="26939" title="bed of nails" label="beds of nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q947103" start="27062" end="27072" title="watchtower" label="watchtower"/>
<link wikidata="Q91122" start="27082" end="27088" title="bunker" label="bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254309" start="27190" end="27209" title="List of Berlin Wall segments" label="surviving fragments"/>
<link wikidata="Q700754" start="27347" end="27366" title="inner German border" label="inner German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q896585" start="27443" end="27453" title="spring-gun" label="spring-gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="28932" end="28939" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q932665" start="28987" end="28999" title="Thierry Noir" label="Thierry Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q485635" start="29147" end="29159" title="Keith Haring" label="Keith Haring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="29344" end="29355" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119" start="29483" end="29492" title="Oberhavel" label="Oberhavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q581972" start="29494" end="29511" title="Mühlenbecker Land" label="Mühlenbecker Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q585248" start="29514" end="29532" title="Glienicke/Nordbahn" label="Glienicke/Nordbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q545340" start="29534" end="29549" title="Hohen Neuendorf" label="Hohen Neuendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q583462" start="29551" end="29562" title="Hennigsdorf" label="Hennigsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139" start="29564" end="29573" title="Havelland (district)" label="Havelland"/>
<link wikidata="Q581715" start="29575" end="29591" title="Schönwalde-Glien" label="Schönwalde-Glien"/>
<link wikidata="Q14842" start="29593" end="29602" title="Falkensee" label="Falkensee"/>
<link wikidata="Q583555" start="29604" end="29620" title="Dallgow-Döberitz" label="Dallgow-Döberitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="29622" end="29629" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142" start="29648" end="29666" title="Potsdam-Mittelmark" label="Potsdam-Mittelmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q640426" start="29668" end="29678" title="Stahnsdorf" label="Stahnsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q104192" start="29680" end="29692" title="Kleinmachnow" label="Kleinmachnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q572512" start="29694" end="29700" title="Teltow" label="Teltow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146" start="29702" end="29716" title="Teltow-Fläming" label="Teltow-Fläming"/>
<link wikidata="Q628528" start="29718" end="29728" title="Großbeeren" label="Großbeeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q574128" start="29730" end="29749" title="Blankenfelde-Mahlow" label="Blankenfelde-Mahlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173" start="29751" end="29766" title="Dahme-Spreewald" label="Dahme-Spreewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q521475" start="29768" end="29778" title="Schönefeld" label="Schönefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q316893" start="30360" end="30375" title="Friedrichstraße" label="Friedrichstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q68689" start="30394" end="30412" title="Checkpoint Charlie" label="Checkpoint Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="30742" end="30756" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9251932" start="31001" end="31028" title="Exclaves of West Berlin in East Germany" label="West Berlin&amp;#x27;s exclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q515015" start="31040" end="31052" title="Steinstücken" label="Steinstücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="31067" end="31075" title="autobahn" label="autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9010" start="31126" end="31151" title="Bundesautobahn 2" label="Berlin-Helmstedt autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q702402" start="31537" end="31560" title="Berlin Friedrichstraße station" label="Friedrichstraße station"/>
<link wikidata="Q99654" start="31681" end="31687" title="Berlin S-Bahn" label="S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q68646" start="31692" end="31698" title="Berlin U-Bahn" label="U-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q168565" start="31917" end="31930" title="ghost station" label="ghost station"/>
<link wikidata="Q170404" start="32229" end="32233" title="Travel visa" label="visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q519875" start="33336" end="33366" title="Four Power Agreement on Berlin" label="Four Power Agreement on Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q157011" start="34340" end="34356" title="East German Mark" label="East German Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="34363" end="34376" title="Deutsche Mark" label="Deutsche Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q168429" start="34550" end="34564" title="Begrüßungsgeld" label="Begrüßungsgeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="35208" end="35219" title="Allied Control Council" label="Four Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q882217" start="35998" end="36023" title="military liaison missions" label="military liaison missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="36097" end="36104" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q896125" start="36920" end="36932" title="Griebnitzsee" label="Griebnitzsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516681" start="37257" end="37285" title="History of the Berlin S-Bahn" label="History of the Berlin S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q68689" start="37329" end="37347" title="Checkpoint Charlie" label="Checkpoint Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q92447" start="38528" end="38549" title="Alexandra Hildebrandt" label="Alexandra Hildebrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q382575" start="38567" end="38592" title="Checkpoint Charlie Museum" label="Checkpoint Charlie Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191269" start="38713" end="38744" title="Centre for Contemporary History" label="Centre for Contemporary History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="38754" end="38761" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q520260" start="38905" end="38917" title="Schießbefehl" label="Schießbefehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q60160" start="39589" end="39604" title="Conrad Schumann" label="Conrad Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q96904" start="39717" end="39729" title="Ida Siekmann" label="Ida Siekmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q461215" start="39838" end="39854" title="Bernauer Strasse" label="Bernauer Strasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q72876" start="39936" end="39949" title="Günter Litfin" label="Günter Litfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684" start="40014" end="40019" title="Spree (river)" label="Spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q118675" start="40216" end="40231" title="Wolfgang Engels" label="Wolfgang Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q155740" start="40278" end="40298" title="Nationale Volksarmee" label="Nationale Volksarmee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="40334" end="40359" title="armored personnel carrier" label="armored personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459918" start="40730" end="40750" title="Tunnel 57" label="digging long tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551574" start="40808" end="40823" title="hot air balloon" label="hot air balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q678305" start="40860" end="40871" title="ultralight aviation" label="ultralights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142905" start="41124" end="41128" title="Trunk (car)" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897591" start="41499" end="41520" title="Unternehmen Reisebüro" label="Unternehmen Reisebüro"/>
<link wikidata="Q217877" start="42034" end="42044" title="Zlin Z 42" label="Zlin Z 42M"/>
<link wikidata="Q896852" start="42073" end="42107" title="Gesellschaft für Sport und Technik" label="Gesellschaft für Sport und Technik"/>
<link wikidata="Q655892" start="42171" end="42180" title="RAF Gatow" label="RAF Gatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="42337" end="42352" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q76741" start="42806" end="42819" title="Peter Fechter" label="Peter Fechter"/>
<link wikidata="Q552913" start="43255" end="43269" title="Chris Gueffroy" label="Chris Gueffroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q71585" start="43345" end="43365" title="Winfried Freudenberg" label="Winfried Freudenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="43399" end="43410" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299477" start="43418" end="43425" title="aerostat" label="balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="43804" end="43815" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567082" start="43889" end="43916" title="Glass Spider Tour" label="a concert close to the Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022243" start="44252" end="44261" title="Death of David Bowie" label="his death"/>
<link wikidata="Q56034" start="44275" end="44296" title="Federal Foreign Office" label="German Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="44499" end="44516" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276681" start="44525" end="44538" title="E Street Band" label="E Street Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q76845" start="44913" end="44916" title="Free German Youth" label="FDJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q201927" start="45366" end="45382" title="David Hasselhoff" label="David Hasselhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792443" start="45578" end="45592" title="Thomas Mignone" label="Thomas Mignone"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="45663" end="45666" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q82425" start="45977" end="45993" title="Brandenburg Gate" label="Brandenburg Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q70922889" start="45997" end="46009" title="David Hasselhoff Museum" label="small museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="46189" end="46203" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="46204" end="46219" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q695194" start="46290" end="46308" title="Rathaus Schöneberg" label="Rathaus Schöneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q443" start="46400" end="46420" title="Ich bin ein Berliner" label="Ich bin ein Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="46777" end="46785" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439991" start="46810" end="46822" title="New Frontier" label="New Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="46888" end="46895" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="46991" end="47008" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q82425" start="47048" end="47064" title="Brandenburg Gate" label="Brandenburg Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="47143" end="47156" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="47168" end="47185" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="47196" end="47256" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="47321" end="47333" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="47364" end="47378" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="47817" end="47823" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355470" start="47831" end="47865" title="1989 Polish parliamentary election" label="1989 Polish parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312198" start="47917" end="47980" title="Removal of Hungary&amp;#x27;s border fence with Austria" label="dismantling the electrified fence along its border with Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q160056" start="48163" end="48182" title="Pan-European Picnic" label="Pan-European Picnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76343" start="48232" end="48249" title="Otto von Habsburg" label="Otto von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="48274" end="48291" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="49124" end="49131" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="49135" end="49142" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="49269" end="49277" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="49555" end="49569" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q263047" start="49722" end="49741" title="Monday demonstrations in East Germany" label="mass demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q682258" start="50083" end="50102" title="Peaceful Revolution" label="Peaceful Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q328548" start="50304" end="50332" title="Alexanderplatz demonstration" label="Alexanderplatz demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="50641" end="50655" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602" start="50705" end="50715" title="Egon Krenz" label="Egon Krenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q57445" start="51574" end="51591" title="Günter Schabowski" label="Günter Schabowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q392934" start="52305" end="52309" title="Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata" label="ANSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q826859" start="52317" end="52332" title="Riccardo Ehrman" label="Riccardo Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q919527" start="52767" end="52777" title="Tom Brokaw" label="Tom Brokaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="52922" end="52925" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q132108" start="52939" end="52944" title="heute" label="heute"/>
<link wikidata="Q49653" start="52968" end="52971" title="ARD (broadcaster)" label="ARD"/>
<link wikidata="Q314231" start="53035" end="53061" title="Tal der Ahnungslosen" label="nearly all of East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q19916" start="53230" end="53241" title="Tagesthemen" label="Tagesthemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109823" start="53259" end="53283" title="Hanns Joachim Friedrichs" label="Hanns Joachim Friedrichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473355" start="54378" end="54390" title="Harald Jäger" label="Harald Jäger"/>
<link wikidata="Q895863" start="54413" end="54446" title="Bornholmer Straße border crossing" label="Bornholmer Straße border crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q675430" start="54578" end="54583" title="New states of Germany" label="Ossis"/>
<link wikidata="Q445420" start="54634" end="54639" title="Wessi" label="Wessi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663014" start="54975" end="54988" title="Heinz Schäfer" label="Heinz Schäfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="55306" end="55318" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76429" start="55426" end="55441" title="Kathrin Schmidt" label="Kathrin Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q819081" start="55715" end="55735" title="Topography of Terror" label="Topography of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="55756" end="55763" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152252" start="55817" end="55832" title="Potsdamer Platz" label="Potsdamer Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684" start="55894" end="55899" title="Spree (river)" label="Spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q313746" start="55927" end="55944" title="East Side Gallery" label="East Side Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56396" end="56410" title="Lohmühleninsel" label="Lohmühleninsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="56448" end="56452" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013767" start="56482" end="56487" title="Mitte (locality)" label="Mitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q72876" start="56685" end="56698" title="Günter Litfin" label="Günter Litfin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56716" end="56729" title="Humboldthafen" label="Humboldthafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q583462" start="56930" end="56941" title="Hennigsdorf" label="Hennigsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q545340" start="57133" end="57148" title="Hohen Neuendorf" label="Hohen Neuendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281197" start="57947" end="57975" title="Certificate of authenticity" label="certificates of authenticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="58040" end="58044" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="58117" end="58125" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q445420" start="59020" end="59060" title="Ossi and Wessi" label="&amp;quot;Ossis&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Wessis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q46613" start="59651" end="59656" title="Northern Germany" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q46519" start="59661" end="59666" title="Southern Germany" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="59989" end="60001" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q567" start="60730" end="60743" title="Angela Merkel" label="Angela Merkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540" start="60766" end="60781" title="Christian Wulff" label="Christian Wulff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8863" start="60799" end="60813" title="Klaus Wowereit" label="Klaus Wowereit"/>
<link wikidata="Q435421" start="61784" end="61802" title="Old states of Germany" label="West German states"/>
<link wikidata="Q675430" start="61840" end="61858" title="New states of Germany" label="East German states"/>
<link wikidata="Q156203" start="62020" end="62024" title="Bild" label="Bild"/>
<link wikidata="Q10185" start="62141" end="62157" title="Berliner Zeitung" label="Berliner Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="62383" end="62406" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="62424" end="62445" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437973" start="62642" end="62647" title="Forsa Institute" label="Forsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="62744" end="62758" title="The Left (Germany)" label="the Left Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770716" start="62875" end="62885" title="The Tunnel (1962 film)" label="The Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761156" start="62954" end="62974" title="The Road to the Wall" label="The Road to the Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442775" start="63111" end="63123" title="Ross McElwee" label="Ross McElwee"/>
<link wikidata="Q479553" start="63236" end="63254" title="Rabbit à la Berlin" label="Rabbit à la Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q820298" start="63651" end="63674" title="Escape from East Berlin" label="Escape from East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197022" start="63788" end="63821" title="The Spy Who Came in from the Cold (film)" label="The Spy Who Came in from the Cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q468071" start="63895" end="63909" title="The Spy Who Came in from the Cold" label="eponymous book"/>
<link wikidata="Q287451" start="63940" end="63951" title="Martin Ritt" label="Martin Ritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q204958" start="64058" end="64075" title="Funeral in Berlin (film)" label="Funeral in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="64111" end="64124" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q363653" start="64138" end="64150" title="Guy Hamilton" label="Guy Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q591272" start="64159" end="64172" title="Casino Royale (1967 film)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774732" start="64273" end="64307" title="The Wicked Dreams of Paula Schultz" label="The Wicked Dreams of Paula Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384550" start="64393" end="64408" title="George Marshall (director)" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q490076" start="64583" end="64597" title="Night Crossing" label="Night Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q200405" start="64651" end="64660" title="John Hurt" label="John Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q242717" start="64662" end="64676" title="Jane Alexander" label="Jane Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q309640" start="64682" end="64694" title="Beau Bridges" label="Beau Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q426397" start="64923" end="64935" title="The Innocent (1993 film)" label="The Innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="64973" end="64976" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="64977" end="64980" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q55303" start="65053" end="65069" title="John Schlesinger" label="John Schlesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q540191" start="65078" end="65089" title="Sonnenallee" label="Sonnenallee"/>
<link wikidata="Q86655" start="65182" end="65198" title="Leander Haußmann" label="Leander Haußmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q29327" start="65207" end="65217" title="The Tunnel (2001 film)" label="The Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q75714" start="65300" end="65319" title="Roland Suso Richter" label="Roland Suso Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q154817" start="65328" end="65343" title="Good Bye Lenin!" label="Good Bye Lenin!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65458" end="65471" title="Open The Wall (film)" label="Open The Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="65622" end="65637" title="9 November 1989" label="9 November 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q18067135" start="65646" end="65661" title="Bridge of Spies (film)" label="Bridge of Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537508" start="65713" end="65727" title="Frederic Pryor" label="Frederic Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="65809" end="65820" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="65923" end="65928" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209641" start="66034" end="66047" title="John le Carré" label="John le Carré"/>
<link wikidata="Q468071" start="66055" end="66088" title="The Spy Who Came in from the Cold" label="The Spy Who Came in from the Cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q20664331" start="66120" end="66131" title="spy fiction" label="spy fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q505274" start="66134" end="66146" title="Len Deighton" label="Len Deighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892427" start="66154" end="66165" title="Berlin Game" label="Berlin Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q20664331" start="66197" end="66208" title="spy fiction" label="spy fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900936" start="66771" end="66786" title="Peter Schneider (writer)" label="Peter Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765221" start="67011" end="67031" title="Stationary Traveller" label="Stationary Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q612471" start="67065" end="67070" title="Camel (band)" label="Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987088" start="67168" end="67184" title="West of the Wall" label="West of the Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821260" start="67213" end="67224" title="Toni Fisher" label="Toni Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398159" start="67310" end="67329" title="Holidays in the Sun (song)" label="Holidays in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="67359" end="67368" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="67374" end="67385" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="67443" end="67456" title="Johnny Rotten" label="Johnny Rotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="67503" end="67514" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q701655" start="67528" end="67534" title="&amp;quot;Heroes&amp;quot; (David Bowie song)" label="Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q505994" start="67651" end="67664" title="Tony Visconti" label="Tony Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67683" end="67695" title="Antonia Maaß" label="Antonia Maaß"/>
<link wikidata="Q595352" start="67730" end="67752" title="&amp;quot;Heroes&amp;quot; (David Bowie album)" label="album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q56034" start="67940" end="67962" title="Federal Foreign Office" label="Federal Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68004" end="68009" title="#David Bowie, 1987" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q10461933" start="68227" end="68252" title="Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash" label="Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q357211" start="68291" end="68302" title="Graham Nash" label="Graham Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151394" start="68327" end="68340" title="Innocent Eyes (Graham Nash album)" label="Innocent Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q365670" start="68389" end="68399" title="Roy Harper (singer)" label="Roy Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882393" start="68426" end="68430" title="Once (Roy Harper album)" label="Once"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424058" start="68597" end="68622" title="Hedwig and the Angry Inch (musical)" label="Hedwig and the Angry Inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q253137" start="68632" end="68642" title="rock opera" label="rock opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q61742290" start="69041" end="69049" title="Liza Fox" label="Liza Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761062" start="69722" end="69748" title="The Day the Wall Came Down" label="The Day the Wall Came Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923103" start="69784" end="69799" title="Veryl Goodnight" label="Veryl Goodnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716567" start="69941" end="69956" title="The Berlin Wall (video game)" label="The Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q155813" start="69992" end="70000" title="Ostalgie" label="Ostalgie"/>
<link wikidata="Q708321" start="70281" end="70302" title="Berlin Crisis of 1961" label="Berlin Crisis of 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728467" start="70319" end="70343" title="Chapel of Reconciliation" label="Chapel of Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66057683" start="70345" end="70360" title="Deborah Kennedy (artist)" label="Deborah Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="70433" end="70464" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="Dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q51476459" start="70473" end="70500" title="East Germany balloon escape" label="East Germany balloon escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916399" start="70502" end="70522" title="Green Line (Lebanon)" label="Green Line (Lebanon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q700754" start="70524" end="70543" title="Inner German border" label="Inner German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q28980421" start="70545" end="70581" title="Israeli annexation of East Jerusalem" label="Israeli annexation of East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="70583" end="70608" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="Korean Demilitarized Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q588599" start="70611" end="70636" title="Military Demarcation Line" label="Military Demarcation Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244273" start="70638" end="70651" title="List of walls" label="List of walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q427974" start="70653" end="70667" title="Operation Gold" label="Operation Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322838" start="70669" end="70680" title="Peace lines" label="Peace lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312198" start="70682" end="70733" title="Removal of Hungary&amp;#x27;s border fence with Austria" label="Removal of Hungary&amp;#x27;s border fence with Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q840476" start="70741" end="70766" title="The Wall – Live in Berlin" label="The Wall – Live in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035753" start="70809" end="70842" title="World Freedom Day (United States)" label="World Freedom Day (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232339" start="70886" end="70899" title="David Childs (academic)" label="Childs, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q68509491" start="71755" end="71774" title="Mary Elise Sarotte" label="Sarotte, Mary Elise"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="72154" end="72160" title="Flickr" label="Flickr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3727" wikidata="Q810451" url="?curid=3727" title="Bass (sound)">
<text>Bass ( ) (also called bottom end) describes tones of low (also called &quot;deep&quot;) frequency, pitch and range from 16 to 250 Hz (C0 to middle C4) and bass instruments that produce tones in the low-pitched range C2-C4. They belong to different families of instruments and can cover a wide range of musical roles. Since producing low pitches usually requires a long air column or string, and for stringed instruments, a large hollow body, the string and wind bass instruments are usually the largest instruments in their families or instrument classes.

==Musical role==
When bass notes are played in a musical ensemble such an orchestra, they are frequently used to provide a counterpoint or counter-melody, in a harmonic context either to outline or juxtapose the progression of the chords, or with percussion to underline the rhythm.

===Rhythm section ===
In popular music, the bass part, which is called the &quot;bassline&quot;, typically provides harmonic and rhythmic support to the band. The bass player is a member of the rhythm section in a band, along with the drummer, rhythm guitarist, and, in some cases, a keyboard instrument player (e.g., piano or Hammond organ). The bass player emphasizes the root or fifth of the chord in their basslines (and to a lesser degree, the third of the chord) and accents the strong beats.

==Kinds of bass harmony==
In classical music, different forms of bass are: &quot;basso concertante&quot;, or &quot;basso recitante&quot;; the bass voice of the chorus; the bass which accompanies the softer passages of a composition, as well as those passages which employ the whole power of the ensemble, generally played by the violoncellos in orchestral music; &quot;contrabass&quot; (“under bass”), is described as that part which is performed by the double basses; violoncellos often play the same line an octave higher, or a different melodic or rhythmic part which is not a bassline when double basses are used; &quot;basso ripieno&quot;; that bass which joins in the full passages of a composition, and, by its depth of tone and energy of stroke, affords a powerful contrast to the lighter and softer passages or movements.

Basso continuo was an approach to writing music during the Baroque music era (1600–1750). With basso continuo, a written-out bassline served to set out the chord progression for an entire piece (symphony, concerto, Mass, or other work), with the bassline being played by pipe organ or harpsichord and the chords being improvised by players of chordal instruments (theorbo, lute, harpsichord, etc.).

&quot;The bass differs from other voices because of the particular role it plays in supporting and defining harmonic motion. It does so at levels ranging from immediate, chord-by-chord events to the larger harmonic organization of an entire work.&quot;

==Instruments==
As seen in the musical instrument classification article, categorizing instruments can be difficult. For example, some instruments fall into more than one category. The cello is considered a tenor instrument in some orchestral settings, but in a string quartet it is the bass instrument. Also, the Bass Flute is actually the tenor member of the flute family even though it is called the &quot;Bass&quot; Flute.

Examples grouped by general form and playing technique include:
*Double bass from the viol or violin family (usually the instrument referred to as a &quot;bass&quot; in European classical music and jazz. Sometimes called a &quot;string bass&quot; to differentiate it from a &quot;brass bass&quot; or &quot;bass horn&quot;, or an &quot;upright bass&quot; to differentiate it from a &quot;bass guitar&quot;)
*Bass guitar and acoustic bass guitar, instruments shaped, constructed and held (or worn) like guitars, that play in the bass range. The electric bass guitar is usually the instrument referred to as a &quot;bass&quot; in pop and rock music.
*A bass horn, such as a tuba, serpent, and sousaphone from the wind family and low-tuned versions of specific types of brass and woodwind instruments, such as bassoon, bass clarinet, bass trombone and bass saxophone, etc. (less common usage)
*Keyboard bass, a keyboard alternative to the bass guitar or double bass (e.g. the Fender Rhodes piano bass in the 1960s or 13-note MIDI keyboard controllers in the 2000s)
*Washtub bass, a simple folk instrument

A musician playing one of these instruments is often known as a bassist. Other more specific terms such as &#x27;bass guitarist&#x27;, &#x27;double bassist&#x27;, &#x27;bass player&#x27;, etc. may also be used.

===Keyboards===
*Keyboard bass
*Pedal keyboard

===Percussion===
====Unpitched====
*Bass drum

====Pitched====
*Timpani

===Stringed===
*Double bass
*Bass guitar
*Washtub bass
*Cello

===Wind===
==== Woodwind ====

*Bass recorder
*Bass oboe
*Bassoon
*Contrabassoon
*Bass saxophone
*Contrabass saxophone
*Subcontrabass saxophone
*Bass clarinet
*Contrabass clarinet
*Contrabass flute

====Brass====
*Tuba
*Subcontrabass tuba
*Bass trombone
*Euphonium
*Baritone Horn

==Music shows and dances==

With recorded music playback, for owners of 33 rpm LPs and 45 singles, the availability of loud &quot;and&quot; deep bass was limited by the ability of the phonograph record stylus to track the groove. While some hi-fi aficionados had solved the problem by using other playback sources, such as reel-to-reel tape players which were capable of delivering accurate, naturally deep bass from acoustic sources, or synthetic bass not found in nature, with the popular introduction of the compact cassette in the late 1960s it became possible to add more low-frequency content to recordings. By the mid-1970s, 12&quot; vinyl singles, which allowed for &quot;more bass volume&quot;, were used to record disco, reggae, dub and hip-hop tracks; dance club DJs played these records in clubs with subwoofers to achieve &quot;physical and emotional&quot; reactions from dancers.

In the early 1970s, early disco DJs sought out deeper bass sounds for their dance events. David Mancuso hired sound engineer Alex Rosner to design additional subwoofers for his disco dance events, along with &quot;tweeter arrays&quot; to &quot;boost the treble and bass at opportune moments&quot; at his private, underground parties at The Loft. The demand for sub-bass sound reinforcement in the 1970s was driven by the important role of &quot;powerful bass drum&quot; in disco, as compared with rock and pop; to provide this deeper range, a third crossover point from 40 Hz to 120 Hz (centering on 80 Hz) was added. The Paradise Garage discotheque in New York City, which operated from 1977 to 1987, had &quot;custom designed &#x27;sub-bass&#x27; speakers&quot; developed by Alex Rosner&#x27;s disciple, sound engineer Richard (&quot;Dick&quot;) Long that were called &quot;Levan Horns&quot; (in honor of resident DJ Larry Levan).

By the end of the 1970s, subwoofers were used in dance venue sound systems to enable the playing of &quot;[b]ass-heavy dance music&quot; that we &quot;do not &#x27;hear&#x27; with our ears but with our entire body&quot;. At the club, Long used four Levan bass horns, one in each corner of the dancefloor, to create a &quot;haptic and tactile quality&quot; in the sub-bass that you could feel in your body. To overcome the lack of sub-bass frequencies on 1970s disco records (sub-bass frequencies below 60 Hz were removed during mastering), Long added a DBX 100 &quot;Boom Box&quot; subharmonic pitch generator into his system to synthesize 25 Hz to 50 Hz sub-bass from the 50 to 100 Hz bass on the records. In the early 1980s, Long designed a sound system for the Warehouse dance club, with &quot;huge stacks of subwoofers&quot; which created &quot;deep and intense&quot; bass frequencies that &quot;pound[ed] through your system&quot; and &quot;entire body&quot;, enabling clubgoers to &quot;viscerally experience&quot; the DJs&#x27; house music mixes.
Deep, heavy bass is central to Jamaican musical styles such as dub and reggae. In Jamaica in the 1970s and 1980s, sound engineers for reggae sound systems began creating &quot;heavily customized&quot; subwoofer enclosures by adding foam and tuning the cabinets to achieve &quot;rich and articulate speaker output below 100 Hz&quot;. The sound engineers who developed the &quot;bass-heavy signature sound&quot; of sound reinforcement systems have been called &quot;deserving as much credit for the sound of Jamaican music as their better-known music producer cousins&quot;. The sound engineers for Stone Love Movement (a sound system crew), for example, modified folded horn subwoofers they imported from the US to get more of a bass reflex sound that suited local tone preferences for dancehall audiences, as the unmodified folded horn was found to be &quot;too aggressive&quot; sounding and &quot;not deep enough for Jamaican listeners&quot;.

In Jamaican sound system culture, there are both &quot;low and high bass bins&quot; in &quot;towering piles&quot; that are &quot;delivered in large trucks&quot; and set up by a crew of &quot;box boys&quot;, and then positioned and adjusted by the sound engineer in a process known as &quot;stringing up&quot;, all to create the &quot;sound of reggae music you can literally feel as it comes off these big speakers&quot;. Sound system crews hold &#x27;sound clash&#x27; competitions, where each sound system is set up and then the two crews try to outdo each other.

==Movies==
The use of subwoofers to provide deep bass in film presentations received a great deal of publicity in 1974 with the movie &quot;Earthquake&quot; which was released in Sensurround. Initially installed in 17 U.S. theaters, the Cerwin Vega &quot;Sensurround&quot; system used large subwoofers which were driven by racks of 500 watt amplifiers which were triggered by control tones printed on one of the audio tracks on the film. Four of the subwoofers were positioned in front of the audience under (or behind) the film screen and two more were placed together at the rear of the audience on a platform. Powerful noise energy and loud rumbling in the range of 17 Hz to 120 Hz was generated at the level of 110–120 decibels of sound pressure level, abbreviated dB(SPL). The new low frequency entertainment method helped the film become a box office success. More Sensurround systems were assembled and installed. By 1976 there were almost 300 Sensurround systems in theaters. Other films to use the effect include &quot;Midway&quot; in 1976 and &quot;Rollercoaster&quot; in 1977.

==See also==
*Sub bass
*Treble (sound)
*Bass clef
*Figured bass

==Sources==
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="0" end="4" title="Bass (sound)" label="Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="22" end="32" title="Bass (sound)" label="bottom end"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="44" end="48" title="Pitch (music)" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="88" end="97" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="99" end="104" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042979" start="109" end="114" title="range (music)" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q843813" start="140" end="148" title="middle C" label="middle C"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="155" end="171" title="Bass (sound)" label="bass instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="198" end="209" title="Bass (sound)" label="low-pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042979" start="210" end="215" title="range (music)" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="260" end="271" title="musical instrument" label="instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="606" end="622" title="musical ensemble" label="musical ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="631" end="640" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="680" end="692" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="704" end="710" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="717" end="725" title="harmony" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="788" end="793" title="chord (music)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="804" end="814" title="Percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="832" end="838" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="922" end="930" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="1035" end="1049" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="1076" end="1083" title="drum kit" label="drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q670969" start="1085" end="1098" title="rhythm guitar" label="rhythm guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="1125" end="1144" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboard instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1159" end="1164" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="1168" end="1181" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="1370" end="1385" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="1670" end="1681" title="violoncello" label="violoncello"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="1795" end="1806" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="2173" end="2187" title="Basso continuo" label="Basso continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="2232" end="2245" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="2329" end="2346" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="2444" end="2454" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="2458" end="2469" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748242" start="2858" end="2891" title="musical instrument classification" label="musical instrument classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="3012" end="3017" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="3034" end="3039" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="3089" end="3103" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="3320" end="3331" title="Double bass" label="Double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q40125" start="3341" end="3345" title="viol" label="viol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="3424" end="3448" title="European classical music" label="European classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="3453" end="3457" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="3662" end="3673" title="Bass guitar" label="Bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q424017" start="3678" end="3698" title="acoustic bass guitar" label="acoustic bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="3882" end="3885" title="popular music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="3890" end="3900" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q742168" start="3905" end="3914" title="bass horn" label="bass horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131168" start="3926" end="3930" title="tuba" label="tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q742168" start="3932" end="3939" title="Serpent (instrument)" label="serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q499387" start="3945" end="3955" title="sousaphone" label="sousaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q159998" start="4061" end="4068" title="bassoon" label="bassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8345" start="4070" end="4083" title="bass clarinet" label="bass clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4085" end="4098" title="Trombone#Bass trombone" label="bass trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q810551" start="4103" end="4117" title="bass saxophone" label="bass saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398221" start="4145" end="4158" title="Keyboard bass" label="Keyboard bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q743659" start="4227" end="4240" title="Fender Rhodes" label="Fender Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244764" start="4317" end="4329" title="Washtub bass" label="Washtub bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q639669" start="4359" end="4367" title="musician" label="musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q584301" start="4421" end="4428" title="bassist" label="bassist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398221" start="4586" end="4599" title="Keyboard bass" label="Keyboard bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758965" start="4601" end="4615" title="Pedal keyboard" label="Pedal keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="4653" end="4662" title="Bass drum" label="Bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="4681" end="4688" title="Timpani" label="Timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="4706" end="4717" title="Double bass" label="Double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="4719" end="4730" title="Bass guitar" label="Bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244764" start="4732" end="4744" title="Washtub bass" label="Washtub bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="4746" end="4751" title="Cello" label="Cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353648" start="4785" end="4798" title="Bass recorder" label="Bass recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q808215" start="4800" end="4809" title="Bass oboe" label="Bass oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q159998" start="4811" end="4818" title="Bassoon" label="Bassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83513" start="4820" end="4833" title="Contrabassoon" label="Contrabassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q810551" start="4835" end="4849" title="Bass saxophone" label="Bass saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783263" start="4851" end="4871" title="Contrabass saxophone" label="Contrabass saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q284715" start="4873" end="4896" title="Subcontrabass saxophone" label="Subcontrabass saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8345" start="4898" end="4911" title="Bass clarinet" label="Bass clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731509" start="4913" end="4932" title="Contrabass clarinet" label="Contrabass clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q587246" start="4934" end="4950" title="Contrabass flute" label="Contrabass flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q131168" start="4967" end="4971" title="Tuba" label="Tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630969" start="4973" end="4991" title="Subcontrabass tuba" label="Subcontrabass tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194854" start="4993" end="5006" title="Bass trombone" label="Bass trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q495529" start="5008" end="5017" title="Euphonium" label="Euphonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q790468" start="5019" end="5032" title="Baritone Horn" label="Baritone Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="5218" end="5235" title="phonograph record" label="phonograph record"/>
<link wikidata="Q544858" start="5357" end="5382" title="Reel-to-reel audio tape recording" label="reel-to-reel tape players"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="5955" end="5960" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="5961" end="5963" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996310" start="6019" end="6032" title="David Mancuso" label="David Mancuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q31770874" start="6054" end="6065" title="Alex Rosner" label="Alex Rosner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521621" start="6265" end="6273" title="The Loft (New York City)" label="The Loft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339843" start="6551" end="6566" title="Paradise Garage" label="Paradise Garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="6567" end="6578" title="discotheque" label="discotheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6582" end="6595" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q113504777" start="6750" end="6781" title="Richard Long (sound designer)" label="Richard (&amp;quot;Dick&amp;quot;) Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="6845" end="6847" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341804" start="6848" end="6859" title="Larry Levan" label="Larry Levan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631191" start="7445" end="7472" title="Subharmonic synthesizer" label="subharmonic pitch generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423025" start="7627" end="7636" title="Warehouse (nightclub)" label="Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="7898" end="7909" title="house music" label="house music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="7988" end="7994" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q389435" start="8058" end="8070" title="sound system (Jamaican)" label="sound system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618981" start="8514" end="8533" title="Stone Love Movement" label="Stone Love Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="8702" end="8711" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15643869" start="9313" end="9324" title="sound clash" label="sound clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q500280" start="9562" end="9584" title="Earthquake (1974 film)" label="&amp;quot;Earthquake&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413933" start="9607" end="9618" title="Sensurround" label="Sensurround"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068172" start="10163" end="10183" title="Sound pressure" label="sound pressure level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708667" start="10450" end="10468" title="Midway (1976 film)" label="&amp;quot;Midway&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q340911" start="10481" end="10506" title="Rollercoaster (1977 film)" label="&amp;quot;Rollercoaster&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q848412" start="10531" end="10539" title="Sub bass" label="Sub bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827865" start="10541" end="10555" title="Treble (sound)" label="Treble (sound)"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="10557" end="10566" title="Bass clef" label="Bass clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q349603" start="10568" end="10580" title="Figured bass" label="Figured bass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3728" wikidata="Q2346991" url="?curid=3728" title="UK bass">
<text>UK bass, also called bass music, is club music that emerged in the United Kingdom during the mid-2000s under the influence of diverse genres such as house, grime, dubstep, Future garage, R&amp;B, and UK funky. The term &quot;UK bass&quot; came into use as artists began ambiguously blending the sounds of these defined genres while maintaining an emphasis on percussive, bass-led rhythm. 

UK bass is sometimes conflated with bassline or post-dubstep. It is not to be confused with the hip hop and electro-based genre Miami bass, which is sometimes called &quot;bass music&quot; as well.

==Origins==
The breadth of styles that have come to be associated with the term preclude it from being a specific musical genre. &quot;Pitchfork&quot; writer Martin Clark has suggested that &quot;well-meaning attempts to loosely define the ground we&#x27;re covering here are somewhat futile and almost certainly flawed. This is not one genre. However, given the links, interaction, and free-flowing ideas… you can&#x27;t dismiss all these acts as unrelated.&quot; Dubstep producer Skream is quoted in an interview with &quot;The Independent&quot; in September 2011 as saying: The word dubstep is being used by a lot of people and there were a lot of people being tagged with the dubstep brush. They don&#x27;t want to be tagged with it and shouldn&#x27;t be tagged with it – that&#x27;s not what they&#x27;re pushing... When I say &#x27;UK bass&#x27;, it&#x27;s what everyone UK is associated with so it would be a lot easier if it was called that.&quot;

In the United Kingdom, bass music has had major mainstream success since the late 2000s and early 2010s, with artists such as James Blake, Benga, Burial, SBTRKT, Sophie, Rustie, Zomby, and Skream. The term &quot;post-dubstep&quot; has been used synonymously to refer to artists, such as Blake and Mount Kimbie whose work draws on UK garage, 2-step, and other forms of underground dance music, as well as ambient music and early R&amp;B. Outside of nightclubs, UK bass has mainly been promoted and played on Internet radio stations such as Sub.FM and Rinse FM.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2346991" start="0" end="7" title="UK bass" label="UK bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346991" start="21" end="31" title="UK bass" label="bass music"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="36" end="46" title="club music" label="club music"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="67" end="81" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="149" end="154" title="house music" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166726" start="156" end="161" title="Grime (music genre)" label="grime"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="163" end="170" title="dubstep" label="dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510816" start="172" end="185" title="Future garage" label="Future garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="187" end="194" title="contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364028" start="200" end="208" title="UK funky" label="UK funky"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="371" end="375" title="bass (music)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="380" end="386" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846346" start="426" end="434" title="Bassline (music genre)" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q106130091" start="438" end="450" title="post-dubstep" label="post-dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="486" end="493" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q217597" start="498" end="505" title="Electro (music)" label="electro"/>
<link wikidata="Q546206" start="518" end="528" title="Miami bass" label="Miami bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="724" end="733" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="1054" end="1061" title="Dubstep" label="Dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q734062" start="1071" end="1077" title="Skream" label="Skream"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="1115" end="1130" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1553" end="1567" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q350362" start="1672" end="1683" title="James Blake (musician)" label="James Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q524665" start="1685" end="1690" title="Benga (musician)" label="Benga"/>
<link wikidata="Q552245" start="1692" end="1698" title="Burial (musician)" label="Burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518508" start="1700" end="1706" title="Sbtrkt" label="SBTRKT"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161827" start="1708" end="1714" title="Sophie (musician)" label="Sophie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382510" start="1716" end="1722" title="Rustie" label="Rustie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993203" start="1724" end="1729" title="Zomby" label="Zomby"/>
<link wikidata="Q734062" start="1735" end="1741" title="Skream" label="Skream"/>
<link wikidata="Q106130091" start="1758" end="1770" title="post-dubstep" label="post-dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359424" start="1843" end="1855" title="Mount Kimbie" label="Mount Kimbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="1950" end="1963" title="ambient music" label="ambient music"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="1974" end="1981" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="2053" end="2067" title="Internet radio" label="Internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642765" start="2085" end="2091" title="Sub.FM" label="Sub.FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432266" start="2096" end="2104" title="Rinse FM" label="Rinse FM"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3729" wikidata="Q368027" url="?curid=3729" title="Burning glass">
<text>A burning glass or burning lens is a large convex lens that can concentrate the Sun&#x27;s rays onto a small area, heating up the area and thus resulting in ignition of the exposed surface. Burning mirrors achieve a similar effect by using reflecting surfaces to focus the light. They were used in 18th-century chemical studies for burning materials in closed glass vessels where the products of combustion could be trapped for analysis. The burning glass was a useful contrivance in the days before electrical ignition was easily achieved.

==History==

Burning glass technology has been known since antiquity, as described by Greek and Roman writers who recorded the use of lenses to start fires for various purposes. Pliny the Elder noted the use of glass vases filled with water to concentrate sunlight heat intensely enough to ignite clothing, as well as convex lenses that were used to cauterize wounds. Plutarch refers to a burning mirror made of joined triangular metal mirrors installed at the temple of the Vestal Virgins. Aristophanes mentions the burning lens in his play &quot;The Clouds&quot; (424 BC).

The Hellenistic Greek mathematician Archimedes was said to have used a burning glass as a weapon in 212 BC, when Syracuse was besieged by Marcus Claudius Marcellus of the Roman Republic. The Roman fleet was supposedly incinerated, though eventually the city was taken and Archimedes was slain.
The legend of Archimedes gave rise to a considerable amount of research on burning glasses and lenses until the late 17th century. Various researchers from medieval Christendom to the Islamic world worked with burning glasses, including Anthemius of Tralles (6th century AD), Proclus (6th century; who by this means purportedly destroyed the fleet of Vitalian besieging Constantinople), Ibn Sahl in his &quot;On Burning Mirrors and Lenses&quot; (10th century), Alhazen in his &quot;Book of Optics&quot; (1021), Roger Bacon (13th century), Giambattista della Porta and his friends (16th century), Athanasius Kircher and Gaspar Schott (17th century), and the Comte de Buffon in 1740 in Paris.

While the effects of camera obscura were mentioned by Greek philosopher Aristotle in the 4th century BC, contemporary Chinese Mohists of China&#x27;s Warring States Period who compiled the &quot;Mozi&quot; described their experiments with burning mirrors and the pinhole camera. A few decades after Alhazen described camera obscura in Iraq, the Song dynasty Chinese statesman Shen Kuo was nevertheless the first to clearly describe the relationship of the focal point of a concave mirror, the burning point and the pinhole camera as separate radiation phenomena in his &quot;Dream Pool Essays&quot; (1088). By the late 15th century Leonardo da Vinci would be the first in Europe to make similar observations about the focal point and pinhole.

Burning lenses were used in the 18th century by both Joseph Priestley and Antoine Lavoisier in their experiments to obtain oxides contained in closed vessels under high temperatures. These included carbon dioxide by burning diamond, and mercuric oxide by heating mercury. This type of experiment contributed to the discovery of &quot;dephlogisticated air&quot; by Priestley, which became better known as oxygen, following Lavoisier&#x27;s investigations.

Chapter 17 of William Bates&#x27; 1920 book &quot;Perfect Sight Without Glasses&quot;, in which the author argues that observation of the sun is beneficial to those with poor vision, includes a figure of somebody &quot;Focussing the Rays of the Sun Upon the Eye of a Patient by Means of a Burning Glass.&quot;

The burning lens of the Grand Duke of Tuscany was used by Sir Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday to burn a diamond in oxygen on 27 March 1814.

==Use==
=== War: since the legend of Archimedes ===
The first story akin to that of burning glass is by Archimedes, for the purpose of war, in 212 BC. When Syracuse was besieged by Marcus Claudius Marcellus, the Roman fleet was supposedly incinerated by the use of not glass per se, but a concave mirror made of brass focusing sunlight. Whether or not that actually happened, eventually the city was taken and Archimedes was slain.

In 1796, during the French Revolution and three years after the declaration of war between France and Great Britain, physicist Étienne-Gaspard Robert met with the French government and proposed the use of mirrors to burn the invading ships of the British Royal Navy. They decided not to take up his proposal.

=== Domestic use: primitive fire making ===
Burning glasses (often called fire lenses) are still used to light fires in outdoor and primitive settings. Large burning lenses sometimes take the form of Fresnel lenses, similar to lighthouse lenses, including those for use in solar furnaces. Solar furnaces are used in industry to produce extremely high temperatures without the need for fuel or large supplies of electricity. They sometimes employ a large parabolic array of mirrors (some facilities are several stories high) to focus light to a high intensity.

=== Religion: sacred fire ===
In various religions settings, a burning glass is used to set off some sort of sacred fire.

From the 7th to the 16th centuries, a burning glass was used by Christians to set off the Easter Fire during the Easter vigil. Thus, Saint Boniface explained to Pope Zachary that he produced the new fire of Holy Saturday by means of a crystal lens concentrating the rays of the sun. This process was also mentioned in liturgical books until the Roman Pontifical of 1561.

In Cambodia, a burning glass has also been used since ancient times for the cremation of kings and most recently for the funeral of King Sihanouk. The crematorium of the king is traditionally prepared by the Bakus brahmin from the Royal Palace on the last day of the week-long funeral. Small pieces of fragrant agarwood are placed beneath the magnifying glass until it ignites. The incandescent wood is used to light candles and pass on the fire to the attendees, who usually take their lit candles home.

=== Sports: lighting the Olympic torch ===
The Olympic torch that is carried around the host country of the Olympic Games is lit by a burning glass, at the site of ancient Olympia in Greece.

=== Popular culture: verification attempts ===
There have been several real-world tests to evaluate the validity of the legend of Archimedes described above over the centuries, including a test by Comte de Buffon (circa 1747), documented in the paper titled &quot;Invention De Miroirs Ardens, Pour Brusler a Une Grande Distance&quot;, and an experiment by John Scott, which was documented in an 1867 paper.
In 1973, Greek scientist Dr. Ioannis Sakkas, curious about whether Archimedes could really have used a &quot;burning glass&quot; to destroy the Roman fleet in 212 BC, lined up nearly 60 Greek sailors, each holding an oblong mirror tipped to catch the sun&#x27;s rays and direct them at a wooden ship 160 feet away. The ship caught fire at once. Sakkas said after the experiment there was no doubt in his mind the great inventor could have used bronze mirrors to scuttle the Romans.

However, accounting for battle conditions makes such a weapon impractical, with modern tests refuting such claims. An experiment was carried out by a group at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 2005. It concluded that although the theory was sound for stationary objects, the mirrors would not likely have been able to concentrate sufficient solar energy to set a ship on fire under battle conditions. Similar experiments were conducted on the popular science-based TV show &quot;MythBusters&quot; in 2004, 2006, and 2010, arriving at similar results based on the premise of the controversial myth.

However, an episode of &quot;Richard Hammond&#x27;s Engineering Connections&quot; relating to the Keck Observatory (whose reflector glass is based on the Archimedes&#x27; Mirror) did successfully use a much smaller curved mirror to burn a wooden model, although the scaled-down model was not made of the same quality of materials as in the &quot;MythBusters&quot; effort.

==See also==
* Diocles (mathematician)
* Nimrud lens
* Pyreliophorus
* Visby lenses
* Solar furnace

==References==
==Further reading==
*Temple, Robert. &quot;The Crystal Sun&quot;, .

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368027" start="2" end="15" title="Burning glass" label="burning glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q368027" start="19" end="31" title="Burning glass" label="burning lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="43" end="54" title="Biconvex lens" label="convex lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="157" end="165" title="Combustion" label="ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q368027" start="190" end="205" title="Burning glass" label="Burning mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="720" end="735" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136347" start="892" end="901" title="cauterize" label="cauterize"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="910" end="918" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="1017" end="1031" title="Vestal Virgins" label="Vestal Virgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="1033" end="1045" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q868447" start="1090" end="1100" title="The Clouds" label="The Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="1122" end="1139" title="Hellenistic Greek" label="Hellenistic Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="1154" end="1164" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="1231" end="1239" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q312306" start="1256" end="1281" title="Marcus Claudius Marcellus" label="Marcus Claudius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1289" end="1303" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q540867" start="1309" end="1320" title="Roman Navy" label="Roman fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="1577" end="1588" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="1596" end="1609" title="Islamic world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q298226" start="1649" end="1669" title="Anthemius of Tralles" label="Anthemius of Tralles"/>
<link wikidata="Q878539" start="1763" end="1771" title="Vitalian (general)" label="Vitalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1782" end="1796" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q335292" start="1799" end="1807" title="Ibn Sahl (mathematician)" label="Ibn Sahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="1873" end="1880" title="Ibn al-Haytham" label="Alhazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q264562" start="1894" end="1908" title="Book of Optics" label="Book of Optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q171677" start="1923" end="1934" title="Roger Bacon" label="Roger Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q334154" start="1951" end="1975" title="Giambattista della Porta" label="Giambattista della Porta"/>
<link wikidata="Q76738" start="2008" end="2026" title="Athanasius Kircher" label="Athanasius Kircher"/>
<link wikidata="Q91673" start="2031" end="2044" title="Gaspar Schott" label="Gaspar Schott"/>
<link wikidata="Q229264" start="2069" end="2084" title="Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon" label="Comte de Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183998" start="2125" end="2139" title="camera obscura" label="camera obscura"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="2176" end="2185" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="2230" end="2236" title="Mohist" label="Mohist"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="2254" end="2275" title="Warring States Period" label="Warring States Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835619" start="2299" end="2303" title="Mozi (book)" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313742" start="2367" end="2381" title="pinhole camera" label="pinhole camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="2449" end="2461" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q270085" start="2480" end="2488" title="Shen Kuo" label="Shen Kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190909" start="2560" end="2571" title="Focus (optics)" label="focal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506584" start="2577" end="2591" title="concave mirror" label="concave mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069875" start="2679" end="2696" title="Dream Pool Essays" label="Dream Pool Essays"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="2736" end="2753" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="2901" end="2917" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="2922" end="2939" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q174727" start="3085" end="3099" title="Mercury(II) oxide" label="mercuric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="3111" end="3118" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999319" start="3182" end="3202" title="Phlogiston theory" label="dephlogisticated air"/>
<link wikidata="Q512902" start="3318" end="3331" title="William Bates (physician)" label="William Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="3677" end="3689" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8750" start="3694" end="3709" title="Michael Faraday" label="Michael Faraday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4210" end="4227" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q289163" start="4317" end="4339" title="Étienne-Gaspard Robert" label="Étienne-Gaspard Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="4445" end="4455" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14672" start="4700" end="4712" title="Fresnel lens" label="Fresnel lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="4727" end="4737" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q855248" start="4773" end="4786" title="solar furnace" label="solar furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="4954" end="4963" title="Parabolic reflector" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638573" start="5170" end="5181" title="Fire worship" label="sacred fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q494350" start="5274" end="5285" title="Easter Fire" label="Easter Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q686500" start="5297" end="5309" title="Easter vigil" label="Easter vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q160445" start="5317" end="5331" title="Saint Boniface" label="Saint Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q139467" start="5345" end="5357" title="Pope Zachary" label="Pope Zachary"/>
<link wikidata="Q263790" start="5529" end="5545" title="Roman Pontifical" label="Roman Pontifical"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="5559" end="5567" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="5632" end="5641" title="cremation" label="cremation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="5688" end="5701" title="King Sihanouk" label="King Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5764" end="5777" title="Baku (brahmin)" label="Bakus brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420618" start="5787" end="5799" title="Royal Palace of Cambodia" label="Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q358375" start="5867" end="5875" title="agarwood" label="agarwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="6109" end="6122" title="Olympic torch" label="Olympic torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="6170" end="6183" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="6234" end="6241" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229264" start="6451" end="6466" title="Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon" label="Comte de Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="7307" end="7344" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="7496" end="7508" title="solar energy" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q486844" start="7634" end="7645" title="MythBusters" label="MythBusters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7661" end="7665" title="MythBusters (2006 season)#Episode 46 – &amp;quot;Archimedes&amp;#x27; Death Ray&amp;quot;" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7671" end="7675" title="MythBusters (2010 season)#Episode 157 .E2.80.93 .22President.27s Challenge.22" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901803" start="7783" end="7829" title="Richard Hammond&amp;#x27;s Engineering Connections" label="Richard Hammond&amp;#x27;s Engineering Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q210997" start="7852" end="7868" title="Keck Observatory" label="Keck Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226886" start="8142" end="8165" title="Diocles (mathematician)" label="Diocles (mathematician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205286" start="8168" end="8179" title="Nimrud lens" label="Nimrud lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263426" start="8182" end="8195" title="Pyreliophorus" label="Pyreliophorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573322" start="8198" end="8210" title="Visby lenses" label="Visby lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q855248" start="8213" end="8226" title="Solar furnace" label="Solar furnace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3730" wikidata="Q221374" url="?curid=3730" title="Battle of Adrianople (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[Battle of Adrianople]] (378 CE), in which Gothic rebels defeated the Eastern Roman Empire, was the main battle of the Gothic War (376–382).

Battle of Adrianople may also refer to:
*Battle of Adrianople (324), a battle in which Constantine the Great defeated Licinius in a Roman civil war
*Siege of Adrianople (378), an unsuccessful siege by the Goths following the Battle of Adrianople
*Battle of Adrianople (718), a battle between an alliance of Bulgarians and Byzantines against the Umayyad Caliphate, during the Siege of Constantinople (717–718)
*Battle of Adrianople (813), a successful Bulgarian siege of the Byzantine city
*Battle of Adrianople (914), a battle between Bulgarians and Byzantines
*Battle of Adrianople (972), a battle between Byzantines and Kievan Rus&#x27; led by Sviatoslav I of Kiev
*Battle of Adrianople (1003), a battle between Bulgarians and Byzantines
*Battle of Adrianople (1094), part of the revolt of Constantine Diogenes (pretender) and his Cuman allies
*Battle of Adrianople (1205), part of the Fourth Crusade, in which the Bulgarians defeated the Crusaders
*Battle of Adrianople (1226), part of the revolt of Theodore Komnenos Doukas
*Battle of Adrianople (1254), in which the Byzantines defeated the Bulgarians
*Battle of Adrianople (1305), a battle between the Byzantines and the Catalan Company
*Battle of Adrianople (1355), a battle between the Byzantines and the Serbs led by Stefan Dušan
*Battle of Adrianople (1365), in which the Ottoman Empire took the city from the Byzantine Empire
*Battle of Adrianople (1829), in which the Russians seized the city from the Ottoman Empire
*Siege of Adrianople (1912–1913), in which the Bulgarians took the city from the Ottomans in the First Balkan War
*Siege of Adrianople (1913)

==See also==
* Adrianople
*Battle of Tzirallum, a 313 CE battle in which Licinius defeated Maximinus Daia in a Roman civil war</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221374" start="4" end="28" title="Battle of Adrianople (disambiguation)" label="[[Battle of Adrianople]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q221374" start="147" end="167" title="Battle of Adrianople (disambiguation)" label="Battle of Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q767848" start="188" end="214" title="Battle of Adrianople (324)" label="Battle of Adrianople (324)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931381" start="296" end="321" title="Siege of Adrianople (378)" label="Siege of Adrianople (378)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="394" end="420" title="Battle of Adrianople (718)" label="Battle of Adrianople (718)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27900" start="522" end="555" title="Siege of Constantinople (717–718)" label="Siege of Constantinople (717–718)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713449" start="557" end="583" title="Battle of Adrianople (813)" label="Battle of Adrianople (813)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="637" end="663" title="Battle of Adrianople (914)" label="Battle of Adrianople (914)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="709" end="735" title="Battle of Adrianople (972)" label="Battle of Adrianople (972)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="769" end="785" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058572" start="793" end="813" title="Sviatoslav I of Kiev" label="Sviatoslav I of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="815" end="842" title="Battle of Adrianople (1003)" label="Battle of Adrianople (1003)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="888" end="915" title="Battle of Adrianople (1094)" label="Battle of Adrianople (1094)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18223550" start="939" end="971" title="Constantine Diogenes (pretender)" label="Constantine Diogenes (pretender)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427630" start="994" end="1021" title="Battle of Adrianople (1205)" label="Battle of Adrianople (1205)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1099" end="1126" title="Battle of Adrianople (1226)" label="Battle of Adrianople (1226)"/>
<link wikidata="Q371668" start="1150" end="1174" title="Theodore Komnenos Doukas" label="Theodore Komnenos Doukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724154" start="1176" end="1203" title="Battle of Adrianople (1254)" label="Battle of Adrianople (1254)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1254" end="1281" title="Battle of Adrianople (1305)" label="Battle of Adrianople (1305)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501196" start="1323" end="1338" title="Catalan Company" label="Catalan Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1340" end="1367" title="Battle of Adrianople (1355)" label="Battle of Adrianople (1355)"/>
<link wikidata="Q207303" start="1422" end="1434" title="Stefan Dušan" label="Stefan Dušan"/>
<link wikidata="Q983012" start="1436" end="1463" title="Battle of Adrianople (1365)" label="Battle of Adrianople (1365)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28155605" start="1534" end="1561" title="Battle of Adrianople (1829)" label="Battle of Adrianople (1829)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887868" start="1626" end="1657" title="Siege of Adrianople (1912–1913)" label="Siege of Adrianople (1912–1913)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078671" start="1740" end="1766" title="Siege of Adrianople (1913)" label="Siege of Adrianople (1913)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="1783" end="1793" title="Adrianople" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132306" start="1795" end="1814" title="Battle of Tzirallum" label="Battle of Tzirallum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3731" wikidata="Q7321258" url="?curid=3731" title="Beacon">
<text>A beacon is an intentionally conspicuous device designed to attract attention to a specific location. A common example is the lighthouse, which draws attention to a fixed point that can be used to navigate around obstacles or into port. More modern examples include a variety of radio beacons that can be read on radio direction finders in all weather, and radar transponders that appear on radar displays.

Beacons can also be combined with semaphoric or other indicators to provide important information, such as the status of an airport, by the colour and rotational pattern of its airport beacon, or of pending weather as indicated on a weather beacon mounted at the top of a tall building or similar site. When used in such fashion, beacons can be considered a form of optical telegraphy.

== For navigation ==
Beacons help guide navigators to their destinations. Types of navigational beacons include radar reflectors, radio beacons, sonic and visual signals. Visual beacons range from small, single-pile structures to large lighthouses or light stations and can be located on land or on water. Lighted beacons are called &quot;lights&quot;; unlighted beacons are called &quot;daybeacons&quot;. Aerodrome beacons are used to indicate locations of airports and helipads.

In the United States, a series of beacons were constructed across the country in the 1920s and 1930s to help guide pilots delivering air mail. They were placed about 25 miles apart from each other, and included large concrete arrows with accompanying lights to illuminate them.

Handheld beacons are also employed in aircraft marshalling, and are used by the marshal to deliver instructions to the crew of aircraft as they move around an active airport, heliport or aircraft carrier.

== For defensive communications (historical) ==
Historically, beacons were fires lit at well-known locations on hills or high places, used either as lighthouses for navigation at sea, or for signalling over land that enemy troops were approaching, in order to alert defenses. As signals, beacons are an ancient form of optical telegraph and were part of a relay league.

Systems of this kind have existed for centuries over much of the world. The ancient Greeks called them &quot;phryctoriae&quot;, while beacons figure on several occasions on the column of Trajan.

In imperial China, sentinels on and near the Great Wall of China used a sophisticated system of daytime smoke and nighttime flame to send signals along long chains of beacon towers.

Legend has it that King You of Zhou played a trick multiple times in order to amuse his often melancholy concubine, ordering beacon towers lit to fool his vassals and soldiers. But when enemies, led by the Marquess of Shen really arrived at the wall, although the towers were lit, no defenders came, leading to King Yōu&#x27;s death and the collapse of the Western Zhou dynasty. China&#x27;s system of beacon towers was not extant prior to the Han dynasty.

Thucydides wrote that during the Peloponnesian War, the Peloponnesians who were in Corcyra were informed by night-time beacon signals of the approach of sixty Athenian vessels from Lefkada.

In the 10th century, during the Arab–Byzantine wars, the Byzantine Empire used a beacon system to transmit messages from the border with the Abbasid Caliphate, across Anatolia to the imperial palace in the Byzantine capital, Constantinople. It was devised by Leo the Mathematician for Emperor Theophilos, but either abolished or radically curtailed by Theophilos&#x27; son and successor, Michael III. Beacons were later used in Greece as well, while the surviving parts of the beacon system in Anatolia seem to have been reactivated in the 12th century by Emperor Manuel I Komnenos.

In Scandinavia many hill forts were part of beacon networks to warn against invading pillagers. In Finland, these beacons were called &quot;vainovalkeat&quot;, &quot;persecution fires&quot;, or &quot;vartiotulet&quot;, &quot;guard fires&quot;, and were used to warn Finn settlements of imminent raids by the Vikings.

In Wales, the Brecon Beacons were named for beacons used to warn of approaching English raiders. In England, the most famous examples are the beacons used in Elizabethan England to warn of the approaching Spanish Armada. Many hills in England were named Beacon Hill after such beacons. In England the authority to erect beacons originally lay with the King and later was delegated to the Lord High Admiral. The money due for the maintenance of beacons was called &quot;Beaconagium&quot; and was levied by the sheriff of each county. In the Scottish borders country, a system of beacon fires was at one time established to warn of incursions by the English. Hume and Eggerstone castles and Soltra Edge were part of this network.

In Spain, the border of Granada in the territory of the Crown of Castile had a complex beacon network to warn against Moorish raiders and military campaigns. Due to the progressive advance of the borders throughout the process of the Reconquista, the entire Spanish geography is full of defensive lines of castles, towers and fortifications, visually connected to each other, which served as fortified beacons. Some examples are the Route of the Vinalopó castles or the distribution of the castles in Jaén.

==Military use (20th–21st century)==
=== Infrared marker===

Infrared strobes and other infrared beacons have increasingly been used in modern combat when operating at night as they can only be seen through night vision goggles. As a result, they are often used to mark friendly positions as a form of IFF to prevent friendly fire and improve coordination. Soldiers will typically affix them to their helmets or other gear so they are easily visible to others using night vision including other infantry, ground vehicles, and aerial platforms (drones, helicopters, planes, etc.).

Passive markers include IR patches, which reflect infrared light, and chemlights. The earliest such beacons were often IR chemlights taped to helmets.

As time went on, more sophisticated options began to emerge with electronically powered infrared strobes with specific mounting solutions for attaching to helmets or load bearing equipment. These strobes may have settings which allow constant on or strobes of IR light, hence the name.

Advancements in near-peer technology, however, present risk since if friendly units can see the strobe with night vision so could enemies with night vision capabilities. As a result, some in the American military have stressed that efforts should be made to improve training regarding light discipline (IR and visible) and other means of reducing a unit&#x27;s visible signature.

== On vehicles ==

Vehicular beacons are rotating or flashing lights affixed to the top of a vehicle to attract the attention of surrounding vehicles and pedestrians. Emergency vehicles such as fire engines, ambulances, police cars, tow trucks, construction vehicles, and snow-removal vehicles carry beacon lights.

The color of the lamps varies by jurisdiction; typical colors are blue and/or red for police, fire, and medical-emergency vehicles; amber for hazards (slow-moving vehicles, wide loads, tow trucks, security personnel, construction vehicles, etc.); green for volunteer firefighters or for medical personnel, and violet for funerary vehicles. Beacons may be constructed with halogen bulbs similar to those used in vehicle headlamps, xenon flashtubes, or LEDs. Incandescent and xenon light sources require the vehicle&#x27;s engine to continue running to ensure that the battery is not depleted when the lights are used for a prolonged period. The low power consumption of LEDs allows the vehicle&#x27;s engine to remain turned off while the lights operate.

== Other uses ==
Beacons and bonfires are also used to mark occasions and celebrate events.

Beacons have also allegedly been abused by shipwreckers. An illicit fire at a wrong position would be used to direct a ship against shoals or beaches, so that its cargo could be looted after the ship sank or ran aground. There are, however, no historically substantiated occurrences of such intentional shipwrecking.

In wireless networks, a beacon is a type of frame which is sent by the access point (or WiFi router) to indicate that it is on.

Bluetooth based beacons periodically send out a data packet and this could be used by software to identify the beacon location. This is typically used by indoor navigation and positioning applications.

&quot;Beaconing&quot; is the process that allows a network to self-repair network problems. The stations on the network notify the other stations on the ring when they are not receiving the transmissions. Beaconing is used in Token ring and FDDI networks.

=== In fiction ===
In Aeschylus&#x27; tragedy &quot;Agamemnon&quot;, a chain of eight beacons staffed by so-called &quot;lampadóphoroi&quot; inform Clytemnestra in Argos, within a single night&#x27;s time, that Troy has just fallen under her husband king Agamemnon&#x27;s control, after a famous ten years siege.

In J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s high fantasy novel, &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, a series of beacons alerts the entire realm of Gondor when the kingdom is under attack. These beacon posts were staffed by messengers who would carry word of their lighting to either Rohan or Belfalas. In Peter Jackson&#x27;s film adaptation of the novel, the beacons serve as a connection between the two realms of Rohan and Gondor, alerting one another directly when they require military aid, as opposed to relying on messengers as in the novel.

=== In publishing ===
&quot;The Beacon&quot; was an influential Caribbean magazine published in Trinidad in the 1930s. New Beacon Books was the first Caribbean publishing house in England, founded in London in 1966, was named after the &quot;Beacon&quot; journal.

=== In retail ===
Beacons are sometimes used in retail to send digital coupons or invitations to customers passing by.

==Types==
=== Infrared beacon ===
An infrared beacon (IR beacon) transmits a modulated light beam in the infrared spectrum, which can be identified easily and positively. A line of sight clear of obstacles between the transmitter and the receiver is essential. IR beacons have a number of applications in robotics and in Combat Identification (CID).

Infrared beacons are the key infrastructure for the Universal Traffic Management System (UTMS) in Japan. They perform two-way communication with travelling vehicles based on highly directional infrared communication technology and have a vehicle detecting capability to provide more accurate traffic information.

=== Sonar beacon ===

A sonar beacon is an underwater device which transmits sonic or ultrasonic signals for the purpose of providing bearing information. The most common type is that of a rugged watertight sonar transmitter attached to a submarine and capable of operating independently of the electrical system of the boat. It can be used in cases of emergencies to guide salvage vessels to the location of a disabled submarine.

== See also ==
* Aerodrome beacon
* Beacon mode service
* Beacon School
* Belisha beacon
* Emergency locator beacon
* Emergency position-indicating radiobeacon station (ELTs, PLBs &amp; EPIRBs)
* iBeacon
* Lantern
* Leading lights
* Lighthouse of Alexandria
* Milestone/Kilometric point
* Polaris
* Strobe beacon
* Time ball
* Trail blazing
* Warning light (disambiguation)
* Weather beacon
* Web beacon

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7321258" start="2" end="8" title="Beacon" label="beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502887" start="83" end="100" title="Geodetic datum" label="specific location"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="126" end="136" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q908488" start="279" end="291" title="radio beacon" label="radio beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="313" end="335" title="radio direction finder" label="radio direction finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q849640" start="357" end="374" title="Transponder" label="radar transponder"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="391" end="396" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="494" end="505" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368434" start="585" end="599" title="aerodrome beacon" label="airport beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978232" start="641" end="655" title="weather beacon" label="weather beacon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="774" end="792" title="Telegraph#Optical telegraph" label="optical telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="835" end="845" title="navigation" label="navigators"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="907" end="912" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q908488" start="925" end="938" title="radio beacons" label="radio beacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="1031" end="1041" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242890" start="1183" end="1192" title="Day beacon" label="daybeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368434" start="1201" end="1217" title="Aerodrome beacon" label="Aerodrome beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621307" start="1410" end="1418" title="air mail" label="air mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902809" start="1594" end="1614" title="aircraft marshalling" label="aircraft marshalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="1911" end="1921" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565782" start="1927" end="1944" title="navigational aid" label="navigation at sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q378499" start="2081" end="2098" title="optical telegraph" label="optical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310896" start="2118" end="2130" title="relay league" label="relay league"/>
<link wikidata="Q702472" start="2242" end="2253" title="phryctoriae" label="phryctoriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="2310" end="2326" title="column of Trajan" label="column of Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="2374" end="2393" title="Great Wall" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193397" start="2531" end="2547" title="King You of Zhou" label="King You of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772561" start="2718" end="2734" title="Marquess of Shen (King Ping&amp;#x27;s grandfather)" label="Marquess of Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="2956" end="2967" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="2970" end="2980" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="3003" end="3020" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="3026" end="3040" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="3053" end="3060" title="Corcyra" label="Corcyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190138" start="3151" end="3158" title="Lefkada" label="Lefkada"/>
<link wikidata="Q29100" start="3193" end="3212" title="Arab–Byzantine wars" label="Arab–Byzantine wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3218" end="3234" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207342" start="3242" end="3255" title="Byzantine beacon system" label="beacon system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="3302" end="3319" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="3328" end="3336" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q475338" start="3344" end="3359" title="Great Palace of Constantinople" label="imperial palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="3386" end="3400" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q681601" start="3420" end="3441" title="Leo the Mathematician" label="Leo the Mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q60199" start="3454" end="3464" title="Theophilos (emperor)" label="Theophilos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41622" start="3549" end="3560" title="Michael III" label="Michael III"/>
<link wikidata="Q41610" start="3725" end="3742" title="Manuel I Komnenos" label="Manuel I Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="3765" end="3774" title="hill fort" label="hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="4066" end="4071" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q904522" start="4077" end="4091" title="Brecon Beacons" label="Brecon Beacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="4221" end="4240" title="Elizabethan England" label="Elizabethan England"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="4268" end="4282" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153574" start="4451" end="4468" title="Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom" label="Lord High Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991077" start="4603" end="4618" title="Scottish border" label="Scottish border"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940598" start="4720" end="4724" title="Hume Castle" label="Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="4816" end="4823" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="4848" end="4864" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="5361" end="5369" title="Infrared" label="Infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="5507" end="5527" title="Night-vision device" label="night vision goggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063245" start="5602" end="5605" title="Identification friend or foe" label="IFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579211" start="5701" end="5708" title="Combat helmet" label="helmets"/>
<link wikidata="Q691533" start="5951" end="5960" title="chemlight" label="chemlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308737" start="6868" end="6885" title="Emergency vehicle" label="Emergency vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q939255" start="7389" end="7402" title="Automotive lamp types" label="halogen bulbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q869713" start="7436" end="7444" title="headlamp" label="headlamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405580" start="7453" end="7462" title="flashtube" label="flashtube"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="7468" end="7472" title="light-emitting diode" label="LEDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9505308" start="7801" end="7808" title="bonfire" label="bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122086" start="7908" end="7920" title="Wrecking (shipwreck)" label="shipwreckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="7997" end="8002" title="shoal" label="shoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="8007" end="8012" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8207" end="8213" title="Electric beacon#IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi beacons" label="beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324888" start="8227" end="8232" title="Frame (networking)" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026477" start="8466" end="8499" title="indoor positioning system" label="indoor navigation and positioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="8794" end="8803" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="8824" end="8833" title="Oresteia" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="8920" end="8932" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="8936" end="8941" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="8983" end="8987" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="9068" end="9083" title="Trojan War" label="ten years siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="9089" end="9105" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q326439" start="9113" end="9125" title="high fantasy" label="high fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="9139" end="9160" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q220110" start="9170" end="9187" title="Warning beacons of Gondor" label="series of beacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q213586" start="9215" end="9221" title="Gondor" label="Gondor"/>
<link wikidata="Q220110" start="9351" end="9356" title="Rohan (Middle-earth)" label="Rohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213586" start="9360" end="9368" title="Belfalas" label="Belfalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="9373" end="9386" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9394" end="9422" title="The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King" label="film adaptation of the novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q112061749" start="9646" end="9656" title="The Beacon (magazine)" label="The Beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005447" start="9737" end="9753" title="New Beacon Books" label="New Beacon Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="10308" end="10316" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063245" start="10324" end="10345" title="Combat Identification" label="Combat Identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368434" start="11117" end="11133" title="Aerodrome beacon" label="Aerodrome beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876003" start="11136" end="11155" title="Beacon mode service" label="Beacon mode service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875983" start="11158" end="11171" title="Beacon Status" label="Beacon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747919" start="11174" end="11188" title="Belisha beacon" label="Belisha beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817204" start="11191" end="11215" title="Emergency locator beacon" label="Emergency locator beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q420122" start="11218" end="11267" title="Emergency position-indicating radiobeacon station" label="Emergency position-indicating radiobeacon station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030574" start="11296" end="11303" title="iBeacon" label="iBeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862454" start="11306" end="11313" title="Lantern" label="Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930418" start="11316" end="11330" title="Leading lights" label="Leading lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q43244" start="11333" end="11357" title="Lighthouse of Alexandria" label="Lighthouse of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10145" start="11360" end="11369" title="Milestone" label="Milestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10145" start="11370" end="11386" title="Kilometric point" label="Kilometric point"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="11389" end="11396" title="Polaris" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8271517" start="11399" end="11412" title="Strobe beacon" label="Strobe beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185876" start="11415" end="11424" title="Time ball" label="Time ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042490" start="11427" end="11440" title="Trail blazing" label="Trail blazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969828" start="11443" end="11473" title="Warning light (disambiguation)" label="Warning light (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978232" start="11476" end="11490" title="Weather beacon" label="Weather beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q247213" start="11493" end="11503" title="Web beacon" label="Web beacon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3733" wikidata="Q854844" url="?curid=3733" title="Bhangra (music)">
<text>Bhangra () is a type of non-traditional music of Punjab originating from the Punjab region.

Over the years, Bhangra has evolved and gained popularity not only in South Asia but also around the world. It has become a significant part of the cultural identity of the Punjabi diaspora in countries like Australia, the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States. Prior to this musical fusion, Bhangra existed only as a dance form in the native Punjab. This Punjabi music was unique in that it was not traditional nor did it seek any authenticity. While the traditional folk music of Punjab has a set of melodies that are used by various singers, Bhangra was a form of strict &quot;band culture&quot; in that new melodies were composed for each song. Therefore, the musicians were as important as the singers. 

==Origins==
The roots of modern bhangra music date back to the Sikh Punjabi community in Punjab during the 1960s. An early pop music and modern recording group of this type of music in the United Kingdom was Bhujhangy Group, founded by Tarlochan Singh Bilga, Balbir Singh Khanpur, Gurpal, Rajinder Dhona and Dalvir Kahanpuri in Birmingham in 1971. Bhujhangy Group&#x27;s first major hit was &quot;Bhabiye Akh Larr Gayee&quot;. It was written by Tarlochan Singh Bilga in the early 1970s and was released on Birmingham&#x27;s Oriental Star Agencies label. This was the first bhangra song to combine traditional Asian music with modern Western instruments.

===Differences from folk music===
Although bhangra music used many of the elements of Punjabi folk music (e.g., &quot;Bakkrey Bulaaney&quot; – the goat herding vocalizations), it was also radically different in its embrace of modernity. The song structure of a typical bhangra song featured four verses, a chorus, along with two alternating instrumental bridge sections. (e.g., CVB1CVB2CVB1CVB2C.) Hence it featured more musicianship than its folk predecessor.

==United Kingdom==
===1970s===
A modern and commercial form of bhangra music was said to rise in Britain in the 1970s by Punjabi immigrants who took their native folk music and began experimenting by altering it using instruments from their host country. The new genre quickly became popular in Britain replacing Punjabi folk singers due to it being heavily influenced in Britain by the infusion of rock music and a need to move away from the simple and repetitive Punjabi folk music. It indicated the development of a self-conscious and distinctively rebellious British Asian youth culture centred on an experiential sense of self, e.g., language, gesture, bodily signification, desires, etc., in a situation in which tensions with British culture and racist elements in British society had resulted in alienation in many minority ethnic groups, fostered a sense of need for an affirmation of a positive identity and culture, and provided a platform for British Punjabi males to assert their masculinity.

In the 1980s, distributed by record labels such as Multitone Records, bhangra artists were selling over 30,000 cassettes a week in the UK, but no artists reached the Top 40 UK chart despite these artists outselling popular British ones; most of the bhangra cassette sales were not through the large UK record stores, whose sales were those recorded by the Official UK Charts Company for creating their rankings.

The group Alaap was formed in 1977, co-founded by Channi Singh and Harjeet Gandhi who both hailed from Southall, a Punjabi area in London. Their album &quot;Teri Chunni De Sitaray&quot; was released in 1982 by Multitone. Alaap was considered the first and original superstar bhangra band formed in the United Kingdom. Channi Singh has been awarded the OBE by the Queen for his services to Bhangra music and services/charity for the British Asian community. Co-founder Harjeet Gandhi died in 2003.

The 1980s is commonly known as the golden age, or the age of bhangra music, which lasted roughly from 1985 to 1993. The primary emphasis during these times was on the melody/riff, played out usually on a synthesizer, harmonium, accordion or guitar. Folk instruments were rarely used.

One of the biggest bhangra stars of the last several decades is Malkit Singh and his band Golden Star. Singh was born in June 1963 in the village of Hussainpur in Punjab. He attended the Lyallpur Khalsa College, Jalandhar, in Punjab in 1980 to study for a bachelor of arts degree. There he met his mentor, Professor Inderjit Singh, who taught him Punjabi folk singing and bhangra dancing. Due to Singh&#x27;s tutelage, Malkit entered and won song contests during this time. In 1983, he won a gold medal at the Guru Nanak Dev University in Amritsar, Punjab, for performing his song &quot;Gurh Nalon Ishq Mitha&quot;, which later featured on his first album, &quot;Nach Gidhe Wich&quot;. The lyrics were by Tarlochan Singh Bilga and it was released in 1985. This album was created with Manager, Tarlochan Singh Bilga(TSB). The band has toured 27 countries. Malkit has been awarded the MBE by the Queen for his services to Bhangra music.

Bhangra boy band, the Sahotas, were composed of five brothers from Wolverhampton. Their music is a fusion of bhangra, rock and dance.

Heera, formed by Bhupinder Bhindi and fronted by Kumar and Dhami, was one of the most popular bands of the 1980s. 

Bands like Alaap and Heera incorporated rock-influenced beats into bhangra, because it enabled &quot;Asian youth to affirm their identities positively&quot; within the broader environment of alternative rock as an alternative way of expression. However, some believe that the progression of bhangra music created an &quot;intermezzo culture&quot; post-India&#x27;s partition, within the unitary definitions of Southeast Asians within the diaspora, thus &quot;establishing a brand new community in their home away from home&quot;.

Several other influential groups appeared around the same time, including The Saathies, Premi Group, Bhujungy Group, and Apna Sangeet. Apna Sangeet, best known for their hit &quot;Mera Yaar Vajavey Dhol&quot;, re-formed for charity in May 2009 after a break-up.

When Bhangra and General Indian sounds and lyrics were combined, British-Asian artists began incorporating them in their music. Some Asian artists such as Bally Sagoo and Talvin Singh are creating their own form of British hip-hop.

This era also brought about bhangra art, which like the bhangra music it represented was rebellious. Unlike folk music art, which consisted of a picture of the folk singer, bhangra recordings had details such as distinctive artwork, logos, clever album names and band/musician listings (who played what).

===Folk backlash===
Unlike bhangra, folk music depends on a set number of traditional melodies that may be hundreds of years old. Each new singer simply writes new lyrics using one of those melodies.

In the mid-1990s, many artists, attracted to the economics of a bandless singer only act that technology such as karaoke machines now enabled, returned to the original, traditional folk beats away from bhangra music, often incorporating more dhol drum beats and tumbi. This time also saw the rise of several young Punjabi folk singers as a backlash to bhangra music. They were aided by DJs who mixed hip-hop samples with folk singing.

Beginning around 1994, there was a trend towards the use of samples (often sampled from mainstream hip hop) mixed with traditional folk rhythm instruments, such as the tumbi and dhol. Using folk instruments and hip-hop samples, along with relatively inexpensive folk vocals imported from Punjab, Punjabi folk music was able to cause the decline of bhangra music.

Pioneering DJs instrumental in the decline of bhangra were Bally Sagoo and Panjabi MC. As DJs who were initially hired by bhangra labels to remix the original recordings on the label&#x27;s roster (OSA and Nachural respectively), they along with the record labels quickly found that remixing folk singers from India was much cheaper than working with outsourced bhangra bands.

A pioneering folk singer that was instrumental in bhangra&#x27;s demise was Jazzy B, who debuted in 1992. Having sold over 55,000 copies of his third album, &quot;Folk and Funky&quot;, he is now one of the best-selling Punjabi folk artists in the world, with a vocal style likened to that of Kuldip Manak.

Other influential folk artists include Surinder Shinda – famous for his &quot;Putt Jattan De&quot; – Harbhajan Mann, Manmohan Waris, Sarbjit Cheema, Hans Raj Hans, Sardool Sikander, B21, Paaras and Bombay Talkie.

By the end of the 1990s, bhangra music had largely declined and been replaced with Punjabi folk singers. The same folk singers which bhangra bands had replaced a decade earlier were being utilized by DJs to make relatively inexpensive live music on laptops. This &quot;folkhop&quot; genre was short lived as records could not be officially released due to nonclearance copyrights on samples used to create the &quot;beat&quot;. This continued until the end of the century. Folk-hop record labels such as Hi-Tech were investigated by BPI (British Phonographic Industry) for copyright infringement by way of uncleared samples on releases by folk DJs such as DJ Sanj.

Toward the end of the decade, bhangra continued to decline, with folk-hop artists such as Bally Sagoo and Apache Indian signing with international recording labels Sony and Island. Moreover, Multitone Records, one of the major recording labels associated with bhangra in Britain in the 1980s and 1990s, was bought by BMG. A recent Pepsi commercial launched in Britain featured South Asian actors and Punjabi folk music.
===2000s remixes===

Punjabi folk remixed with hip-hop, known as folkhop, is most often produced when folk vocals are purchased online to be remixed in a studio. Folk vocals are usually sung to traditional melodies, that are often repeated with new lyrics.

Some South Asian DJs, especially in America, have mixed Punjabi folk music with house, reggae, and hip-hop to add a different flavour to Punjabi folk. These remixes continued to gain popularity as the 1990s came to an end. 

A notable remix artist is Bally Sagoo, a Punjabi-Sikh, Anglo-Indian raised in Birmingham, England. Sagoo described his music as &quot;a bit of tablas, a bit of the Indian sound. But bring on the bass lines, bring on the funky-drummer beat, bring on the James Brown samples&quot;, to &quot;Time&quot; magazine in 1997. He was recently signed by Sony. Daler Mehndi, a Punjabi singer from India has a type of music known as &quot;folk pop&quot;. Mehndi has released tracks such as &quot;Bolo Ta Ra Ra&quot; and &quot;Ho Jayegee Balle Balle&quot;. His song &quot;Tunak Tunak Tun&quot; was released in 1998.

==Canada and the United States==
Punjabi immigrants have encouraged the growth of Punjabi folk music in the Western hemisphere rather than bhangra music. The bhangra industry has grown in North America much less than in the United Kingdom.

North American (non bhangra) folk artists such as Manmohan Waris, Jazzy Bains, Kamal Heer, Harbhajan Mann, Sarabjit Cheema, and Debi Makhsoospuri have emerged and the remix market has grown.

In 2001, Punjabi folk, and its hip-hop form, folkhop, began to exert an influence over US R&amp;B music, when Missy Elliott released the folkhop-influenced song &quot;Get Ur Freak On&quot;. In 2003, a version of Panjabi MC&#x27;s &quot;Mundian To Bach Ke&quot; (&quot;Beware of the Boys&quot;) featured U.S. rapper Jay-Z. Additionally, American rapper Pras of The Fugees recorded tracks with British alternative bhangra band Swami. American singer and actress Selena Gomez released her bhangra-influenced single &quot;Come &amp; Get It&quot; from her first solo album &quot;Stars Dance&quot; in 2013.

==Lyrics==
Bhangra lyrics, which generally cover social issues or love, are sung in Punjabi. Bhangra lyrics were generally kept deliberately simple by the creators of the genre because the youth did not understand complex lyrics. Traditional Punjabi folk lyrics are generally more complex and often tell the tales of Punjabi history. There are many bhangra songs devoted to Punjabi pride themes and Punjabi heroes. The lyrics are tributes to the cultural traditions of Punjab. In particular, many bhangra tracks have been written about Udham Singh and Bhagat Singh. Less serious topics include beautiful women with their colourful duppattas. Lyrics can also be about crops and the coming of a new season. Bhangra is sung fiercely with strong lyrics often yelling: &quot;balle balle&quot; or &quot;chakde phate&quot;, which refer to celebration and/or pride.

Notable bhangra or Punjabi lyricists include Harbans Jandu who wrote &quot;Giddhian Di Rani&quot;.

==Instruments==
Punjabi instruments contribute to bhangra. Originally this was primarily the dhol. The 20th century has brought changes to the instruments that define bhangra, to include the tumbi, sarangi, dholak (smaller than the dhol), flute, zither, fiddle, harmonium, tabla, guitar, mandolin, saxophone, synthesizer, drum set, and other Western instruments. Perhaps the most famous Bhangra instrument is the dhol. It is a double-sided barrel drum that creates the beat to which Bhangra is danced. The person who plays the instrument, the dholi, plays various beats to create the different Bhangra segments, such as Dhamaal, Jhummar, One side of the dhol has thicker skin, which creates a deeper sound, and the other side has a thinner skin, resulting in a higher-pitched sound. Two sticks are used to play the dhol instrument. The thicker stick, called the dagga, is used to play the bass side. The thinner tilli is used to play the treble side. Both sticks are usually made of wood or bamboo.

The string instruments include the guitar (both electrical), bass, sitar, tumbi, veena, violin and sarangi. The snare, toms, dhadd, dafli, dholki, and damru are the other drums. The tumbi, originally played by folk artists such as Lalchand Yamla Jatt and Kuldip Manak in true folk recordings and then notably used by Chamkila, a Punjabi folk (not bhangra) singer, is a high-tone, single-string instrument and Chimta by (Late) Alam Lohar.

==Cultural impact and resurgence of Punjabi folk music in the West==

The third and fourth generation are generally unable to speak Punjabi if their parents could hardly speak it. There is a move towards Punjabi folk music which is the purest form of Punjabi music. Much of the youth struggle to understand the lyrics, although, there are some children and young adults who have maintained their folk roots. Another reason why some fans express an anti-folk sentiment is that many folk songs were written for the dominant Jatts clan whereas Sikhs do not believe in castes, so they disapproved of Punjabi folk music. However, today with artists like Jazzy B, PMC, Sukhshinder Shinda and Diljit Dosanjh, Punjabi folk has increased in popularity although it is fused in some cases. iTunes has catalogs of many Punjabi folk singers available.

Another cause of the resurgence of Punjabi folk music is due to the increased popularity of bhangra in areas like the UK, Canada and U.S. Bhangra has become more accessible through social media platforms such as YouTube and Instagram, for the younger generation. In addition, multiple universities, across the UK, US and Canada have teams as well as academies being set up by senior dancers separate from universities. This resurgence has led to a desire for more traditional folk songs and beats, but also a learning opportunity for children of their cultures.

==Derivatives==
===Bhangragga===
Bhangragga or bhangramuffin is a term for the style of music incorporating elements of Bhangra and dancehall (or ragga, short for the word Raggamuffin) created by British Asian producers Simon and Diamond on the debut album by Apache Indian &quot;No Reservations&quot; (1993).
The sound is very percussion-heavy – a distinct holdover from Bhangra – with a propulsive beat clearly designed for dancing. The dancehall influence can be felt through the use of pre-programmed music, similar to Dancehall &quot;riddims&quot;.
Lyrically, the style features a combination of Sub-Continental-accented (usually Indian) vocals delivered in the clipped style associated with dancehall – and sometimes including the Patois of the latter style.
This style is almost exclusively a British phenomenon, as the two cultures involved in its genesis mix reasonably freely there. The most successful exponent, however, is Apache Indian, who had a worldwide hit with &quot;Boom Shack-A-Lak&quot;, which was included on the soundtrack to the film &quot;Dumb and Dumber&quot;, among others.

==See also==
*List of bhangra artists
*Music of Punjab
*Punjabi culture
*Asian Underground
*Multitone records
*Dhol
*Punjab region
*Music of the United Kingdom

==References==
==External links==

*Where Bhangra Lives
*Bhangra News, Music Videos &amp; Interviews
*www.Bhangra.org
*House Of Bhangra
* India Music – The first ever Indian Music domain and web site registered.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="0" end="7" title="Bhangra (music)" label="Bhangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="49" end="55" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="301" end="310" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="316" end="330" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="332" end="338" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="348" end="361" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479601" start="419" end="429" title="Bhangra (dance)" label="dance form"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239070" start="1019" end="1034" title="Bhujhangy Group" label="Bhujhangy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102371" start="1335" end="1357" title="Oriental Star Agencies" label="Oriental Star Agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564213" start="1552" end="1570" title="Folk music of Punjab" label="Punjabi folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722871" start="2491" end="2504" title="British Asian" label="British Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059289" start="2505" end="2518" title="youth culture" label="youth culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q371174" start="2577" end="2584" title="gesture" label="gesture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="2681" end="2687" title="racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="2732" end="2742" title="Social alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="2751" end="2773" title="Minority group" label="minority ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935118" start="2986" end="3003" title="Multitone Records" label="Multitone Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740447" start="3358" end="3363" title="Alaap (band)" label="Alaap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072540" start="3398" end="3410" title="Channi Singh" label="Channi Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83434" start="3451" end="3459" title="Southall" label="Southall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695398" start="4195" end="4207" title="Malkit Singh" label="Malkit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753945" start="4280" end="4290" title="Hussainpur" label="Hussainpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707059" start="4318" end="4341" title="Lyallpur Khalsa College" label="Lyallpur Khalsa College"/>
<link wikidata="Q33377" start="4343" end="4352" title="Jalandhar" label="Jalandhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620404" start="4641" end="4666" title="Guru Nanak Dev University" label="Guru Nanak Dev University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="4670" end="4678" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399714" start="5089" end="5096" title="Sahotas" label="Sahotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="5134" end="5147" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698073" start="5202" end="5207" title="Heera Group UK" label="Heera"/>
<link wikidata="Q85742205" start="5970" end="5982" title="Apna Sangeet" label="Apna Sangeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881398" start="6267" end="6278" title="Bally Sagoo" label="Bally Sagoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q331450" start="6283" end="6295" title="Talvin Singh" label="Talvin Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="6335" end="6342" title="Hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881398" start="7711" end="7722" title="Bally Sagoo" label="Bally Sagoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346896" start="7727" end="7737" title="Panjabi MC" label="Panjabi MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168478" start="8106" end="8113" title="Jazzy B" label="Jazzy B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694938" start="8322" end="8334" title="Kuldip Manak" label="Kuldip Manak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646359" start="8376" end="8391" title="Surinder Shinda" label="Surinder Shinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654381" start="8438" end="8452" title="Harbhajan Mann" label="Harbhajan Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750656" start="8454" end="8468" title="Manmohan Waris" label="Manmohan Waris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423522" start="8470" end="8484" title="Sarbjit Cheema" label="Sarbjit Cheema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650648" start="8486" end="8499" title="Hans Raj Hans" label="Hans Raj Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423826" start="8501" end="8517" title="Sardool Sikander" label="Sardool Sikander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834375" start="8519" end="8522" title="B21 (band)" label="B21"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940592" start="8535" end="8548" title="Bombay Talkie (band)" label="Bombay Talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053024" start="8820" end="8827" title="folkhop" label="folkhop"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="9548" end="9553" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053024" start="9702" end="9709" title="folkhop" label="folkhop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="9982" end="9988" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="9994" end="10001" title="Hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881398" start="10146" end="10157" title="Bally Sagoo" label="Bally Sagoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="10198" end="10208" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="10373" end="10384" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="10409" end="10413" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="10464" end="10468" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q464185" start="10470" end="10482" title="Daler Mehndi" label="Daler Mehndi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852806" start="10679" end="10694" title="Tunak Tunak Tun" label="Tunak Tunak Tun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750656" start="11015" end="11029" title="Manmohan Waris" label="Manmohan Waris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15929750" start="11044" end="11054" title="Kamal Heer" label="Kamal Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="11132" end="11137" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053024" start="11202" end="11209" title="folkhop" label="folkhop"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="11247" end="11254" title="contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="11267" end="11280" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504849" start="11324" end="11339" title="Get Ur Freak On" label="Get Ur Freak On"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346896" start="11369" end="11379" title="Panjabi MC" label="Panjabi MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294929" start="11393" end="11411" title="Mundian To Bach Ke" label="Mundian To Bach Ke"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="11472" end="11477" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q380634" start="11509" end="11513" title="Pras" label="Pras"/>
<link wikidata="Q159329" start="11517" end="11527" title="The Fugees" label="The Fugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653142" start="11582" end="11587" title="Swami (band)" label="Swami"/>
<link wikidata="Q83287" start="11617" end="11629" title="Selena Gomez" label="Selena Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348336" start="11675" end="11692" title="Come &amp;amp; Get It (Selena Gomez song)" label="Come &amp;amp; Get It"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410026" start="11731" end="11742" title="Stars Dance" label="Stars Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="11843" end="11850" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473141" start="12295" end="12306" title="Udham Singh" label="Udham Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q377808" start="12311" end="12323" title="Bhagat Singh" label="Bhagat Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q911648" start="12390" end="12399" title="Dupatta" label="duppattas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654330" start="12663" end="12676" title="Harbans Jandu" label="Harbans Jandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="12811" end="12815" title="dhol" label="dhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q170060" start="12909" end="12914" title="tumbi" label="tumbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q608650" start="12916" end="12923" title="sarangi" label="sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q936590" start="12925" end="12931" title="dholak" label="dholak"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="12957" end="12962" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q76239" start="12964" end="12970" title="zither" label="zither"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="12972" end="12978" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="12980" end="12989" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="12991" end="12996" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="12998" end="13004" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="13006" end="13014" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="13753" end="13759" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="13779" end="13783" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="13785" end="13790" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170060" start="13792" end="13797" title="tumbi" label="tumbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q959769" start="13799" end="13804" title="veena" label="veena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="13806" end="13812" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q608650" start="13817" end="13824" title="sarangi" label="sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="13830" end="13835" title="Snare drum" label="snare"/>
<link wikidata="Q849349" start="13837" end="13841" title="Tom-tom drum" label="toms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268673" start="13843" end="13848" title="dhadd" label="dhadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q936590" start="13857" end="13863" title="dholki" label="dholki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158229" start="13869" end="13874" title="damru" label="damru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480035" start="13949" end="13968" title="Lal Chand Yamla Jatt" label="Lalchand Yamla Jatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694938" start="13973" end="13985" title="Kuldeep Manak" label="Kuldip Manak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740048" start="14035" end="14043" title="Chamkila" label="Chamkila"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564213" start="14361" end="14379" title="Folk music of Punjab" label="Punjabi folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645980" start="14679" end="14684" title="Jat people" label="Jatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564213" start="14753" end="14771" title="Folk music of Punjab" label="Punjabi folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168478" start="14806" end="14813" title="Jazzy B" label="Jazzy B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541065" start="14820" end="14838" title="Sukhshinder Shinda" label="Sukhshinder Shinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276830" start="14843" end="14857" title="Diljit Dosanjh" label="Diljit Dosanjh"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="15209" end="15216" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="15221" end="15230" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="15607" end="15620" title="bhangramuffin" label="bhangramuffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="15648" end="15653" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="15692" end="15701" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q740911" start="15706" end="15711" title="ragga" label="ragga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15732" end="15743" title=":wikt:raggamuffin" label="Raggamuffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722871" start="15756" end="15769" title="British Asian" label="British Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q504599" start="15820" end="15833" title="Apache Indian (musician)" label="Apache Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="15888" end="15898" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q852209" start="16099" end="16105" title="riddim" label="riddim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348800" start="16161" end="16185" title="Indian English" label="Sub-Continental-accented"/>
<link wikidata="Q35939" start="16293" end="16303" title="Jamaican Patois" label="the Patois"/>
<link wikidata="Q504599" start="16495" end="16508" title="Apache Indian (musician)" label="Apache Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943437" start="16545" end="16561" title="Boom Shack-A-Lak" label="Boom Shack-A-Lak"/>
<link wikidata="Q462418" start="16624" end="16639" title="Dumb and Dumber" label="Dumb and Dumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607514" start="16676" end="16699" title="List of bhangra artists" label="List of bhangra artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942249" start="16701" end="16716" title="Music of Punjab" label="Music of Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260349" start="16718" end="16733" title="Punjabi culture" label="Punjabi culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976128" start="16735" end="16752" title="Asian Underground" label="Asian Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935118" start="16754" end="16771" title="Multitone records" label="Multitone records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="16773" end="16777" title="Dhol" label="Dhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="16779" end="16792" title="Punjab region" label="Punjab region"/>
<link wikidata="Q268673" start="16794" end="16821" title="Music of the United Kingdom" label="Music of the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3735" wikidata="Q214039" url="?curid=3735" title="Beastie Boys">
<text>The Beastie Boys were an American hip-hop/rap rock group formed in 1981 in New York City. They were composed of Adam &quot;Ad-Rock&quot; Horovitz (vocals, guitar), Adam &quot;MCA&quot; Yauch (vocals, bass), and Michael &quot;Mike D&quot; Diamond (vocals, drums). The Beastie Boys were formed out of members of experimental hardcore punk band the Young Aborigines, which was formed in 1979, with Diamond on drums, Jeremy Shatan on bass guitar, John Berry on guitar, and Kate Schellenbach later joining on percussion. When Shatan left New York City in mid-1981, Yauch replaced him on bass and the resulting band was named the Beastie Boys. Berry left shortly thereafter and was replaced by Horovitz.

After achieving local success with the 1983 comedy hip hop single &quot;Cooky Puss&quot;, the Beastie Boys made a full transition to hip hop, and Schellenbach left. They toured with Madonna in 1985 and a year later released their debut album, &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot; (1986), the first rap album to top the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart. Their second album, &quot;Paul&#x27;s Boutique&quot; (1989), composed almost entirely of samples, was a commercial failure that later received critical acclaim. &quot;Check Your Head&quot; (1992) and &quot;Ill Communication&quot; (1994) found mainstream success, followed by &quot;Hello Nasty&quot; (1998), &quot;To the 5 Boroughs&quot; (2004), &quot;The Mix-Up&quot; (2007), and &quot;Hot Sauce Committee Part Two&quot; (2011).

The Beastie Boys have sold 20 million records in the United States and had seven platinum-selling albums from 1986 to 2004. They are the biggest-selling rap group since &quot;Billboard&quot; began recording sales in 1991. In 2012, they became the third rap group to be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In the same year, Yauch died of cancer and the Beastie Boys disbanded. The remaining members have released several retrospective works, including a book, a documentary, and a career-spanning compilation album.

== History ==
=== 1979–1983: Formation and early years ===
Prior to forming the Beastie Boys, Michael Diamond was part of a number of bands such as the Walden Jazz Band, BAN, and the Young Aborigines. The Beastie Boys formed in July 1981 when the Young Aborigines bassist Jeremy Shatan left New York City for the summer and the remaining members Diamond, John Berry and Kate Schellenbach formed a new hardcore punk band with Adam Yauch.

In a 2007 interview with Charlie Rose, Yauch recalled that it was Berry who suggested the name the Beastie Boys. Although the band stated that &quot;Beastie&quot; is an acronym standing for &quot;Boys Entering Anarchistic States Towards Inner Excellence&quot;, in the Charlie Rose interview, both Yauch and Diamond acknowledged that the acronym was an &quot;afterthought&quot; conceived after the name was chosen. The band supported Bad Brains, the Dead Kennedys, the Misfits and Reagan Youth at venues such as CBGB, A7, Trude Heller&#x27;s and Max&#x27;s Kansas City, playing at the latter venue on its closing night. In November 1982, the Beastie Boys recorded the 7-inch EP &quot;Polly Wog Stew&quot; at 171A studios, an early recorded example of New York hardcore.

On November 13, 1982, the Beastie Boys played Philip Pucci&#x27;s birthday for the purposes of his short concert film, &quot;Beastie&quot;. Pucci held the concert in Bard College&#x27;s Preston Drama Dance Department Theatre. This performance marked the Beastie Boys&#x27; first on-screen appearance in a published motion picture. Pucci&#x27;s concept for &quot;Beastie&quot; was to distribute a mixture of both a half dozen 16 mm Bell &amp; Howell Filmo cameras, and 16 mm Bolex cameras to audience members and ask that they capture the Beastie Boys performance from the audience&#x27;s own point of view while a master sync sound camera filmed from the balcony of the abandoned theater where the performance was held. The opening band for that performance was the Young and the Useless, which featured Adam Horovitz as the lead singer. A one-minute clip of &quot;Beastie&quot; was subsequently excerpted and licensed by the Beastie Boys for use in the &quot;Egg Raid on Mojo&quot; segment of the &quot;Skills to Pay the Bills&quot; long-form home video released by Capitol Records. &quot;Skills to Pay the Bills&quot; later went on to be certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Berry left the group in 1982 (later forming Thwig, Big Fat Love and Bourbon Deluxe) and was replaced by Horovitz, who had become close friends with the Beastie Boys.

The band also recorded and then performed its first hip hop track, &quot;Cooky Puss&quot;, based on a prank call by the group to a Carvel Ice Cream franchise in 1983. It was a part of the new lineup&#x27;s first EP, also called &quot;Cooky Puss&quot;, which was the first piece of work that showed their incorporation of the underground rap phenomenon and the use of samples. It quickly became a hit in New York underground dance clubs and night clubs. After &quot;Beastie Revolution&quot; was later sampled in a British Airways commercial, the Beastie Boys threatened to sue them over the use of the song, and the airline immediately paid them $40,000 in royalties.

=== 1984–1987: Def Jam years and &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot; ===
Following the success of &quot;Cooky Puss&quot;, the band began to incorporate rap into their sets. They hired a DJ for their live shows, New York University student Rick Rubin, who began producing records soon thereafter. &quot;I met Mike first,&quot; Rubin recalled. &quot;I thought he was an arrogant asshole. Through spending time with the Beasties I grew to see that they had this great sense of humor. It wasn&#x27;t that they were assholes, and even if it was, they were funny with it.&quot; Rubin formed Def Jam Recordings with Russell Simmons, and approached the band about producing them for his new label. As the band was transitioning to hip hop, Schellenbach was fired in 1984, with Diamond taking over on drums. In their 2018 memoir, Ad-Rock expressed regret for firing Schellenbach, which he attributed to her not fitting with the &quot;new tough-rapper-guy identity&quot;.

The band&#x27;s 12-inch single &quot;Rock Hard&quot; (1984) was the second Def Jam record crediting Rubin as producer (the first was &quot;It&#x27;s Yours&quot; by T La Rock and Jazzy Jay). During 1985, the group was the supporting act of the Virgin Tour, Madonna&#x27;s first concert series. On July 22, 1986, the Beastie Boys opened for John Lydon&#x27;s post-Sex Pistols band Public Image Ltd., They headlined with Fishbone and Murphy&#x27;s Law with DJ Hurricane, and later in the year the group was on the &quot;Raising Hell&quot; tour with Run-DMC, Whodini, LL Cool J, and the Timex Social Club. Thanks to this exposure, &quot;Hold It Now, Hit It&quot; charted on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s US R&amp;B and dance charts. &quot;She&#x27;s on It&quot; from the &quot;Krush Groove&quot; soundtrack continued in a rap/metal vein while a double A-side 12&quot;, &quot;Paul Revere/The New Style&quot;, was released at the end of the year.

The band recorded &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot; in 1986 and released it on November 15, 1986. The album was favorably reviewed by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine. &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot; became one of the best-selling rap albums of the 1980s and the first rap album to go number 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart, where it stayed for five weeks. It also reached number 2 on the Top R&amp;B album chart. It was Def Jam&#x27;s fastest selling debut record to date and sold over nine-million copies. The fourth single, &quot;(You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party!)&quot;, reached number 7 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. Although the group has sold over 26-million records in the US, this is their only single to peak in the US top ten or top twenty. The accompanying video (directed by Ric Menello and Adam Dubin) became an MTV staple. Another song from the album, &quot;No Sleep till Brooklyn&quot;, peaked at number 14 on the UK Singles Chart.

The band took the &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot; tour around the world the following year. The tour was troubled by lawsuits and arrests, with the band accused of provoking the crowd. This culminated in a notorious gig at the Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool, England, on May 30, 1987, that erupted into a riot approximately 10 minutes after the group hit the stage and the arrest of Adam Horovitz by Merseyside Police. He was charged with assault causing grievous bodily harm.

===1988–1989: Move to Capitol Records and &quot;Paul&#x27;s Boutique&quot;===
In 1988, the Beastie Boys appeared in &quot;Tougher Than Leather&quot;, a film directed by Rubin as a star vehicle for Run-D.M.C. and Def Jam Recordings. After Def Jam stopped paying them for work they had already done and were owed money for, the Beastie Boys left Def Jam and signed with Capitol Records.

The second Beastie Boys album, &quot;Paul&#x27;s Boutique&quot;, was released on July 25, 1989. Produced by the Dust Brothers, it blends eclectic samples and has been described as an early work of experimental hip hop. It failed to match the sales of &quot;Licensed to Ill,&quot; reaching number 14 on the US album charts,&quot;&quot; but later attracted acclaim; &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked it number 156 on its list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. It also made it onto the Apple Music 100 Best Albums list at number 48.

===1990–1996: &quot;Check Your Head&quot; and &quot;Ill Communication&quot;===

&quot;Check Your Head&quot; was recorded in the band&#x27;s G-Son studio in Atwater Village, California, and released on its Grand Royal record label. The band was influenced to play instruments on this album by Dutch group Urban Dance Squad; with Mike D on drums, Yauch on bass, Horovitz on guitar and Mark Ramos Nishita (&quot;Keyboard Money Mark&quot;) on keyboards. Mario Caldato, Jr., who had helped in the production of &quot;Paul&#x27;s Boutique&quot;, engineered the record and became a longtime collaborator. &quot;Check Your Head&quot; was released in 1992 and was certified double Platinum in the US and peaked at number 10 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. The single &quot;So What&#x27;cha Want&quot; reached number 93 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and charted on both the Rap and Modern Rock Chart, while the album&#x27;s first single, &quot;Pass the Mic&quot;, peaked at number 38 on the Hot Dance Music chart. The album also introduced a more experimental direction, with funk and jazz inspired songs including &quot;Lighten Up&quot; and &quot;Something&#x27;s Got to Give&quot;. The band returned to their hardcore punk roots for the song &quot;Time for Livin&#x27;&quot;, a cover of a 1974 Sly and the Family Stone song. The addition of instruments and the harder rock sound of the album could be considered a precursor to the nu metal genre of music to come out in the later half of the 1990s.

The Beastie Boys signed an eclectic roster of artists to their Grand Royal label, including Luscious Jackson, Sean Lennon, and Australian artist Ben Lee. The group owned Grand Royal Records until 2001. Grand Royal&#x27;s first independent release was Luscious Jackson&#x27;s album &quot;In Search of Manny&quot; in 1993. Also in 1993, the band contributed the track &quot;It&#x27;s the New Style&quot; (with DJ Hurricane) to the AIDS benefit album &quot;No Alternative&quot;, produced by the Red Hot Organization.

The Beastie Boys also published &quot;Grand Royal Magazine&quot;, which ran for six issues between 1993 and 1997, the first issue featuring a cover story on Bruce Lee, artwork by George Clinton, and interviews with Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and A Tribe Called Quest&#x27;s MC Q-Tip. The 1995 issue of the magazine contained a piece on the mullet. The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; cites this as the first published use of the term, along with the lyrics from the band&#x27;s 1994 song, &quot;Mullet Head&quot;. That term was not heard in the 1980s, even though that decade has retroactively been hailed as the mullet&#x27;s peak in popularity. The &quot;OED&quot; says that the term was &quot;apparently coined, and certainly popularized, by US hip-hop group Beastie Boys&quot;.

&quot;Ill Communication&quot;, released in 1994, saw the Beastie Boys&#x27; return to the top of the charts when the album debuted at number 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and peaked at number 2 on the R&amp;B/hip hop album chart. The single &quot;Sabotage&quot; became a hit on the modern rock charts and the music video, directed by Spike Jonze, received extensive play on MTV. Also in 1994, the band released &quot;Some Old Bullshit&quot;, featuring the band&#x27;s early independent material, which made it to number 46 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Independent Albums chart.

The Beastie Boys headlined at Lollapalooza—an American travelling music festival—in 1994, together with the Smashing Pumpkins. In addition, the band performed three concerts (in Los Angeles, New York City, and Washington, D.C.) to raise money for the Milarepa Fund and dedicated the royalties from &quot;Shambala&quot; and &quot;Bodhisattva Vow&quot; from &quot;Ill Communication&quot; to the cause. The Milarepa Fund aims to raise awareness of Tibetan human rights issues and the exile of the Dalai Lama. In 1996, Yauch organized the largest rock benefit show since 1985&#x27;s Live Aid – the Tibetan Freedom Concert, a two-day festival at Golden Gate Park in San Francisco that attracted over 100,000 attendees.

In 1995, the popularity of the Beastie Boys was underlined when tickets for an arena tour went on sale in the US and Madison Square Garden and Chicago&#x27;s Rosemont Horizon sold out within 30 minutes. One dollar from each ticket sold went through Milarepa to local charities in each city on the tour. The Beastie Boys toured South America and Southeast Asia for the first time. The band also released &quot;Aglio e Olio&quot;, a collection of eight songs lasting just 11 minutes harking back to their punk roots, in 1995. &quot;The In Sound from Way Out!&quot;, a collection of previously released jazz/funk instrumentals, was released on Grand Royal in 1996 with the title and artwork a homage to an album by electronic pop music pioneers Perrey and Kingsley.

In 1992, the Beastie Boys decided to sample portions of the sound recording of &quot;Choir&quot; by James Newton in various renditions of their song &quot;Pass the Mic&quot;. The band did not obtain a license from Newton to use the composition. Pursuant to their license from ECM Records, the Beastie Boys digitally sampled the opening six seconds of Newton&#x27;s sound recording of &quot;Choir&quot;, and repeated this six-second sample as a background element throughout their song. Newton brought suit, claiming that the band infringed his copyright in the underlying composition of &quot;Choir&quot;. The district court granted the Beastie Boys summary judgment. The district court said that no license was required because the three-note segment of &quot;Choir&quot; lacked the requisite originality and was therefore not copyrightable. The decision was affirmed on appeal.

===1997–2001: &quot;Hello Nasty&quot;===
The Beastie Boys began work on the album &quot;Hello Nasty&quot; at the G-Son studios, Los Angeles in 1995, but continued to produce and record it in New York City after Yauch moved to Manhattan in 1996. The album displayed a substantial shift in musical feel, with the addition of Mix Master Mike. The album featured bombastic beats, rap samples, and experimental sounds. Released on July 14, 1998, &quot;Hello Nasty&quot; earned first week sales of 681,000 in the US and went straight to number 1 in the US, the UK, Germany, Australia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, and Sweden. The album achieved number 2 rank on the charts in Canada and Japan, and reached top-ten chart positions in Austria, Switzerland, Ireland, Belgium, Finland, France and Israel.

The Beastie Boys won two Grammy Awards in 1999, receiving the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album for &quot;Hello Nasty&quot; as well as the Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for &quot;Intergalactic&quot;. This was the first time that a band had won awards in both rap and alternative categories.

At the 1998 MTV Video Music Awards, the Beastie Boys won the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award for their contributions to music videos. The following year at the 1999 MTV Video Music Awards, they also won the award for Best Hip Hop Video for their hit song &quot;Intergalactic&quot;. The Beastie Boys used both appearances at the Video Music Awards to make politically charged speeches of considerable length to the sizable MTV audiences. At the 1998 ceremony, Yauch addressed the issue of Muslim people being stereotyped as terrorists and that most people of the Muslim faith are not terrorists. These comments were made in the wake of the US Embassy bombings that had occurred in both Kenya and Tanzania only a month earlier. At the 1999 ceremony in the wake of the horror stories that were coming out of Woodstock 99, Adam Horovitz addressed the fact that there had been many cases of sexual assaults and rapes at the festival, suggesting the need for bands and festivals to pay much more attention to the security details at their concerts.

The Beastie Boys started an arena tour in 1998. Through Ian C. Rogers, the band made live downloads of their performances available for their fans, but were temporarily thwarted when Capitol Records removed them from its website. The Beastie Boys was one of the first bands who made MP3 downloads available on their website. The group got a high level of response and public awareness as a result including a published article in &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; on the band&#x27;s efforts.

The Beastie Boys released &quot;The Sounds of Science&quot;, a two-CD anthology of their works in 1999. This album reached number  19 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, number 18 in Canada, and number 14 on the R&amp;B/Hip Hop chart. The one new song, the single &quot;Alive&quot;, reached number 11 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock chart.

In 2000, the Beastie Boys had planned to co-headline the Rhyme and Reason Tour with Rage Against the Machine and Busta Rhymes, but the tour was canceled when drummer Mike D sustained a serious injury due to a bicycle accident. The official diagnosis was fifth-degree acromioclavicular joint dislocation; he needed surgery and extensive rehabilitation. By the time he recovered, Rage Against the Machine had disbanded, although they would reunite seven years later.

Under the name Country Mike, Mike D recorded an album, &quot;Country Mike&#x27;s Greatest Hits&quot;, and gave it to friends and family for Christmas in 2000. Adam &quot;Ad-Rock&quot; Horovitz&#x27;s side project BS 2000 released &quot;Simply Mortified&quot; in 2001. In October 2001, after the September 11, 2001 attacks, the Beastie Boys organized and headlined the New Yorkers Against Violence Concert at the Hammerstein Ballroom.

===2002–2008: &quot;To the 5 Boroughs&quot; and &quot;The Mix-Up&quot;===

In 2002, Adam Yauch started building a new studio facility, Oscilloscope Laboratories, in downtown Manhattan, New York and the band started work on a new album there. The band released a protest song, &quot;In a World Gone Mad&quot;, against the 2003 Iraq war as a free download on several websites, including the Milarepa website, the MTV website, MoveOn.org, and Win Without War. The 19th and 20th Tibetan Freedom Concerts were held in Tokyo and Taipei, the Beastie Boys&#x27; first Taiwan appearance. The Beastie Boys also headlined the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival.

Their single, &quot;Ch-Check It Out&quot;, debuted on &quot;The O.C.&quot; in the season 1 episode &quot;The Vegas&quot;, which aired April 28, 2004.

&quot;To the 5 Boroughs&quot; was released worldwide on June 15, 2004. It was the first album the band produced themselves and reached number 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; albums chart, number 2 in the UK and Australia, and number 3 in Germany. The first single from the album, &quot;Ch-Check It Out&quot;, reached number 1 in Canada and on the US Modern Rock Tracks chart.
The album was the cause of some controversy with allegations that it installed spyware when inserted into the CD drive of a computer. The band denied this allegation, defending that there is no copy protection software on the albums sold in the US and UK. While there is Macrovision CDS-200 copy protection software installed on European copies of the album, this is standard practice for all European releases on EMI/Capitol Records released in Europe, and it does not install spyware or any form of permanent software.

The band stated in mid-2006 that they were writing material for their next album and would be producing it themselves.
Speaking to British music weekly &quot;NME&quot; (April 26, 2007), Diamond revealed that a new album was to be called &quot;The Mix-Up&quot;. Despite initial confusion regarding whether the album would have lyrics as opposed to being purely instrumental, the Mic-To-Mic blog reported that Capitol Records had confirmed it would be strictly instrumental and erroneously reported a release date scheduled for July 10, 2007. (The album was eventually released June 26, as originally reported.) On May 1, 2007, this was further cemented by an e-mail sent to those on the band&#x27;s mailing list – explicitly stating that the album would be all instrumental:

The band subsequently confirmed the new album and announced a short tour that focused on festivals as opposed to a traditional tour, including the likes of Sónar (Spain), Roskilde (Denmark), Hurricane/Southside (Germany), Bestival (Isle of Wight), Electric Picnic (Ireland) and Open&#x27;er Festival (Poland). The Beastie Boys performed at the UK leg of Live Earth July 7, 2007 at Wembley Stadium, London with &quot;Sabotage&quot;, &quot;So What&#x27;cha Want&quot;, &quot;Intergalactic&quot;, and &quot;Sure Shot&quot;.

They worked with Reverb, a non-profit environmental organization, on their 2007 summer tour, and headlined the Langerado Music Festival in South Florida on Friday, March 7, 2008. The band won a Grammy for &quot;The Mix-Up&quot; in the &quot;Best Pop Instrumental Album&quot; category at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards in 2008.

===2009–2012: &quot;Hot Sauce Committee&quot;===

In February 2009, Yauch revealed their forthcoming new album had taken the band&#x27;s sound in a &quot;bizarre&quot; new direction, saying &quot;It&#x27;s a combination of playing and sampling stuff as we&#x27;re playing, and also sampling pretty obscure records.&quot; The tentative title for the record was &quot;Tadlock&#x27;s Glasses&quot;, of which Yauch explained the inspiration behind the title:

On May 25, 2009, it was announced during an interview on &quot;Late Night with Jimmy Fallon&quot; that the name of their new album would be &quot;Hot Sauce Committee&quot; and was set for release on September 15 (with the track listing of the album announced through their mailing list on June 23). The album included a collaboration with Santigold who co-wrote and sang with the band on the track &quot;Don&#x27;t Play No Game That I Can&#x27;t Win&quot;.

In June, the group appeared at Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival and performed the new single from the album titled &quot;Too Many Rappers&quot; alongside rapper Nas who appears on the track. It was the last live performance by the Beastie Boys as a trio. The group would have toured the UK later in the year in support of the new record.

Speaking to &quot;Drowned in Sound&quot;, the Beastie Boys revealed that Part 2 was done. Mike D also hinted it may be released via unusual means:

On July 20, Yauch announced on the band&#x27;s official YouTube channel and through the fan mailing list, the cancellation of several tour dates and the postponement of the new album due to the discovery of a cancerous tumor in his parotid gland and a lymph node. The group also had to cancel their co-headlining gig at the Osheaga Festival in Montreal and another headlining spot for the first night of the All Points West Festival in Jersey City, New Jersey.

In late October 2010, the Beastie Boys sent out two emails regarding the status of &quot;Hot Sauce Committee&quot; Pts. 1 and 2 to their online mailing list. An email dated October 18 read: &quot;Although we regret to inform you that &quot;Hot Sauce Committee Part 1&quot; will continue to be delayed indefinitely, &quot;Hot Sauce Committee Part 2&quot; will be released on time as originally planned in spring of 2011.&quot; One week later, a second email was sent out, reading as follows:

The official release dates were April 27, 2011, for Japan; April 29 in the UK and Europe, and May 3, 2011, in the US. The third single for the album &quot;Make Some Noise&quot; was made available for download on April 11, 2011, as well as a limited edition 7-inch vinyl single for Record Store Day five days later with a Passion Pit remix of the track as a b-side. The track was leaked online on April 6 and subsequently made available via their blog.

On April 22, the Beastie Boys emailed out the cryptic message &quot;This Sat, 10:35 am EST – Just listen, listen, listen to the beat box&quot;. A day later, they live streamed their album online via beatbox inside Madison Square Garden.

The band was announced as an inductee into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in December 2011. They were inducted by Chuck D and LL Cool J on April 14, 2012. Yauch was too sick to attend the ceremony, having been admitted to NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital the same day, therefore the group didn&#x27;t perform; instead Black Thought, Travie from Gym Class Heroes and Kid Rock performed a medley of their songs. Diamond and Horovitz accepted and read a letter that Yauch had written.

===2012–present: Deaths of Yauch and Berry, and disbandment===
On May 4, 2012, Yauch died from cancer at the age of 47. Mike D told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; that the Beastie Boys had recorded new music in late 2011, but did not say if these recordings would be released. He also said that the Beastie Boys would likely disband due to the death of MCA, though he was open to making new music with Ad-Rock and that &quot;Yauch would genuinely want us to try whatever crazy thing we wanted but never got around to&quot;. In June 2014, Mike D confirmed that he and Ad-Rock would not make music under the Beastie Boys name again.

The founding Beastie Boys guitarist John Berry died on May 19, 2016, aged 52, as a result of frontotemporal dementia, following several years of ill health. He was credited with naming the band and played guitar on the first EP. The first Beastie Boys show took place at Berry&#x27;s loft.

Yauch&#x27;s will forbids the use of Beastie Boys music in advertisements. In June 2014, the Beastie Boys won a lawsuit against Monster Energy for using their music in a commercial without permission. They were awarded $1.7 million in damages and $668,000 for legal fees.

In October 2018, Mike D and Ad-Rock released a memoir, &quot;Beastie Boys Book&quot;, recounting events throughout the group&#x27;s history. The book was adapted into a documentary in April 2020, &quot;Beastie Boys Story&quot;, directed by Spike Jonze and premiered on Apple TV+. The book and documentary were also complemented by the compilation album &quot;Beastie Boys Music&quot;, released in October 2020.

== Activism ==

In 1994, Yauch and activist Erin Potts organized the Tibetan Freedom Concert in order to raise awareness of humans rights abuses by the Chinese government on the Tibetan people. Yauch became aware of this after hiking in Nepal and speaking with Tibetan refugees. The events became annual, and shortly after went international with acts such as Live, Mike Mills and Michael Stipe of R.E.M., Rage Against the Machine, the Smashing Pumpkins, and U2.

==Musical style and influences==
Originally a hardcore punk band, the Beastie Boys had largely abandoned the genre in favor of hip hop and rap rock by the time work began on their debut studio album &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot;. The group mixed elements of hip hop, punk, funk, electro, jazz and Latin music into their music. They have also been described as alternative hip hop and punk rap.

==Legacy, influence and cultural impact==
Around the time of the release of their debut album, &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot;, Mike D started to appear on stage and in publicity photographs wearing a large Volkswagen emblem attached to a chain-link necklace. This started a rash of thefts of the emblem from vehicles around the world as fans tried to emulate him. A controversial concert in Columbus, Georgia, in 1987 led to the passage of a lewdness ordinance in that city.

The Beastie Boys are influential in the hip hop and rock music scenes, with artists such as Eminem, Rage Against the Machine, Hed PE, , Sublime, and Blur citing them as an influence. In the 2022 book &quot;What&#x27;s That Sound?: An Introduction to Rock Music and Its History&quot;, music journalists Andrew Flory and John Covach surmised &quot;perhaps the Beastie Boys will prove to be the Elvises of rap—the inevitable white catalysts necessary for exploding black music innovations into Anglo ears.&quot;

The Beastie Boys have had four albums reach the top of the &quot;Billboard&quot; album charts (&quot;Licensed to Ill&quot;, &quot;Ill Communication&quot;, &quot;Hello Nasty&quot; and &quot;To the 5 Boroughs&quot;) since 1986. In the November 2004 issue, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; named &quot;Sabotage&quot; the 475th song on their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list.
In their April 2005 issue, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked them number 77 on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. VH1 ranked them number 89 on their list of their 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. On September 27, 2007, it was announced that the Beastie Boys were one of the nine nominees for the 2008 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Inductions. In December 2011, they were announced to be official 2012 inductees.

The Beastie Boys have many high-profile longtime fans, including Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) president Dana White, who has a bass guitar signed by all three members and a copy of &quot;Beastie Boys Book&quot; in his office. Speaking on the death of Adam Yauch, White said, &quot;I seriously haven&#x27;t been impacted by a death in a long time like I was with the Beastie Boys&quot;. Actor Seth Rogen, who appeared in the video for &quot;Make Some Noise&quot;, also said, &quot;I&#x27;m a huge Beastie Boys fan and they just called and asked if I wanted to be a part of it, and I said yes without hesitation. I didn&#x27;t need to hear anything. I didn&#x27;t need to see anything, any concepts. I was just like, &#x27;I will literally do anything you ask me to do&#x27;&quot;. Ben Stiller was seen in the crowd for the DVD release &quot;Awesome; I Fuckin&#x27; Shot That!&quot; and featured Horovitz in his movie &quot;While We&#x27;re Young&quot;, where he said, &quot;I&#x27;m a huge Beastie Boys fan, so doing that, for me, was beyond anything&quot;. Eminem was highly influenced by the Beastie Boys and cited them alongside LL Cool J as being the reason he got into rap. During an interview with MTV after the death of Yauch, he said, &quot;Adam Yauch brought a lot of positivity into the world and I think it&#x27;s obvious to anyone how big of an influence the Beastie Boys were on me and so many others. They are trailblazers and pioneers and Adam will be sorely missed. My thoughts and prayers are with his family, Mike D., and Ad-Rock.&quot; His album cover for &quot;Kamikaze&quot; paid homage to &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot; and he also paid homage in his &quot;Berzerk&quot; video. In an interview with Rolling Stone, &quot;Beavis and Butt-Head&quot; creator Mike Judge acknowledged he was a fan of the band, citing his favorite song as &quot;Fight for Your Right&quot;, as the Beastie Boys appeared on &quot;Beavis and Butt-Head&quot; on numerous occasions. Kid Rock wrote an in-depth tribute to Yauch after being influenced by the band, which said, &quot;I thought I was the 4th member of Beastie Boys in 7th grade. You couldn&#x27;t tell me I wasn&#x27;t. The first time I ever saw them on stage was a very early show of theirs before &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot; came out, opening for Run DMC at Joe Louis Arena. My jaw dropped to the floor!&quot; In 2020, &quot;Spin&quot; ranked the Beastie Boys as the 12th-most influential artist of the previous 35 years.

==Tributes==
In 2022, the New York City Council voted to rename the intersection of Ludlow and Rivington streets in Manhattan&#x27;s Lower East Side—the location of the &quot;Paul&#x27;s Boutique&quot; album cover—&quot;Beastie Boys Square&quot;. The vote was the result of a grassroots campaign started in 2013 by historian LeRoy McCarthy. The renaming was voted down when first proposed in 2014, but it passed on July 14, 2022. The square was renamed on September 9, 2023, coinciding with the 50th anniversary of hip hop.

==Legal issues==

In 2003, the Beastie Boys were involved in the landmark sampling decision &quot;Newton v. Diamond&quot;. In that case, a federal judge ruled that the band was not liable for sampling James Newton&#x27;s &quot;Choir&quot; in their track &quot;Pass the Mic&quot;. The sample used is the six-second flute stab. In short, the Beastie Boys cleared the sample but obtained only the rights to use the sound recording and not the composition rights to the song &quot;Choir&quot;. In the decision, the judge found that:

==Members==

Members
* Mike D – vocals, drums (1981–2012)
* Kate Schellenbach – drums, percussion, backing vocals (1981–1984)
* John Berry – guitars (1981–1982; died 2016)
* MCA – vocals, bass (1981–2012; his death)
* Ad-Rock – vocals, guitars (1982–2012)

Touring musicians
* DJ Double R (Rick Rubin) – disc jockey (1984–1985)
* Sam Sever  – disc jockey (1986)
* Doctor Dré – disc jockey (1986)
* DJ Hurricane – disc jockey, backing vocals (1986–1997)
* Eric Bobo – percussion, drums (1992–1996)
* Money Mark (Mark Ramos-Nishita) – keyboards, vocals (1992–2012)
* Amery &quot;AWOL&quot; Smith – drums, backing vocals, percussion (1992–1998)
* Alfredo Ortiz – drums, percussion (1996–2012)
* Mix Master Mike – disc jockey, backing vocals (1998–2012)
===Timeline===
====Touring Members Timeline====
==Discography==
Studio albums
* &quot;Licensed to Ill&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Paul&#x27;s Boutique&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Check Your Head&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Ill Communication&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Hello Nasty&quot; (1998)
* &quot;To the 5 Boroughs&quot; (2004)
* &quot;The Mix-Up&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Hot Sauce Committee Part Two&quot; (2011)

==Tours==
* The Virgin Tour (1985) (supporting Madonna)
* Raising Hell Tour (1986) (supporting Run-D.M.C.)
* Licensed to Ill Tour (1987) (with Public Enemy)
* Together Forever Tour (1987) (with Run-D.M.C.)
* Check Your Head Tour (1992) (with Cypress Hill, Rollins Band, Firehose, and Basehead)
* Lollapolooza (1994)
* Ill Communication Tour (1994–1995)
* In the Round Tour (1998–1999) (with A Tribe Called Quest and Money Mark)
* To the 5 Boroughs Tour (2004)
* The Mix-Up Tour (2007–2008)

==Awards and nominations==
;Grammy Awards
|1992
|&quot;Check Your Head&quot;
|Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|-
|1995
|&quot;Sabotage&quot;
|Best Hard Rock Performance
|-
|Rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|1999
|&quot;Intergalactic&quot;
|Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|-
|&quot;Hello Nasty&quot;
|Best Alternative Music Album
|-
|2001
|&quot;Alive&quot;
|Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|2005
|&quot;Ch-Check It Out&quot;
|Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|-
|&quot;To The 5 Boroughs&quot;
|Best Rap Album
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|2008
|&quot;Off the Grid&quot;
|Best Pop Instrumental Performance
|-
|&quot;The Mix-Up&quot;
|Best Contemporary Instrumental Album
|-
|2010
|&quot;Too Many Rappers&quot; 
|Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|}

;MTV Video Music Awards
|rowspan=&quot;5&quot;|1994
|rowspan=&quot;5&quot;|&quot;Sabotage&quot;
|Video of the Year
|-
|Best Group Video
|-
|Breakthrough Video
|-
|Best Direction 
|-
|Viewer&#x27;s Choice
|-
|1998
|Beastie Boys
|Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award
|-
|1999
|&quot;Intergalactic&quot;
|Best Hip-Hop Video
|-
|2009
|&quot;Sabotage&quot;
|Best Video (That Should Have Won a Moonman)
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|2011
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|&quot;Make Some Noise&quot;
|Video of the Year
|-
|Best Direction 
|}

;MTV Europe Music Awards
|1994
|Beastie Boys
|Best Group
|-
|rowspan=&quot;4&quot;|1998
|&quot;Intergalactic&quot;
|Best Video
|-
|&quot;Hello Nasty&quot;
|Best Album
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|Beastie Boys
|Best Group
|-
|Best Hip-Hop
|-
|1999
|Beastie Boys
|Best Hip-Hop
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|2004
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|Beastie Boys
|Best Group
|-
|Best Hip-Hop
|-
|2011
|&quot;Make Some Noise&quot;
|Best Video
|}

;MTV Video Music Awards Japan
|2005
|&quot;Ch-Check It Out&quot;
|Best Hip-Hop Video
|-
|2009
|Beastie Boys
|MTV Street Icon Award
|}

== Filmography ==
* &quot;Beastie&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Krush Groove&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Tougher Than Leather&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Futurama&quot; episode &quot;Hell Is Other Robots&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Awesome; I Fuckin&#x27; Shot That!&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Fight for Your Right Revisited&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Beastie Boys Story&quot; (2020)

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* 
* Beastie Boys Lyrics Annotated – Beastie Boys lyrics laid out with annotated comments explaining popular culture and historical references as well as known samples.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="4" end="16" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="34" end="41" title="hip-hop" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q877693" start="42" end="50" title="rap rock" label="rap rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q349799" start="112" end="145" title="Ad-Rock" label="Adam &amp;quot;Ad-Rock&amp;quot; Horovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q344784" start="164" end="190" title="Adam Yauch" label="Adam &amp;quot;MCA&amp;quot; Yauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706308" start="211" end="245" title="Mike D" label="Michael &amp;quot;Mike D&amp;quot; Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="323" end="336" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467756" start="443" end="453" title="John Berry (Beastie Boys)" label="John Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813331" start="469" end="486" title="Kate Schellenbach" label="Kate Schellenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q602646" start="743" end="757" title="comedy hip hop" label="comedy hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689934" start="771" end="781" title="Cooky Puss" label="Cooky Puss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="832" end="839" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="881" end="888" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073460" start="948" end="963" title="Licensed to Ill" label="Licensed to Ill"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1009" end="1034" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q977418" start="1068" end="1088" title="Paul&amp;#x27;s Boutique" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s Boutique"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="1131" end="1138" title="Sampling (music)" label="samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q608507" start="1209" end="1224" title="Check Your Head" label="Check Your Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096393" start="1248" end="1265" title="Ill Communication" label="Ill Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035160" start="1323" end="1334" title="Hello Nasty" label="Hello Nasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q897841" start="1355" end="1372" title="To the 5 Boroughs" label="To the 5 Boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527278" start="1393" end="1403" title="The Mix-Up" label="The Mix-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933719" start="1428" end="1456" title="Hot Sauce Committee Part Two" label="Hot Sauce Committee Part Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="1553" end="1561" title="Music recording sales certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1647" end="1656" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="1759" end="1785" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706308" start="2092" end="2107" title="Mike D" label="Michael Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961481" start="2150" end="2156" title="Walden School (New York City)" label="Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467756" start="2353" end="2363" title="John Berry (Beastie Boys)" label="John Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813331" start="2368" end="2385" title="Kate Schellenbach" label="Kate Schellenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="2399" end="2412" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q344784" start="2423" end="2433" title="Adam Yauch" label="Adam Yauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q715515" start="2461" end="2473" title="Charlie Rose" label="Charlie Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="2794" end="2806" title="backronym" label="afterthought"/>
<link wikidata="Q798671" start="2869" end="2879" title="Bad Brains" label="Bad Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="2885" end="2898" title="Dead Kennedys" label="Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q311785" start="2904" end="2911" title="Misfits (band)" label="Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464456" start="2916" end="2928" title="Reagan Youth" label="Reagan Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022965" start="2947" end="2951" title="CBGB" label="CBGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157270" start="2957" end="2976" title="Trude Heller&amp;#x27;s" label="Trude Heller&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458004" start="2981" end="3003" title="Max&amp;#x27;s Kansas City" label="Max&amp;#x27;s Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="3103" end="3109" title="7-inch" label="7-inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907630" start="3119" end="3133" title="Polly Wog Stew" label="Polly Wog Stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983116" start="3186" end="3203" title="New York hardcore" label="New York hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="3372" end="3384" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q815669" start="3637" end="3654" title="Bell &amp;amp; Howell" label="Bell &amp;amp; Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q689975" start="3680" end="3685" title="Bolex" label="Bolex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990141" start="3968" end="3993" title="the Young and the Useless" label="the Young and the Useless"/>
<link wikidata="Q349799" start="4010" end="4023" title="Ad-Rock" label="Adam Horovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="4273" end="4288" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689934" start="4658" end="4668" title="Cooky Puss" label="Cooky Puss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394256" start="4687" end="4697" title="prank call" label="prank call"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047520" start="4716" end="4732" title="Carvel (restaurant)" label="Carvel Ice Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="4922" end="4925" title="rap" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="5098" end="5113" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="5456" end="5475" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q587361" start="5484" end="5494" title="Rick Rubin" label="Rick Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q654283" start="5830" end="5848" title="Def Jam Recordings" label="Def Jam Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q962378" start="5854" end="5869" title="Russell Simmons" label="Russell Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939699" start="6245" end="6254" title="Rock Hard (song)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q647789" start="6372" end="6381" title="T La Rock" label="T La Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194121" start="6386" end="6395" title="Jazzy Jay" label="Jazzy Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414716" start="6447" end="6462" title="the Virgin Tour" label="the Virgin Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="6464" end="6471" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="6547" end="6557" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="6570" end="6581" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q845265" start="6587" end="6604" title="Public Image Ltd." label="Public Image Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q902881" start="6626" end="6634" title="Fishbone" label="Fishbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953822" start="6639" end="6656" title="Murphy&amp;#x27;s Law (band)" label="Murphy&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700428" start="6662" end="6674" title="DJ Hurricane" label="DJ Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="6754" end="6761" title="Run-DMC" label="Run-DMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109520" start="6763" end="6770" title="Whodini" label="Whodini"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="6772" end="6781" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q194694" start="6791" end="6808" title="Timex Social Club" label="Timex Social Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491899" start="6937" end="6953" title="She&amp;#x27;s on It" label="She&amp;#x27;s on It"/>
<link wikidata="Q626455" start="6975" end="6987" title="Krush Groove" label="Krush Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153185" start="7073" end="7084" title="Paul Revere (song)" label="Paul Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073460" start="7168" end="7183" title="Licensed to Ill" label="Licensed to Ill"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="7278" end="7291" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="7437" end="7462" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282361" start="7678" end="7722" title="(You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party!)" label="(You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="7757" end="7786" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993286" start="7954" end="7965" title="Ric Menello" label="Ric Menello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678992" start="7970" end="7980" title="Adam Dubin" label="Adam Dubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877532" start="8039" end="8061" title="No Sleep till Brooklyn" label="No Sleep till Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="8096" end="8112" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374081" start="8338" end="8368" title="Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool" label="Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820586" start="8511" end="8528" title="Merseyside Police" label="Merseyside Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996049" start="8711" end="8731" title="Tougher Than Leather (film)" label="Tougher Than Leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601296" start="8769" end="8781" title="star vehicle" label="star vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="8786" end="8796" title="Run-D.M.C." label="Run-D.M.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="8957" end="8972" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q977418" start="9012" end="9032" title="Paul&amp;#x27;s Boutique" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s Boutique"/>
<link wikidata="Q765119" start="9087" end="9100" title="Dust Brothers" label="Dust Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="9121" end="9128" title="Sampling (music)" label="samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q438503" start="9172" end="9192" title="experimental hip hop" label="experimental hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="9405" end="9436" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056642" start="9463" end="9474" title="Apple Music" label="Apple Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q608507" start="9597" end="9612" title="Check Your Head" label="Check Your Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q132235828" start="9651" end="9663" title="G-Son Studios" label="G-Son studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q758277" start="9667" end="9694" title="Atwater Village, California" label="Atwater Village, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330733" start="9716" end="9727" title="Grand Royal" label="Grand Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300591" start="9815" end="9832" title="Urban Dance Squad" label="Urban Dance Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609235" start="9920" end="9939" title="Money Mark" label="Keyboard Money Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293384" start="9961" end="9979" title="Mario Caldato, Jr." label="Mario Caldato, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7549585" start="10277" end="10298" title="So What&amp;#x27;cha Want" label="So What&amp;#x27;cha Want"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="10392" end="10409" title="Alternative Songs" label="Modern Rock Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142432" start="10454" end="10466" title="Pass the Mic" label="Pass the Mic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="10586" end="10590" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="10595" end="10599" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q608507" start="10658" end="10686" title="Something&amp;#x27;s Got to Give (song)" label="Something&amp;#x27;s Got to Give"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133807" start="10806" end="10830" title="Sly and the Family Stone" label="Sly and the Family Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="10943" end="10951" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330733" start="11075" end="11086" title="Grand Royal" label="Grand Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476516" start="11104" end="11120" title="Luscious Jackson" label="Luscious Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q311238" start="11122" end="11133" title="Sean Lennon" label="Sean Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q334920" start="11157" end="11164" title="Ben Lee" label="Ben Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979214" start="11299" end="11317" title="In Search of Manny" label="In Search of Manny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700428" start="11420" end="11432" title="DJ Hurricane" label="DJ Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043962" start="11466" end="11480" title="No Alternative" label="No Alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q748704" start="11504" end="11524" title="Red Hot Organization" label="Red Hot Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16397" start="11684" end="11693" title="Bruce Lee" label="Bruce Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q336272" start="11706" end="11720" title="George Clinton (funk musician)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q179051" start="11742" end="11761" title="Kareem Abdul-Jabbar" label="Kareem Abdul-Jabbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q300602" start="11766" end="11786" title="A Tribe Called Quest" label="A Tribe Called Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q42025" start="11797" end="11802" title="Q-Tip (rapper)" label="Q-Tip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410374" start="11860" end="11866" title="mullet (haircut)" label="mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="11878" end="11903" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096393" start="12315" end="12332" title="Ill Communication" label="Ill Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040607" start="12561" end="12569" title="Sabotage (Beastie Boys song)" label="Sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037693" start="12596" end="12607" title="modern rock" label="modern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q259913" start="12648" end="12659" title="Spike Jonze" label="Spike Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071038" start="12731" end="12748" title="Some Old Bullshit" label="Some Old Bullshit"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="12923" end="12935" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="12997" end="13018" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314018" start="13144" end="13157" title="Milarepa Fund" label="Milarepa Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="13176" end="13185" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096393" start="13197" end="13205" title="Shambala (Beastie Boys song)" label="Shambala"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="13338" end="13343" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="13387" end="13397" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q193740" start="13472" end="13480" title="Live Aid" label="Live Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q980915" start="13487" end="13510" title="Tibetan Freedom Concert" label="Tibetan Freedom Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q635559" start="13534" end="13550" title="Golden Gate Park" label="Golden Gate Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="13725" end="13746" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336027" start="13766" end="13782" title="Allstate Arena" label="Rosemont Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606612" start="14017" end="14029" title="Aglio e Olio (EP)" label="Aglio e Olio"/>
<link wikidata="Q607501" start="14138" end="14164" title="The In Sound from Way Out! (Beastie Boys album)" label="The In Sound from Way Out!"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="14208" end="14212" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="14213" end="14217" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169608" start="14308" end="14316" title="The In Sound from Way Out! (Perrey and Kingsley album)" label="an album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169608" start="14350" end="14369" title="Perrey and Kingsley" label="Perrey and Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q611264" start="14472" end="14484" title="James Newton" label="James Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035160" start="15341" end="15352" title="Hello Nasty" label="Hello Nasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q704963" start="15576" end="15591" title="Mix Master Mike" label="Mix Master Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q990545" start="16075" end="16096" title="41st Annual Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards in 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="16112" end="16157" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809486" start="16201" end="16256" title="Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group" label="Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046503" start="16267" end="16280" title="Intergalactic (song)" label="Intergalactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849504" start="16387" end="16414" title="1998 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1998 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q821861" start="16441" end="16477" title="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award" label="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q822597" start="16545" end="16572" title="1999 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1999 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q876206" start="17024" end="17043" title="1998 United States embassy bombings" label="US Embassy bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="17070" end="17075" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="17080" end="17088" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935455" start="17190" end="17202" title="Woodstock 99" label="Woodstock 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="17865" end="17888" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17956" end="17977" title="Beastie Boys Anthology: The Sounds of Science" label="The Sounds of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727406" start="18192" end="18197" title="Alive (Beastie Boys song)" label="Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="18356" end="18380" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q59185" start="18385" end="18397" title="Busta Rhymes" label="Busta Rhymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423943" start="18539" end="18574" title="Separated shoulder" label="acromioclavicular joint dislocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513673" start="18799" end="18832" title="Country Mike&amp;#x27;s Greatest Hits" label="Country Mike&amp;#x27;s Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632255" start="18951" end="18958" title="BS 2000" label="BS 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961329" start="18974" end="18990" title="Simply Mortified" label="Simply Mortified"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="19033" end="19059" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645778" start="19150" end="19170" title="Hammerstein Ballroom" label="Hammerstein Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886493" start="19308" end="19333" title="Oscilloscope Laboratories" label="Oscilloscope Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="19347" end="19356" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q829147" start="19435" end="19447" title="protest song" label="protest song"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797218" start="19455" end="19474" title="In a World Gone Mad" label="In a World Gone Mad"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="19494" end="19507" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 Iraq war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633547" start="19597" end="19607" title="MoveOn.org" label="MoveOn.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023656" start="19613" end="19628" title="Win Without War" label="Win Without War"/>
<link wikidata="Q889872" start="19788" end="19828" title="Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival" label="Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q194427" start="19891" end="19899" title="The O.C." label="The O.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q897841" start="19988" end="20005" title="To the 5 Boroughs" label="To the 5 Boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065888" start="20267" end="20282" title="Ch-Check It Out" label="Ch-Check It Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="20328" end="20349" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="US Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="20436" end="20443" title="spyware" label="spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020610" start="20628" end="20647" title="Macrovision CDS-200" label="Macrovision CDS-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629023" start="20771" end="20774" title="EMI Records" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="21037" end="21040" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527278" start="21122" end="21132" title="The Mix-Up" label="The Mix-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="21287" end="21302" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513769" start="21810" end="21815" title="Sónar" label="Sónar"/>
<link wikidata="Q493819" start="21825" end="21833" title="Roskilde Festival" label="Roskilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q490328" start="21845" end="21854" title="Hurricane Festival" label="Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q521252" start="21855" end="21864" title="Southside Festival" label="Southside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616359" start="21876" end="21884" title="Bestival" label="Bestival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="21886" end="21899" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357459" start="21902" end="21917" title="Electric Picnic" label="Electric Picnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502395" start="21932" end="21953" title="Open&amp;#x27;er Festival" label="Open&amp;#x27;er Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835180" start="21998" end="22004" title="Live Earth concert, London" label="UK leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233398" start="22008" end="22018" title="Live Earth" label="Live Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="22035" end="22050" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040607" start="22070" end="22078" title="Sabotage (Beastie Boys song)" label="Sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549585" start="22092" end="22113" title="So What&amp;#x27;cha Want" label="So What&amp;#x27;cha Want"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046503" start="22127" end="22140" title="Intergalactic (song)" label="Intergalactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645587" start="22158" end="22167" title="Sure Shot" label="Sure Shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318073" start="22193" end="22199" title="Reverb (non-profit)" label="Reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593860" start="22417" end="22444" title="Best Pop Instrumental Album" label="Best Pop Instrumental Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518357" start="22467" end="22492" title="50th Annual Grammy Awards" label="50th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933719" start="23105" end="23124" title="Hot Sauce Committee Part Two" label="Hot Sauce Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q240343" start="23298" end="23307" title="Santigold" label="Santigold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291846" start="23363" end="23408" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Play No Game That I Can&amp;#x27;t Win" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Play No Game That I Can&amp;#x27;t Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984221" start="23448" end="23480" title="Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival" label="Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q194220" start="23578" end="23581" title="Nas" label="Nas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040076" start="23774" end="23790" title="Drowned in Sound" label="Drowned in Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q691653" start="24136" end="24149" title="parotid gland" label="parotid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033298" start="24228" end="24244" title="Osheaga Festival" label="Osheaga Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="24248" end="24256" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729261" start="24312" end="24336" title="All Points West Festival" label="All Points West Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="24340" end="24363" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739075" start="25013" end="25028" title="Make Some Noise (Beastie Boys song)" label="Make Some Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="25139" end="25155" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784022" start="25179" end="25190" title="Passion Pit" label="Passion Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="25525" end="25546" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="25596" end="25622" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q733373" start="25663" end="25670" title="Chuck D" label="Chuck D"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="25675" end="25684" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="25771" end="25800" title="NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital" label="NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q880598" start="25864" end="25877" title="Black Thought" label="Black Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q314107" start="25879" end="25885" title="Travie" label="Travie"/>
<link wikidata="Q818377" start="25891" end="25907" title="Gym Class Heroes" label="Gym Class Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="25912" end="25920" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18592" start="26749" end="26772" title="frontotemporal dementia" label="frontotemporal dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q544293" start="27075" end="27089" title="Monster Energy" label="Monster Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q91484984" start="27422" end="27440" title="Beastie Boys Story" label="Beastie Boys Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q259913" start="27460" end="27471" title="Spike Jonze" label="Spike Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="27489" end="27498" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q98912320" start="27579" end="27597" title="Beastie Boys Music" label="Beastie Boys Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q980915" start="27701" end="27724" title="Tibetan Freedom Concert" label="Tibetan Freedom Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850158" start="27756" end="27776" title="Human rights in Tibet" label="humans rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="27784" end="27802" title="China" label="Chinese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="27810" end="27824" title="Tibetan people" label="Tibetan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="27869" end="27874" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165714" start="27992" end="27996" title="Live (band)" label="Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q364864" start="27998" end="28008" title="Mike Mills" label="Mike Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q215182" start="28013" end="28026" title="Michael Stipe" label="Michael Stipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="28030" end="28036" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="28038" end="28062" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="28064" end="28085" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="28091" end="28093" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="28142" end="28155" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="28223" end="28230" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q877693" start="28235" end="28243" title="rap rock" label="rap rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="28352" end="28359" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="28361" end="28365" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="28367" end="28371" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q217597" start="28373" end="28380" title="electro music" label="electro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="28382" end="28386" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345375" start="28391" end="28402" title="Latin music" label="Latin music"/>
<link wikidata="Q438503" start="28454" end="28473" title="alternative hip hop" label="alternative hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089257" start="28478" end="28486" title="punk rap" label="punk rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="28692" end="28702" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="28877" end="28885" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="29054" end="29060" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="29062" end="29086" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q158599" start="29088" end="29094" title="Hed PE" label="Hed PE"/>
<link wikidata="Q591691" start="29098" end="29105" title="Sublime (band)" label="Sublime"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="29111" end="29115" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="29354" end="29361" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvises"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942343" start="29424" end="29435" title="black music" label="black music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065184" start="29453" end="29458" title="Anglo" label="Anglo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="29732" end="29745" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="29803" end="29833" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833781" start="29936" end="29968" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Artists of All Time" label="100 Greatest Artists of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="29970" end="29973" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="30158" end="30184" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="30332" end="30362" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="Ultimate Fighting Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q660297" start="30379" end="30389" title="Dana White" label="Dana White"/>
<link wikidata="Q344784" start="30525" end="30535" title="Adam Yauch" label="Adam Yauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q220308" start="30666" end="30676" title="Seth Rogen" label="Seth Rogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739075" start="30714" end="30729" title="Make Some Noise (Beastie Boys song)" label="Make Some Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q47100" start="31054" end="31065" title="Ben Stiller" label="Ben Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631303" start="31114" end="31148" title="Awesome; I Fuckin&amp;#x27; Shot That!" label="Awesome; I Fuckin&amp;#x27; Shot That!"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089779" start="31196" end="31218" title="While We&amp;#x27;re Young (film)" label="While We&amp;#x27;re Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="31331" end="31337" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="31405" end="31414" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="31477" end="31480" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q56394963" start="31848" end="31868" title="Kamikaze (Eminem album)" label="&amp;quot;Kamikaze&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073460" start="31890" end="31905" title="Licensed to Ill" label="Licensed to Ill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656690" start="31949" end="31956" title="Berzerk (song)" label="Berzerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="31991" end="32004" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q511726" start="32012" end="32032" title="Beavis and Butt-Head" label="Beavis and Butt-Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q434585" start="32047" end="32057" title="Mike Judge" label="Mike Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282361" start="32131" end="32151" title="(You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party!)" label="Fight for Your Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="32247" end="32255" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q168579" start="32587" end="32602" title="Joe Louis Arena" label="Joe Louis Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="32648" end="32664" title="Spin (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="32778" end="32799" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="32868" end="32900" title="Lower East Side" label="Manhattan&amp;#x27;s Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="33267" end="33274" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="33351" end="33359" title="sampling (music)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q611264" start="33478" end="33490" title="James Newton" label="James Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706308" start="33830" end="33836" title="Mike D" label="Mike D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813331" start="33867" end="33884" title="Kate Schellenbach" label="Kate Schellenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467756" start="33935" end="33945" title="John Berry (Beastie Boys)" label="John Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q344784" start="33981" end="33984" title="Adam Yauch" label="MCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q349799" start="34025" end="34032" title="Ad-Rock" label="Ad-Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q587361" start="34084" end="34095" title="Rick Rubin" label="DJ Double R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233832" start="34171" end="34181" title="Doctor Dré" label="Doctor Dré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700428" start="34205" end="34217" title="DJ Hurricane" label="DJ Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351217" start="34262" end="34271" title="Eric &amp;quot;Bobo&amp;quot; Correa" label="Eric Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609235" start="34306" end="34316" title="Money Mark" label="Money Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611467" start="34451" end="34464" title="Alfredo Ortiz" label="Alfredo Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q704963" start="34499" end="34514" title="Mix Master Mike" label="Mix Master Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073460" start="34643" end="34658" title="Licensed to Ill" label="Licensed to Ill"/>
<link wikidata="Q977418" start="34680" end="34700" title="Paul&amp;#x27;s Boutique" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s Boutique"/>
<link wikidata="Q608507" start="34722" end="34737" title="Check Your Head" label="Check Your Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096393" start="34759" end="34776" title="Ill Communication" label="Ill Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035160" start="34798" end="34809" title="Hello Nasty" label="Hello Nasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q897841" start="34831" end="34848" title="To the 5 Boroughs" label="To the 5 Boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527278" start="34870" end="34880" title="The Mix-Up" label="The Mix-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933719" start="34902" end="34930" title="Hot Sauce Committee Part Two" label="Hot Sauce Committee Part Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414716" start="34957" end="34972" title="The Virgin Tour" label="The Virgin Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="34992" end="34999" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="35040" end="35050" title="Run-D.M.C." label="Run-D.M.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="35088" end="35100" title="Public Enemy (group)" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891331" start="35201" end="35213" title="Rollins Band" label="Rollins Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050516" start="35215" end="35223" title="Firehose (band)" label="Firehose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886725" start="35229" end="35237" title="Basehead" label="Basehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="35241" end="35253" title="Lollapolooza" label="Lollapolooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="35464" end="35476" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q117548" start="35479" end="35483" title="34th Annual Grammy Awards" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809486" start="35514" end="35552" title="Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group" label="Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542302" start="35557" end="35561" title="37th Annual Grammy Awards" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040607" start="35569" end="35577" title="Sabotage (Beastie Boys song)" label="Sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542160" start="35585" end="35611" title="Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance" label="Best Hard Rock Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q990545" start="35638" end="35642" title="41st Annual Grammy Awards" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046503" start="35650" end="35663" title="Intergalactic (song)" label="Intergalactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="35739" end="35767" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Music Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q777063" start="35772" end="35776" title="43rd Annual Grammy Awards" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727406" start="35784" end="35789" title="Alive (Beastie Boys song)" label="Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542327" start="35862" end="35866" title="47th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065888" start="35874" end="35889" title="Ch-Check It Out" label="Ch-Check It Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367988" start="35971" end="35985" title="Grammy Award for Best Rap Album" label="Best Rap Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518357" start="36012" end="36016" title="50th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593861" start="36044" end="36077" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Instrumental Performance" label="Best Pop Instrumental Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593860" start="36106" end="36142" title="Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Instrumental Album" label="Best Contemporary Instrumental Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349100" start="36147" end="36151" title="52nd Annual Grammy Awards" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823888" start="36159" end="36175" title="Too Many Rappers" label="Too Many Rappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="36228" end="36249" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q257974" start="36274" end="36278" title="1994 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040607" start="36308" end="36316" title="Sabotage (Beastie Boys song)" label="Sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065651" start="36324" end="36341" title="MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year" label="Video of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q543729" start="36346" end="36362" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best Group Video" label="Best Group Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q820984" start="36367" end="36385" title="MTV Video Music Award – Breakthrough Video" label="Breakthrough Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q915665" start="36390" end="36404" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best Direction" label="Best Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q667066" start="36410" end="36430" title="MTV Video Music Award – Viewer&amp;#x27;s Choice" label="Viewer&amp;#x27;s Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q849504" start="36435" end="36439" title="1998 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q821861" start="36455" end="36491" title="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award" label="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q822597" start="36496" end="36500" title="1999 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046503" start="36508" end="36521" title="Intergalactic (song)" label="Intergalactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108841657" start="36529" end="36547" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best Hip-Hop Video" label="Best Hip-Hop Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q643937" start="36552" end="36556" title="2009 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040607" start="36564" end="36572" title="Sabotage (Beastie Boys song)" label="Sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q572513" start="36650" end="36654" title="2011 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739075" start="36684" end="36699" title="Make Some Noise (Beastie Boys song)" label="Make Some Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q207599" start="36750" end="36773" title="MTV Europe Music Awards" label="MTV Europe Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169503" start="36775" end="36779" title="1994 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841620" start="36795" end="36805" title="MTV Europe Music Award for Best Group" label="Best Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760898" start="36832" end="36836" title="1998 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046503" start="36844" end="36857" title="Intergalactic (song)" label="Intergalactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38435" start="36865" end="36875" title="MTV Europe Music Award for Best Video" label="Best Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841592" start="36905" end="36915" title="MTV Europe Music Award for Best Album" label="Best Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q108830817" start="36971" end="36983" title="MTV Europe Music Award for Best Hip-Hop" label="Best Hip-Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059593" start="36988" end="36992" title="1999 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640575" start="37047" end="37051" title="2004 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416711" start="37121" end="37125" title="2011 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739075" start="37133" end="37148" title="Make Some Noise (Beastie Boys song)" label="Make Some Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q795586" start="37172" end="37200" title="MTV Video Music Awards Japan" label="MTV Video Music Awards Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q795459" start="37202" end="37206" title="2005 MTV Video Music Awards Japan" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065888" start="37214" end="37229" title="Ch-Check It Out" label="Ch-Check It Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029415" start="37237" end="37255" title="MTV Video Music Award Japan for Best Hip-Hop Video" label="Best Hip-Hop Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030771" start="37260" end="37264" title="2009 MTV Video Music Awards Japan" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q626455" start="37361" end="37373" title="Krush Groove" label="Krush Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996049" start="37395" end="37415" title="Tougher Than Leather (film)" label="Tougher Than Leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="37437" end="37445" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q471074" start="37466" end="37486" title="Hell Is Other Robots" label="Hell Is Other Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631303" start="37508" end="37542" title="Awesome; I Fuckin&amp;#x27; Shot That!" label="Awesome; I Fuckin&amp;#x27; Shot That!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739075" start="37564" end="37594" title="Fight for Your Right Revisited" label="Fight for Your Right Revisited"/>
<link wikidata="Q91484984" start="37616" end="37634" title="Beastie Boys Story" label="Beastie Boys Story"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3736" wikidata="Q38272" url="?curid=3736" title="British Isles">
<text>The British Isles are an archipelago in the North Atlantic Ocean off the north-western coast of continental Europe, consisting of the islands of Great Britain, Ireland, the Isle of Man, the Inner and Outer Hebrides, the Northern Isles (Orkney and Shetland), and over six thousand smaller islands. They have a total area of and a combined population of almost 72 million, and include two sovereign states, the Republic of Ireland (which covers roughly five-sixths of Ireland), and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The Channel Islands, off the north coast of France, are normally taken to be part of the British Isles, even though geographically they do not form part of the archipelago. Under the UK Interpretation Act 1978, the Channel Islands are clarified as forming part of the British Islands, not to be confused with the British Isles.

The oldest rocks are 2.7 billion years old and are found in Ireland, Wales and the north-west of Scotland. During the Silurian period, the north-western regions collided with the south-east, which had been part of a separate continental landmass. The topography of the islands is modest in scale by global standards. Ben Nevis, the highest mountain, rises to only , and Lough Neagh, which is notably larger than other lakes in the island group, covers . The climate is temperate marine, with cool winters and warm summers. The North Atlantic drift brings significant moisture and raises temperatures above the global average for the latitude. This led to a landscape that was long dominated by temperate rainforest, although human activity has since cleared the vast majority of forest cover. The region was re-inhabited after the last glacial period of Quaternary glaciation, by 12,000 BC, when Great Britain was still part of a peninsula of the European continent. Ireland may have been connected to Great Britain by way of an ice bridge before 14,000 BC, and was not inhabited until after 8000 BC. Great Britain became an island by 7000 BC with the flooding of Doggerland.

The Gaels (Ireland), Picts (northern Great Britain) and Britons (southern Great Britain), all speaking Insular Celtic languages, inhabited the islands at the beginning of the 1st millennium BC. Much of Brittonic-occupied Britain was conquered by the Roman Empire from AD 43. The first Anglo-Saxons arrived as Roman power waned in the 5th century, and eventually they dominated the bulk of what is now England. Viking invasions began in the 9th century, followed by more permanent settlements and political change, particularly in England. The Norman conquest of England in 1066 and the later Angevin partial conquest of Ireland from 1169 led to the imposition of a new Norman ruling elite across much of Britain and parts of Ireland. By the Late Middle Ages, Great Britain was separated into the Kingdom of England and Kingdom of Scotland, while control in Ireland fluxed between Gaelic kingdoms, Hiberno-Norman lords and the English-dominated Lordship of Ireland, soon restricted only to the Pale. The 1603 Union of the Crowns, Acts of Union 1707 and Acts of Union 1800 aimed to consolidate Great Britain and Ireland into a single political unit, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, with the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands remaining as Crown Dependencies. The expansion of the British Empire and migrations following the Irish Famine and Highland Clearances resulted in the dispersal of some of the islands&#x27; population and culture throughout the world, and rapid depopulation of Ireland in the second half of the 19th century. Most of Ireland seceded from the United Kingdom after the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent Anglo-Irish Treaty (1919–1922), with six counties remaining in the UK as Northern Ireland.

As a term, &quot;British Isles&quot; is a geographical name and not a political unit. In Ireland, the term is controversial, and there are objections to its usage. The Government of Ireland does not officially recognise the term, and its embassy in London discourages its use. &quot;Britain and Ireland&quot; is used as an alternative description, and &quot;Atlantic Archipelago&quot; has also seen limited use in academia. In official documents created jointly by Ireland and the United Kingdom, such as the Good Friday Agreement, the term &quot;these islands&quot; is used.

==Etymology==
The earliest known references to the islands as a group appeared in the writings of seafarers from the ancient Greek colony of Massalia. The original records have been lost; however, later writings, e.g. Avienius&#x27;s &quot;Ora maritima&quot;, that quoted from the Massaliote Periplus (6th century BC) and from Pytheas&#x27;s &quot;On the Ocean&quot; (around 325–320 BC) have survived.

In the 1st century BC, Diodorus Siculus has &quot;Prettanikē nēsos&quot;, &quot;the British Island&quot;, and &quot;Prettanoi&quot;, &quot;the Britons&quot;, describes Julius Caesar as having &quot;advanced the Roman Empire as far as the British Isles&quot; (), and remarks on the region &quot;about the British Isles&quot; (). According to Philip Freeman in 2001, &quot;it seems reasonable, especially at this early point in classical knowledge of the Irish, for Diodorus or his sources to think of all inhabitants of the Brettanic Isles as &quot;Brettanoi&quot;&quot;.

Strabo used Βρεττανική (&quot;Brettanike&quot;), and Marcian of Heraclea, in his &quot;Periplus maris exteri&quot;, used αἱ Πρεττανικαί νῆσοι (&quot;the Prettanic Isles&quot;) to refer to the islands.

According to A. L. F. Rivet and Colin Smith in 1979 &quot;the earliest instance of the name which is textually known to us&quot; is in &quot;The Histories&quot; of Polybius, who referred to them . According to Rivet and Smith, this name encompassed &quot;Britain with Ireland&quot;. According to Thomas O&#x27;Loughlin in 2018, the British Isles was &quot;a concept already present in the minds of those living in continental Europe since at least the 2nd–cent. CE&quot;.

Historians today, though not in absolute agreement, largely agree that these Greek and Latin names were probably drawn from native Celtic-language names for the archipelago. Along these lines, the inhabitants of the islands were called the Πρεττανοί (&quot;Priteni&quot; or &quot;Pretani&quot;). The shift from the &quot;P&quot; of &quot;Pretannia&quot; to the &quot;B&quot; of &quot;Britannia&quot; by the Romans occurred during the time of Julius Caesar.

Greco-Egyptian Claudius Ptolemy referred to the larger island as &quot;great Britain&quot; (μεγάλη Βρεττανία &quot;megale Brettania&quot;) and to Ireland as &quot;little Britain&quot; (μικρὰ Βρεττανία &quot;mikra Brettania&quot;) in his work &quot;Almagest&quot; (147–148 AD). According to Philip Freeman in 2001, Ptolemy &quot;is the only ancient writer to use the name &quot;Little Britain&quot; for Ireland, though in doing so he is well within the tradition of earlier authors who pair a smaller Ireland with a larger Britain as the two Brettanic Isles&quot;. In the second book of Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Geography&quot; (), the second and third chapters are respectively titled in and .

In Arabic geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world, the British Isles are known as or . Arabic geographies, including the &quot;&quot; of al-Battānī, mention the British Isles as twelve islands.

John Skelton&#x27;s English translation of Diodorus Siculus&#x27;s , written in the middle 1480s, mentions the British Isles as . Thomas Twyne&#x27;s English translation of Dionysius Periegetes&#x27;s , published in 1572, mentions the British Isles as . The earliest citation of the phrase in the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; is in a work by John Dee dated 1577. 

Other names used to describe the islands include the &quot;Anglo-Celtic Isles&quot;, &quot;Atlantic archipelago&quot; (a term coined by the historian J. G. A. Pocock in 1975), &quot;British-Irish Isles&quot;, &quot;Britain and Ireland&quot;, &quot;UK and Ireland&quot;, and &quot;British Isles and Ireland&quot;. 
Owing to political and national associations with the word &quot;British&quot;, the Government of Ireland does not use the term &quot;British Isles&quot; and in documents drawn up jointly between the British and Irish governments, the archipelago is referred to simply as &quot;these islands&quot;. British Isles is the most widely accepted term for the archipelago.

==Geography==


The British Isles lie at the juncture of several regions with past episodes of tectonic mountain building. These orogenic belts form a complex geology that records a huge and varied span of Earth&#x27;s history. Of particular note was the Caledonian orogeny during the Ordovician and early Silurian periods, when the craton Baltica collided with the terrane Avalonia to form the mountains and hills in northern Britain and Ireland. Baltica formed roughly the north-western half of Ireland and Scotland. Further collisions caused the Variscan orogeny in the Devonian and Carboniferous periods, forming the hills of Munster, south-west England, and southern Wales. Over the last 500 million years the land that forms the islands has drifted north-west from around 30°S, crossing the equator around 370 million years ago to reach its present northern latitude.

The islands have been shaped by numerous glaciations during the Quaternary Period, the most recent being the Devensian. As this ended, the central Irish Sea was deglaciated and the English Channel flooded, with sea levels rising to current levels some 8,000 years ago, leaving the British Isles in their current form.

There are about 136 permanently inhabited islands in the group, the largest two being Great Britain and Ireland. Great Britain is to the east and covers . Ireland is to the west and covers . The largest of the other islands are to be found in the Hebrides, Orkney and Shetland to the north, Anglesey and the Isle of Man between Great Britain and Ireland, and the Channel Islands near the coast of France. The most densely populated island is Portsea Island, which has an area of but has the third highest population behind Great Britain and Ireland.

The islands are at relatively low altitudes, with central Ireland and southern Great Britain particularly low-lying: the lowest point in the islands is the North Slob in County Wexford, Ireland, with an elevation of . The Scottish Highlands in the northern part of Great Britain are mountainous, with Ben Nevis being the highest point on the islands at . Other mountainous areas include Wales and parts of Ireland, although only seven peaks in these areas reach above . Lakes on the islands are generally not large, although Lough Neagh in Northern Ireland is an exception, covering . The largest freshwater body in Great Britain (by area) is Loch Lomond at , and Loch Ness (by volume) whilst Loch Morar is the deepest freshwater body in the British Isles, with a maximum depth of . There are a number of major rivers within the British Isles. The longest is the Shannon in Ireland at . The river Severn at is the longest in Great Britain.

===Climate===
The climate of the British Isles is mild, moist and changeable with abundant rainfall and a lack of temperature extremes. It is defined as a temperate oceanic climate, or &quot;Cfb&quot; on the Köppen climate classification system, a classification it shares with most of north-west Europe. The North Atlantic Drift (&quot;Gulf Stream&quot;), which flows from the Gulf of Mexico, brings with it significant moisture and raises temperatures above the global average for the islands&#x27; latitudes. Most Atlantic depressions pass to the north of the islands; combined with the general westerly circulation and interactions with the landmass, this imposes a general east–west variation in climate. There are four distinct climate patterns: south-east, with cold winters, warm and dry summers; south-west, having mild and very wet winters, warm and wet summers; north-west, generally wet with mild winters and cool summers; and north-east with cold winters, cool summers.

==Flora and fauna==


The islands enjoy a mild climate and varied soils, giving rise to a diverse pattern of vegetation. Animal and plant life is similar to that of the north-western European mainland. There are however, fewer numbers of species, with Ireland having even less. All native flora and fauna in Ireland is made up of species that migrated primarily from Great Britain. The only window when this could have occurred was prior to the melting of the ice bridge between the two islands 14,000 years ago approaching the end of the last ice age.

As with most of Europe, prehistoric Britain and Ireland were covered with forest and swamp. Clearing began around 6000 BC and accelerated in medieval times. Despite this, Britain retained its primeval forests longer than most of Europe due to a small population and later development of trade and industry, and wood shortages were not a problem until the 17th century. By the 18th century, most of Britain&#x27;s forests were consumed for shipbuilding or manufacturing charcoal and the nation was forced to import lumber from Scandinavia, North America, and the Baltic. Most forest land in Ireland is maintained by state forestation programmes. Almost all land outside urban areas is farmland. However, relatively large areas of forest remain in east and north Scotland and in southeast England. Oak, elm, ash and beech are amongst the most common trees in England. In Scotland, pine and birch are most common. Natural forests in Ireland are mainly oak, ash, wych elm, birch and pine. Beech and lime, though not native to Ireland, are also common there. Farmland hosts a variety of semi-natural vegetation of grasses and flowering plants. Woods, hedgerows, mountain slopes and marshes host heather, wild grasses, gorse and bracken.

Many larger animals, such as wolves, bears and European elk are today extinct. However, some species such as red deer are protected. Other small mammals, such as rabbits, foxes, badgers, hares, hedgehogs, and stoats, are very common and the European beaver has been reintroduced in parts of Scotland. Wild boar have also been reintroduced to parts of southern England, following escapes from boar farms and illegal releases. Many rivers contain otters and grey and common seals are numerous on coasts. There are about 250 bird species regularly recorded in Great Britain, and another 350 that occur with varying degrees of rarity. The most numerous species are wren, robin, house sparrow, woodpigeon, chaffinch and blackbird. Farmland birds are declining in number, except for those kept for game such as pheasant, red-legged partridge, and red grouse. Fish are abundant in the rivers and lakes, in particular salmon, trout, perch and pike. Sea fish include dogfish, cod, sole, pollock and bass, as well as mussels, crab and oysters along the coast. There are more than 21,000 species of insects.

Few species of reptiles or amphibians are found in Great Britain or Ireland. Only three snakes are native to Great Britain: the adder, the barred grass snake and the smooth snake; none are native to Ireland. In general, Great Britain has slightly more variation and native wildlife, with weasels, polecats, wildcats, most shrews, moles, water voles, roe deer and common toads also being absent from Ireland. This pattern is also true for birds and insects. Notable exceptions include the Kerry slug and certain species of woodlouse native to Ireland but not Great Britain.

Domestic animals include the Connemara pony, Shetland pony, English Mastiff, Irish Wolfhound and many varieties of cattle and sheep.

==Demographics==


England has a generally high population density, with almost 80% of the total population of the islands. Elsewhere in Great Britain and Ireland, high density of population is limited to areas around a few large cities. The largest urban area by far is the Greater London Built-up Area with 9 million inhabitants. Other major population centres include the Greater Manchester Built-up Area (2.4 million), West Midlands conurbation (2.4 million) and West Yorkshire Urban Area (1.6 million) in England, Greater Glasgow (1.2 million) in Scotland and Greater Dublin Area (1.9 million) in Ireland.

The population of England rose rapidly during the 19th and 20th centuries, whereas the populations of Scotland and Wales showed little increase during the 20th century; the population of Scotland has remained unchanged since 1951. Ireland for most of its history had much the same population density as Great Britain (about one-third of the total population). However, since the Great Irish Famine, the population of Ireland has fallen to less than one-tenth of the population of the British Isles. The famine caused a century-long population decline, drastically reduced the Irish population and permanently altered the demographic make-up of the British Isles. On a global scale, this disaster led to the creation of an Irish diaspora that numbers fifteen times the current population of the island.

The linguistic heritage of the British Isles is rich, with twelve languages from six groups across four branches of the Indo-European family. The Insular Celtic languages of the Goidelic sub-group (Irish, Manx and Scottish Gaelic) and the Brittonic sub-group (Cornish, Welsh and Breton, spoken in north-western France) are the only remaining Celtic languages—the last of their continental relations were extinct before the 7th century. The Norman languages of Guernésiais, Jèrriais and Sercquiais spoken in the Channel Islands are similar to French, a language also spoken there. A cant, called Shelta, is spoken by Irish Travellers, often to conceal meaning from those outside the group. However, English, including Scots, is the dominant language, with few monoglots remaining in the other languages of the region. The Norn language of Orkney and Shetland became extinct around 1880. 

===Urban areas===

==History==

2.5 million years ago the British Isles were repeatedly submerged beneath an ice sheet which extended into the middle of the North Sea, with a larger ice sheet that covered a significant proportion of Scandinavia on the opposite side. Around 1.9 million years ago these two ice sheets frequently merged, essentially creating a land bridge between Scandinavia and northern Great Britain. Further south, there was a direct land bridge, now known as Doggerland, which was gradually submerged as sea levels rose. However, the Irish Sea was formed before Doggerland was completely covered in water, with Ireland becoming an island roughly 6,000 years before Great Britain did.

The first evidence of human activity on the islands dates from 840,000 or 950,000 years ago, based in flint tools found near Happisburgh on the Norfolk coast of Great Britain. In contrast, the earliest evidence of human activity on the island of Ireland dates from 12,500 years ago.

At the time of the Roman Empire, about two thousand years ago, various tribes, which spoke Celtic dialects of the Insular Celtic group, were inhabiting the islands. The Romans expanded their civilisation to control southern Great Britain but were impeded in advancing any further, building Hadrian&#x27;s Wall to mark the northern frontier of their empire in 122 AD. At that time, Ireland was populated by a people known as Hiberni, the northern third or so of Great Britain by a people known as Picts and the southern two thirds by Britons.
Anglo-Saxons arrived as Roman power waned in the 5th century AD. Initially, their arrival seems to have been at the invitation of the Britons as mercenaries to repulse incursions by the Hiberni and Picts. In time, Anglo-Saxon demands on the British became so great that they came to culturally dominate the bulk of southern Great Britain, though recent genetic evidence suggests Britons still formed the bulk of the population. This dominance created what is now England and left culturally British enclaves only in the north of what is now England, in Cornwall and what is now known as Wales. Ireland had been unaffected by the Romans except, significantly, for being Christianised—traditionally by the Romano-Briton, Saint Patrick. As Europe, including Britain, descended into turmoil following the collapse of Roman civilisation, an era known as the Dark Ages, Ireland entered a golden age and responded with missions (first to Great Britain and then to the continent), the founding of monasteries and universities. These were later joined by Anglo-Saxon missions of a similar nature.

Viking invasions began in the 9th century, followed by more permanent settlements, particularly along the east coast of Ireland, the west coast of modern-day Scotland and the Isle of Man. Though the Vikings were eventually neutralised in Ireland, their influence remained in the cities of Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Waterford and Wexford. England, however, was slowly conquered around the turn of the first millennium AD, and eventually became a feudal possession of Denmark. The relations between the descendants of Vikings in England and counterparts in Normandy, in northern France, lay at the heart of a series of events that led to the Norman conquest of England in 1066. The remnants of the Duchy of Normandy, which conquered England, remain associated to the English Crown as the Channel Islands to this day. A century later, the marriage of the future Henry II of England to Eleanor of Aquitaine created the Angevin Empire, partially under the French Crown. At the invitation of Diarmait Mac Murchada, a provincial king, and under the authority of Pope Adrian IV (the only Englishman to be elected pope), the Angevins invaded Ireland in 1169. Though initially intended to be kept as an independent kingdom, the failure of the Irish High King to ensure the terms of the Treaty of Windsor led Henry II, as King of England, to rule as effective monarch under the title of Lord of Ireland. This title was granted to his younger son, but when Henry&#x27;s heir unexpectedly died, the title of King of England and Lord of Ireland became entwined in one person.

By the Late Middle Ages, Great Britain was separated into the Kingdoms of England and Scotland. Power in Ireland fluxed between Gaelic kingdoms, Hiberno-Norman lords and the English-dominated Lordship of Ireland. A similar situation existed in the Principality of Wales, which was slowly being annexed into the Kingdom of England by a series of laws. During the course of the 15th century, the Crown of England would assert a claim to the Crown of France, thereby also releasing the King of England from being vassal of the King of France. In 1534, King Henry VIII, at first having been a strong defender of Roman Catholicism in the face of the Reformation, separated from the Roman Church after failing to secure a divorce from the Pope. His response was to place the King of England as &quot;the only Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England&quot;, thereby removing the authority of the Pope from the affairs of the English Church. Ireland, which had been held by the King of England as Lord of Ireland, but which strictly speaking had been a feudal possession of the Pope since the Norman invasion was declared a separate kingdom in personal union with England.

Scotland meanwhile had remained an independent Kingdom. In 1603, that changed when the King of Scotland inherited the Crown of England, and consequently the Crown of Ireland also. The subsequent 17th century was one of political upheaval, religious division and war. English colonialism in Ireland of the 16th century was extended by large-scale Scottish and English colonies in Ulster. Religious division heightened, and the king of England came into conflict with parliament over his tolerance towards Catholicism. The resulting English Civil War or War of the Three Kingdoms led to a revolutionary republic in England. Ireland, largely Catholic, was mainly loyal to the king, but by military conquest was subsumed into the new republic. Following defeat to the parliament&#x27;s army, large scale land distributions from loyalist Irish nobility to English commoners in the service of the parliamentary army created a new Ascendancy class which obliterated the remnants of Old English (Hiberno-Norman) and Gaelic Irish nobility in Ireland. The new ruling class was Protestant and English, whilst the populace was largely Catholic and Irish. This theme would influence Irish politics for centuries to come. When the monarchy was restored in England, the king found it politically impossible to restore the lands of former landowners in Ireland. The &quot;Glorious Revolution&quot; of 1688 repeated similar themes: a Catholic king pushing for religious tolerance in opposition to a Protestant parliament in England. The king&#x27;s army was defeated at the Battle of the Boyne and at the militarily crucial Battle of Aughrim in Ireland. Resistance held out, eventually forcing the guarantee of religious tolerance in the Treaty of Limerick. However, the terms were never honoured and a new monarchy was installed.

The Kingdoms of England and Scotland were unified in 1707 creating the Kingdom of Great Britain. Following an attempted republican revolution in Ireland in 1798, the Kingdoms of Ireland and Great Britain were unified in 1801, creating the United Kingdom. The Isle of Man and the Channel Islands remaining outside of the United Kingdom, but with their ultimate good governance being the responsibility of the British Crown (effectively the British government). Although the colonies of North America that would become the United States of America were lost by the start of the 19th century, the British Empire expanded rapidly elsewhere. A century later, it would cover one-third of the globe. Poverty in the United Kingdom remained desperate, however, and industrialisation in England led to terrible conditions for the working classes. Mass migrations following the Irish Famine and Highland Clearances resulted in the distribution of the islands&#x27; population and culture throughout the world and a rapid de-population of Ireland in the second half of the 19th century. Most of Ireland seceded from the United Kingdom after the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent Anglo-Irish Treaty (1919–1922), with the six counties that formed Northern Ireland remaining as an autonomous region of the UK.

==Politics==


There are two sovereign states in the British Isles: Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Ireland, sometimes called the Republic of Ireland, governs five-sixths of the island of Ireland, with the remainder of the island forming Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland is a part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, usually shortened to simply &quot;the United Kingdom&quot;, which governs the remainder of the archipelago with the exception of the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. The Isle of Man and the two Bailiwicks of the Channel Islands, Jersey and Guernsey, are known as the Crown Dependencies. They exercise constitutional rights of self-government and judicial independence; responsibility for international representation rests largely with the UK (in consultation with the respective governments); and responsibility for defence is reserved by the UK. The United Kingdom is made up of four constituent parts: England, Scotland and Wales, forming Great Britain, and Northern Ireland in the northeast of the island of Ireland. Of these, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have devolved governments, meaning that each has its own parliament or assembly and is self-governing with respect to certain matters set down by law. For judicial purposes, Scotland, Northern Ireland and England and Wales (the latter being one entity) form separate legal jurisdictions, with there being no single law for the UK as a whole.

Ireland, the United Kingdom and the three Crown dependencies are all parliamentary democracies, with their own separate parliaments. All parts of the United Kingdom return Members of Parliament (MPs) to parliament in London. In addition to this, voters in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland return members to a devolved parliament in Edinburgh and in Cardiff and an assembly in Belfast. Governance in the norm is by majority rule; however, Northern Ireland uses a system of power sharing whereby unionists and nationalists share executive posts proportionately and where the assent of both groups is required for the Northern Ireland Assembly to make certain decisions. (In the context of Northern Ireland, unionists are those who want Northern Ireland to remain a part of the United Kingdom and nationalists are those who want Northern Ireland to join with the rest of Ireland.) The British monarch is the head of state of the United Kingdom, while in the Republic of Ireland the head of state is the President of Ireland.

Ireland is the only part of the isles that is a member state of the European Union (EU). The UK was a member between 1 January 1973 and 31 January 2020, but the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands were not. Since the partition of Ireland, an informal free-travel area has existed across the island of Ireland. This area required formal recognition in 1997 during the course of negotiations for the Amsterdam Treaty of the European Union, and (together with the Crown dependencies) is now known as the Common Travel Area. As such, Ireland is not part of the Schengen Area, which allows passport-free travel between most EU member states, and is the only member state with an opt-out from the obligation to join the Schengen Zone.

Reciprocal arrangements allow British and Irish citizens specific voting rights in the two states. In Ireland, British citizens can vote in General and local elections, but not in European Parliament elections, constitutional referendums or presidential elections (for which there is no comparable franchise in the United Kingdom). In the United Kingdom, Irish and Commonwealth citizens can vote in every election for which British citizens are eligible. In the Crown dependencies, any resident can vote in general elections, but in Jersey and the Isle of Man only British citizens can run for office. These pre-date European Union law, and in both jurisdictions go further than what was required by European Union law (EU citizens may only vote in local elections in both states and European elections in Ireland). In 2008, a UK Ministry of Justice report investigating how to strengthen the British sense of citizenship proposed to end this arrangement, arguing that &quot;the right to vote is one of the hallmarks of the political status of citizens; it is not a means of expressing closeness between countries&quot;.

In addition, some civil bodies are organised throughout the islands as a whole—for example, the Samaritans, which is deliberately organised without regard to national boundaries on the basis that a service which is not political or religious should not recognise sectarian or political divisions. The Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI), a charity that operates a lifeboat service, is also organised throughout the islands as a whole, covering the waters of the United Kingdom, Ireland, the Isle of Man, and the Channel Islands.

The Northern Ireland peace process has led to a number of unusual arrangements between the Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom. For example, citizens of Northern Ireland are entitled to the choice of Irish or British citizenship or both, and the Governments of Ireland and the United Kingdom consult on matters not devolved to the Northern Ireland Executive. The Northern Ireland Executive and the Government of Ireland also meet as the North/South Ministerial Council to develop policies common across the island of Ireland. These arrangements were made following the 1998 Good Friday Agreement.
===British–Irish Council===
Another body established under the Good Friday Agreement, the British–Irish Council, is made up of all of the states and territories of the British Isles. The British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly () predates the British–Irish Council and was established in 1990. Originally it comprised 25 members of the Oireachtas, the Irish parliament, and 25 members of the parliament of the United Kingdom, with the purpose of building mutual understanding between members of both legislatures. Since then the role and scope of the body has been expanded to include representatives from the Scottish Parliament, the Senedd (Welsh Parliament), the Northern Ireland Assembly, the States of Jersey, the States of Guernsey and the High Court of Tynwald (Isle of Man).

The Council does not have executive powers but meets biannually to discuss issues of mutual importance. Similarly, the Parliamentary Assembly has no legislative powers but investigates and collects witness evidence from the public on matters of mutual concern to its members. Reports on its findings are presented to the Governments of Ireland and the United Kingdom. During the February 2008 meeting of the British–Irish Council, it was agreed to set up a standing secretariat that would serve as a permanent &#x27;civil service&#x27; for the Council. Leading on from developments in the British–Irish Council, the chair of the British–Irish Inter-Parliamentary Assembly, Niall Blaney, has suggested that the body should shadow the British–Irish Council&#x27;s work.

==Culture==

The United Kingdom and Ireland have separate media, although British television, newspapers and magazines are widely available in Ireland, giving people in Ireland a high level of familiarity with the culture of the United Kingdom. Irish newspapers are also available in the UK, and Irish state and private television are widely available in Northern Ireland. Certain reality TV shows have embraced the whole of the islands, for example &quot;The X Factor&quot;, seasons 3, 4 and 7 of which featured auditions in Dublin and were open to Irish voters, whilst the show previously known as &quot;Britain&#x27;s Next Top Model&quot; became &quot;Britain and Ireland&#x27;s Next Top Model&quot; in 2011. A few cultural events are organised for the island group as a whole. For example, the Costa Book Awards are awarded to authors resident in the UK or Ireland. The Mercury Music Prize is handed out every year to the best album from a British or Irish musician or group.

Many globally popular sports had their modern rules codified in the British Isles, including golf, association football, cricket, rugby, snooker and darts, as well as many minor sports such as croquet, bowls, pitch and putt, water polo and handball. A number of sports are popular throughout the British Isles, the most prominent of which is association football. While this is organised separately in different national associations, leagues and national teams, even within the UK, it is a common passion in all parts of the islands. Rugby union is also widely enjoyed across the islands with four national teams from England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales. The British and Irish Lions is a team chosen from each national team and undertakes tours of the Southern Hemisphere rugby-playing nations every four years. Ireland plays as a united team, represented by players from both Northern Ireland and the Republic. These national rugby teams play each other each year for the Triple Crown as part of the Six Nations Championship. Also, since 2001, the professional club teams of Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Italy and South Africa compete against each other in the United Rugby Championship.

The Ryder Cup in golf was originally played between a United States team and a team representing Great Britain and Ireland. From 1979 onwards, this was expanded to include the whole of Europe.

==Transport==
London Heathrow Airport is Europe&#x27;s busiest airport in terms of passenger traffic, and the Dublin-London route is the busiest air route in Europe collectively, the busiest route out of Heathrow and the second-busiest international air route in the world. The English Channel and the southern North Sea are the busiest seaways in the world. The Channel Tunnel, opened in 1994, links Great Britain to France and is the second-longest rail tunnel in the world.

The idea of building a tunnel under the Irish Sea has been raised since 1895, when it was first investigated. Several potential Irish Sea tunnel projects have been proposed, most recently the &quot;Tusker Tunnel&quot; between the ports of Rosslare and Fishguard proposed by The Institute of Engineers of Ireland in 2004. A rail tunnel was proposed in 1997 on a different route, between Dublin and Holyhead, by British engineering firm Symonds. Either tunnel, at , would be by far the longest in the world, and would cost an estimated £15 billion or €20 billion. A proposal in 2007, estimated the cost of building a bridge from County Antrim in Northern Ireland to Galloway in Scotland at £3.5bn (€5bn).

== See also ==
* British Islands
* Proposed British Isles fixed sea link connections
* Extreme points of the British Isles
* List of islands of the British Isles
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;A History of Britain: At the Edge of the World, 3500 B.C. – 1603 A.D.&quot; by Simon Schama, BBC/Miramax, 2000 
* &quot;A History of Britain&quot;—The Complete Collection on DVD by Simon Schama, BBC 2002
* &quot;Shortened History of England&quot; by G. M. Trevelyan Penguin Books 
== External links ==

* An interactive geological map of the British Isles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="4" end="17" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="25" end="36" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="44" end="64" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="96" end="114" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="145" end="158" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="160" end="167" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="173" end="184" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="190" end="195" title="Inner Hebrides" label="Inner"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="200" end="205" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="206" end="214" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="220" end="234" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="236" end="242" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="247" end="255" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="387" end="402" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="409" end="428" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="484" end="536" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="542" end="557" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="582" end="588" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="698" end="709" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q256091" start="806" end="821" title="British Islands" label="British Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="985" end="993" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="1184" end="1193" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206942" start="1237" end="1248" title="Lough Neagh" label="Lough Neagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q211798" start="1394" end="1414" title="North Atlantic drift" label="North Atlantic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="1646" end="1658" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="1721" end="1742" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="Quaternary glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75080276" start="1896" end="1906" title="ice bridge" label="ice bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138308" start="2031" end="2041" title="Doggerland" label="Doggerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="2048" end="2053" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="2065" end="2070" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="2100" end="2107" title="Britons (historical)" label="Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q214506" start="2147" end="2171" title="Insular Celtic languages" label="Insular Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="2277" end="2306" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="conquered by the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="2329" end="2341" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="2454" end="2460" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="2587" end="2593" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="2636" end="2643" title="Angevin Empire" label="Angevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="2785" end="2801" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327860" start="2924" end="2939" title="Gaelic Ireland" label="Gaelic kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q921901" start="2941" end="2961" title="Hiberno-Norman" label="Hiberno-Norman lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q844250" start="2988" end="3007" title="Lordship of Ireland" label="Lordship of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q508481" start="3033" end="3041" title="the Pale" label="the Pale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="3052" end="3071" title="Union of the Crowns" label="Union of the Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="3073" end="3091" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="3096" end="3114" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="3299" end="3317" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="3384" end="3396" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="3401" end="3420" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="3653" end="3678" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="3698" end="3716" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="3832" end="3844" title="Geography" label="geographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970174" start="3900" end="3913" title="British Isles naming dispute" label="controversial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="3958" end="3979" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="4299" end="4320" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="4508" end="4516" title="Marseille" label="Massalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q366793" start="4585" end="4593" title="Avienius" label="Avienius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006491" start="4607" end="4619" title="Ora maritima" label="Ora maritima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334207" start="4648" end="4667" title="Massaliote Periplus" label="Massaliote Periplus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189971" start="4694" end="4701" title="Pytheas" label="Pytheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="4793" end="4809" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="5342" end="5348" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165497" start="5395" end="5414" title="Marcian of Heraclea" label="Marcian of Heraclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670655" start="5557" end="5571" title="A. L. F. Rivet" label="A. L. F. Rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q250816" start="5679" end="5704" title="The Histories (Polybius)" label="&amp;quot;The Histories&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="5708" end="5716" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792818" start="5840" end="5862" title="Thomas O&amp;#x27;Loughlin" label="Thomas O&amp;#x27;Loughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="6148" end="6163" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672712" start="6274" end="6281" title="Priteni" label="Priteni"/>
<link wikidata="Q138396" start="6401" end="6410" title="Britannia" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338367" start="6475" end="6489" title="Greeks in Egypt" label="Greco-Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="6490" end="6506" title="Claudius Ptolemy" label="Claudius Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="6723" end="6731" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="7082" end="7091" title="Geography (Ptolemy)" label="Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="7169" end="7175" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142012" start="7176" end="7231" title="geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world" label="geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="7319" end="7329" title="al-Battānī" label="al-Battānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q638589" start="7377" end="7389" title="John Skelton (poet)" label="John Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794616" start="7507" end="7519" title="Thomas Twyne" label="Thomas Twyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226993" start="7550" end="7570" title="Dionysius Periegetes" label="Dionysius Periegetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="7680" end="7705" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q201484" start="7728" end="7736" title="John Dee" label="John Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763604" start="7810" end="7822" title="Anglo-Celtic" label="Anglo-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336397" start="7901" end="7916" title="J. G. A. Pocock" label="J. G. A. Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="8562" end="8576" title="Orogeny" label="orogenic belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q846077" start="8688" end="8706" title="Caledonian orogeny" label="Caledonian orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="8718" end="8728" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187992" start="8733" end="8747" title="Llandovery epoch" label="early Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q191110" start="8766" end="8772" title="craton" label="craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q805735" start="8773" end="8780" title="Baltica" label="Baltica"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="8799" end="8806" title="terrane" label="terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q510087" start="8807" end="8815" title="Avalonia" label="Avalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q840828" start="8982" end="8998" title="Variscan orogeny" label="Variscan orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="9006" end="9014" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="9019" end="9032" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q131438" start="9063" end="9070" title="Munster" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="9230" end="9237" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="9372" end="9389" title="Quaternary Period" label="Quaternary Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="9417" end="9426" title="Devensian" label="Devensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="9455" end="9464" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419391" start="9643" end="9676" title="List of the British Isles by area" label="136 permanently inhabited islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="9874" end="9882" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="9884" end="9890" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="9895" end="9903" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="9918" end="9926" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="9990" end="10005" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228829" start="10069" end="10083" title="Portsea Island" label="Portsea Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056767" start="10334" end="10344" title="North Slob" label="North Slob"/>
<link wikidata="Q184599" start="10348" end="10362" title="County Wexford" label="County Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="10400" end="10418" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="10479" end="10488" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206942" start="10703" end="10714" title="Lough Neagh" label="Lough Neagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q208926" start="10821" end="10832" title="Loch Lomond" label="Loch Lomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q49650" start="10842" end="10851" title="Loch Ness" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444264" start="10871" end="10881" title="Loch Morar" label="Loch Morar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="11041" end="11048" title="River Shannon" label="Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="11069" end="11081" title="river Severn" label="river Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680726" start="11137" end="11165" title="climate of the British Isles" label="climate of the British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11327" end="11356" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q211798" start="11428" end="11448" title="North Atlantic Current" label="North Atlantic Drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q209190" start="11645" end="11656" title="Low-pressure area" label="depressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12343832" start="11717" end="11737" title="Westerlies" label="westerly circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="12286" end="12303" title="European mainland" label="European mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="12392" end="12397" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="12402" end="12407" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q75080276" start="12563" end="12573" title="ice bridge" label="ice bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q147498" start="13616" end="13624" title="wych elm" label="wych elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="13652" end="13656" title="Tilia" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q235779" start="13803" end="13812" title="hedgerows" label="hedgerows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983007" start="13847" end="13854" title="Calluna vulgaris" label="heather"/>
<link wikidata="Q161794" start="13870" end="13875" title="common gorse" label="gorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q213548" start="13880" end="13887" title="Pteridium aquilinum" label="bracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="13937" end="13949" title="European elk" label="European elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851" start="14052" end="14059" title="European rabbit" label="rabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="14061" end="14066" title="red fox" label="foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27066" start="14068" end="14074" title="Eurasian badger" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838" start="14077" end="14081" title="European hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145" start="14084" end="14092" title="European hedgehog" label="hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345" start="14099" end="14104" title="stoat" label="stoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="14131" end="14146" title="European beaver" label="European beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="14191" end="14200" title="Wild boar" label="Wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="14335" end="14340" title="European otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="14346" end="14350" title="grey seal" label="grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="14355" end="14366" title="common seal" label="common seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25740" start="14551" end="14555" title="Eurasian wren" label="wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q25334" start="14557" end="14562" title="European robin" label="robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683" start="14564" end="14577" title="house sparrow" label="house sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q26026" start="14579" end="14589" title="woodpigeon" label="woodpigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25383" start="14591" end="14600" title="common chaffinch" label="chaffinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25234" start="14605" end="14614" title="common blackbird" label="blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432" start="14695" end="14703" title="common pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q754863" start="14705" end="14725" title="red-legged partridge" label="red-legged partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q40655821" start="14731" end="14741" title="red grouse" label="red grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q191674" start="14825" end="14829" title="Esox" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245778" start="14848" end="14855" title="Squalidae" label="dogfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11688697" start="14862" end="14866" title="sole (fish)" label="sole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123445" start="14868" end="14875" title="pollock" label="pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q192056" start="15116" end="15121" title="Vipera berus" label="adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q35541230" start="15127" end="15145" title="barred grass snake" label="barred grass snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q208648" start="15154" end="15166" title="Coronella austriaca" label="smooth snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q26582" start="15285" end="15292" title="European polecat" label="polecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q41631" start="15310" end="15316" title="shrews" label="shrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q209067" start="15318" end="15323" title="European mole" label="moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q27016" start="15325" end="15336" title="European water vole" label="water voles"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="15338" end="15346" title="roe deer" label="roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q308702" start="15476" end="15486" title="Kerry slug" label="Kerry slug"/>
<link wikidata="Q848812" start="15591" end="15605" title="Connemara pony" label="Connemara pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q214720" start="15607" end="15620" title="Shetland pony" label="Shetland pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q38418" start="15622" end="15637" title="English Mastiff" label="English Mastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38668" start="15639" end="15654" title="Irish Wolfhound" label="Irish Wolfhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447222" start="15971" end="15999" title="Greater London Built-up Area" label="Greater London Built-up Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348519" start="16071" end="16103" title="Greater Manchester Built-up Area" label="Greater Manchester Built-up Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292186" start="16119" end="16144" title="West Midlands conurbation" label="West Midlands conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670140" start="16163" end="16188" title="West Yorkshire Urban Area" label="West Yorkshire Urban Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600557" start="16215" end="16230" title="Greater Glasgow" label="Greater Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q889862" start="16261" end="16280" title="Greater Dublin Area" label="Greater Dublin Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="16687" end="16705" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="17030" end="17044" title="Irish diaspora" label="Irish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="17231" end="17244" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="17245" end="17251" title="Language family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q214506" start="17257" end="17281" title="Insular Celtic languages" label="Insular Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="17289" end="17297" title="Goidelic" label="Goidelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="17309" end="17314" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="17316" end="17320" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="17325" end="17340" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="17350" end="17359" title="Brittonic languages" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="17371" end="17378" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="17390" end="17396" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="17408" end="17428" title="Brittany" label="north-western France"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="17453" end="17469" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="17551" end="17566" title="Norman language" label="Norman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56428" start="17571" end="17582" title="Guernésiais" label="Guernésiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q56430" start="17584" end="17592" title="Jèrriais" label="Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="Q56429" start="17597" end="17607" title="Sercquiais" label="Sercquiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005" start="17693" end="17697" title="Cant (language)" label="cant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36705" start="17706" end="17712" title="Shelta" label="Shelta"/>
<link wikidata="Q875651" start="17727" end="17743" title="Irish Travellers" label="Irish Travellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="17828" end="17833" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q36708" start="17932" end="17945" title="Norn language" label="Norn language"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="17949" end="17955" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="17960" end="17968" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138308" start="18478" end="18488" title="Doggerland" label="Doggerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395685" start="18829" end="18840" title="Happisburgh" label="Happisburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="18848" end="18855" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="19079" end="19094" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q214506" start="19102" end="19116" title="Insular Celtic languages" label="Insular Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="19278" end="19297" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="19554" end="19593" title="Fall of Rome" label="Roman power waned in the 5th century AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q547241" start="20046" end="20078" title="Hen Ogledd" label="the north of what is now England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="20083" end="20091" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257550" start="20199" end="20212" title="Christianisation of Ireland" label="Christianised"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="20412" end="20422" title="golden age" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q592459" start="20427" end="20450" title="Hiberno-Scottish mission" label="responded with missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087692" start="20576" end="20595" title="Anglo-Saxon mission" label="Anglo-Saxon mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="20908" end="20914" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="20916" end="20920" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="20922" end="20930" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="20932" end="20941" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="20946" end="20953" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="21083" end="21090" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="21172" end="21180" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="21257" end="21263" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="21264" end="21291" title="Norman conquest of England" label="conquest of England in 1066"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="21313" end="21330" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="21476" end="21495" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q178525" start="21499" end="21519" title="Eleanor of Aquitaine" label="Eleanor of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="21532" end="21546" title="Angevin Empire" label="Angevin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="21568" end="21580" title="List of French monarchs" label="French Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q887822" start="21603" end="21624" title="Diarmait Mac Murchada" label="Diarmait Mac Murchada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319101" start="21655" end="21671" title="Laudabiliter" label="the authority of"/>
<link wikidata="Q132845" start="21672" end="21686" title="Pope Adrian IV" label="Pope Adrian IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q901714" start="21733" end="21757" title="Norman invasion of Ireland" label="Angevins invaded Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660081" start="21846" end="21865" title="Ruaidrí Ua Conchobair" label="the Irish High King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653852" start="21893" end="21910" title="Treaty of Windsor (1175)" label="Treaty of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q844250" start="21993" end="22008" title="Lord of Ireland" label="Lord of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="22112" end="22127" title="King of England" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="22187" end="22203" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="22254" end="22261" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="22266" end="22274" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327860" start="22308" end="22323" title="Gaelic Ireland" label="Gaelic kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q921901" start="22325" end="22345" title="Hiberno-Norman" label="Hiberno-Norman lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q844250" start="22372" end="22391" title="Lordship of Ireland" label="Lordship of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483510" start="22428" end="22449" title="Principality of Wales" label="Principality of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="22690" end="22696" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="22704" end="22718" title="King of France" label="King of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="23012" end="23029" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="23300" end="23318" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="a separate kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="23456" end="23486" title="Union of the Crowns" label="inherited the Crown of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="23731" end="23737" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="23883" end="23900" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="23904" end="23929" title="War of the Three Kingdoms" label="War of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015091" start="23939" end="23961" title="revolutionary republic" label="revolutionary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777934" start="24276" end="24286" title="Protestant Ascendancy" label="Ascendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="24708" end="24727" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q644960" start="24909" end="24928" title="Battle of the Boyne" label="Battle of the Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887916" start="24959" end="24976" title="Battle of Aughrim" label="Battle of Aughrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860162" start="25073" end="25091" title="Treaty of Limerick" label="Treaty of Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="25209" end="25224" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="unified in 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="25238" end="25262" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="25298" end="25327" title="1798 Rebellion" label="revolution in Ireland in 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="25376" end="25391" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="unified in 1801"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="25406" end="25420" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="25761" end="25775" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="26034" end="26046" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="26051" end="26070" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="26300" end="26325" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="26345" end="26363" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="26542" end="26549" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="26558" end="26610" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="27089" end="27095" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230" start="27100" end="27108" title="Bailiwick of Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="27127" end="27145" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="27446" end="27463" title="Countries of the United Kingdom" label="constituent parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="27633" end="27641" title="Devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="27833" end="27850" title="English law" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="28040" end="28065" title="parliamentary democracies" label="parliamentary democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="28143" end="28164" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="28174" end="28194" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="parliament in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="28284" end="28316" title="Scottish Parliament" label="devolved parliament in Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="28321" end="28331" title="Senedd" label="in Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="28339" end="28358" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="assembly in Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414948" start="28447" end="28460" title="Consociationalism" label="power sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="28469" end="28478" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="28483" end="28495" title="Irish nationalist" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="28590" end="28615" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="28857" end="28872" title="British monarch" label="British monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="28975" end="28995" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="29066" end="29080" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="29215" end="29235" title="partition of Ireland" label="partition of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193739" start="29396" end="29412" title="Amsterdam Treaty" label="Amsterdam Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="29499" end="29517" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="29555" end="29568" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="30093" end="30105" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983190" start="30555" end="30577" title="Ministry of Justice (United Kingdom)" label="UK Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408851" start="30946" end="30956" title="Samaritans (charity)" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166873" start="31151" end="31186" title="Royal National Lifeboat Institution" label="Royal National Lifeboat Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="31391" end="31421" title="Northern Ireland peace process" label="Northern Ireland peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="31743" end="31769" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800594" start="31849" end="31880" title="North/South Ministerial Council" label="North/South Ministerial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="31986" end="32007" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971477" start="32196" end="32232" title="British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly" label="British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821" start="32342" end="32352" title="Oireachtas" label="Oireachtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="32398" end="32430" title="parliament of the United Kingdom" label="parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="32616" end="32635" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="32641" end="32647" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="32672" end="32697" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q946944" start="32703" end="32719" title="States of Jersey" label="States of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368324" start="32725" end="32743" title="States of Guernsey" label="States of Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="32752" end="32773" title="High Court of Tynwald" label="High Court of Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023842" start="33463" end="33475" title="Niall Blaney" label="Niall Blaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431988" start="34015" end="34027" title="The X Factor (UK TV series)" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629355" start="34214" end="34255" title="Britain and Ireland&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model" label="Britain and Ireland&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136336" start="34357" end="34374" title="Costa Book Awards" label="Costa Book Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q501876" start="34433" end="34452" title="Mercury Music Prize" label="Mercury Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="34639" end="34659" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185045" start="34661" end="34668" title="Cricket in the British Isles (disambiguation)" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="34670" end="34675" title="Rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015" start="34677" end="34684" title="History of snooker" label="snooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193387" start="34733" end="34740" title="croquet" label="croquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="34742" end="34747" title="bowls" label="bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898422" start="34749" end="34763" title="pitch and putt" label="pitch and putt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060287" start="34765" end="34775" title="History of water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672856" start="34780" end="34788" title="Gaelic handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="35075" end="35086" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="35159" end="35166" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="35168" end="35175" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="35177" end="35185" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="35190" end="35195" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q733600" start="35201" end="35224" title="British and Irish Lions" label="British and Irish Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13412574" start="35515" end="35527" title="Triple Crown (rugby union)" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642" start="35543" end="35567" title="Six Nations Championship" label="Six Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002" start="35701" end="35726" title="United Rugby Championship" label="United Rugby Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="35733" end="35742" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="35937" end="35960" title="London Heathrow Airport" label="London Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="36201" end="36216" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="36234" end="36243" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="36286" end="36300" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672812" start="36424" end="36450" title="Irish Sea tunnel" label="tunnel under the Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281650" start="36640" end="36648" title="Rosslare Europort" label="Rosslare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018730" start="36653" end="36662" title="Fishguard" label="Fishguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041095" start="36675" end="36712" title="The Institute of Engineers of Ireland" label="The Institute of Engineers of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="36787" end="36793" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q257446" start="36798" end="36806" title="Holyhead" label="Holyhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="37028" end="37041" title="County Antrim" label="County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="37065" end="37073" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q256091" start="37122" end="37137" title="British Islands" label="British Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672812" start="37140" end="37189" title="Proposed British Isles fixed sea link connections" label="Proposed British Isles fixed sea link connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422445" start="37192" end="37227" title="Extreme points of the British Isles" label="Extreme points of the British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419391" start="37230" end="37266" title="List of islands of the British Isles" label="List of islands of the British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657307" start="37338" end="37358" title="A History of Britain (book)" label="A History of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q472272" start="37417" end="37429" title="Simon Schama" label="Simon Schama"/>
<link wikidata="Q472272" start="37519" end="37531" title="Simon Schama" label="Simon Schama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373357" start="37588" end="37603" title="George Macaulay Trevelyan" label="G. M. Trevelyan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3738" wikidata="Q8752" url="?curid=3738" title="Basque language">
<text>Basque (; ) is a language spoken by Basques and other residents of the Basque Country, a region that straddles the westernmost Pyrenees in adjacent parts of northern Spain and southwestern France. Basque is classified as a language isolate (unrelated to any other known languages) and the only language isolate in Europe. The Basques are indigenous to and primarily inhabit the Basque Country. The Basque language is spoken by 806,000 Basques in all territories. Of these, 93.7% (756,000) are in the Spanish area of the Basque Country and the remaining 6.3% (50,000) are in the French portion.

Native speakers live in a contiguous area that includes parts of four Spanish provinces and the three &quot;ancient provinces&quot; in France. Gipuzkoa, most of Biscay, a few municipalities on the northern border of Álava and the northern area of Navarre formed the core of the remaining Basque-speaking area before measures were introduced in the 1980s to strengthen Basque fluency. By contrast, most of Álava, the westernmost part of Biscay, and central and southern Navarre are predominantly populated by native speakers of Spanish, either because Basque was replaced by Spanish over the centuries (as in most of Álava and central Navarre), or because it may never have been spoken there (as in parts of Enkarterri and south-eastern Navarre).

In Francoist Spain, Basque language use was discouraged by the government&#x27;s repressive policies. In the Basque Country, &quot;Francoist repression was not only political, but also linguistic and cultural.&quot; Franco&#x27;s regime suppressed Basque from official discourse, education, and publishing, making it illegal to register newborn babies under Basque names, and even requiring tombstone engravings in Basque to be removed. In some provinces the public use of Basque was suppressed, with people fined for speaking it. Public use of Basque was frowned upon by supporters of the regime, often regarded as a sign of anti-Francoism or separatism. Overall, in the 1960s and later, the trend reversed and education and publishing in Basque began to flourish. As a part of this process, a standardised form of the Basque language, called Euskara Batua, was developed by the Euskaltzaindia in the late 1960s.

Besides its standardised version, the five historic Basque dialects are Biscayan, Gipuzkoan, and Upper Navarrese in Spain and Navarrese–Lapurdian and Souletin in France. They take their names from the historic Basque provinces, but the dialect boundaries are not congruent with province boundaries. Euskara Batua was created so that the Basque language could be used—and easily understood by all Basque speakers—in formal situations (education, mass media, literature), and this is its main use today. In both Spain and France, the use of Basque for education varies from region to region and from school to school.

Basque is the only surviving language isolate in Europe. The current mainstream scientific view on the origin of the Basques and of their language is that early forms of Basque developed before the arrival of Indo-European languages in the area, i.e. before the arrival of Celtic and Romance languages in particular, as the latter today geographically surround the Basque-speaking region. Typologically, with its agglutinative morphology and ergative–absolutive alignment, Basque grammar remains markedly different from that of Standard Average European languages. Nevertheless, Basque has borrowed up to 40 percent of its vocabulary from Romance languages, and the Latin script is used for the Basque alphabet.

== Names of the language ==

In Basque, the name of the language is officially (alongside various dialect forms).

In French, the language is normally called , though has become common in recent times. Spanish has a greater variety of names for the language. Today, it is most commonly referred to as , , or . Both terms, and , are inherited from the Latin ethnonym , which in turn goes back to the Greek term (), an ethnonym used by Strabo in his (23 CE, Book III).

The Spanish term , derived from Latin , has acquired negative connotations over the centuries and is not well-liked amongst Basque speakers generally. Its use is documented at least as far back as the 14th century when a law passed in Huesca in 1349 stated that —essentially penalising the use of Arabic, Hebrew, or Basque in marketplaces with a fine of 30 sols (the equivalent of 30 sheep).

== History and classification ==

Although the Basque language is geographically surrounded by Romance languages, it is a language isolate that is unrelated to them or to any other language. Most scholars believe Basque to be the last remaining descendant of one of the pre-Indo-European languages of prehistoric Europe. Consequently, it may be impossible to reconstruct the prehistory of the Basque language by the traditional comparative method except by applying it to differences between Basque dialects. Little is known of its origins, but it is likely that an early form of the Basque language was present in and around the area of modern Basque Country before the arrival of the Indo-European languages in western Europe during the 3rd millennium BC.

Authors such as Miguel de Unamuno and Louis Lucien Bonaparte have noted that the words for &quot;knife&quot; (), &quot;axe&quot; (), and &quot;hoe&quot; () appear to derive from the word for &quot;stone&quot; (), and have therefore concluded that the language dates to prehistoric Europe when those tools were made of stone. Others find this unlikely: see the controversy.

Latin inscriptions in preserve a number of words with cognates in the reconstructed proto-Basque language, for instance, the personal names and ( and mean &#x27;young girl&#x27; and &#x27;man&#x27;, respectively in modern Basque). This language is generally referred to as Aquitanian and is assumed to have been spoken in the area before the Roman Republic&#x27;s conquests in the western Pyrenees. Some authors even argue for late Basquisation, that the language moved westward during Late Antiquity after the fall of the Western Roman Empire into the northern part of Hispania into what is now the Basque Country.

Roman neglect of this area allowed Aquitanian to survive while the Iberian and Tartessian languages became extinct. Through the long contact with Romance languages, Basque adopted a sizeable number of Romance words. Initially the source was Latin, later Gascon (a branch of Occitan) in the north-east, Navarro-Aragonese in the south-east and Spanish in the south-west.

Since 1968, Basque has been immersed in a revitalisation process, facing formidable obstacles. However, significant progress has been made in numerous areas. Six main factors have been identified to explain its relative success: 
# implementation and acceptance of Unified Basque (Batua), 
# integration of Basque in the education system
# creation of media in Basque (radio, newspapers, and television)
# the established new legal framework
# collaboration between public institutions and people&#x27;s organisations, and 
# campaigns for Basque language literacy.

While those six factors influenced the revitalisation process, the extensive development and use of language technologies is also considered a significant additional factor.

=== Hypotheses concerning Basque&#x27;s connections to other languages ===
Many linguists have tried to link Basque with other languages, but no hypothesis has gained mainstream acceptance. Apart from pseudoscientific comparisons, the appearance of long-range linguistics gave rise to several attempts to connect Basque with geographically very distant language families such as Georgian. Historical work on Basque is challenging since written material and documentation only is available for some few hundred years. Almost all hypotheses concerning the origin of Basque are controversial, and the suggested evidence is not generally accepted by mainstream linguists. Some of these hypothetical connections are:
* Ligurian substrate: this hypothesis, proposed in the 19th century by d&#x27;Arbois de Jubainville, J. Pokorny, P. Kretschmer and several other linguists, encompasses the Basco-Iberian hypothesis.
* Iberian: another ancient language once spoken in the Iberian Peninsula, shows several similarities with Aquitanian and Basque. However, not enough evidence exists to distinguish geographical connections from linguistic ones. Iberian itself remains unclassified. Eduardo Orduña Aznar claims to have established correspondences between Basque and Iberian numerals and noun case markers.
* Vasconic substratum hypothesis: this proposal, made by the German linguist Theo Vennemann, claims that enough toponymical evidence exists to conclude that Basque is the only survivor of a larger family that once extended throughout most of western Europe, and has also left its mark in modern Indo-European languages spoken in Europe.
* Georgian: linking Basque to the Kartvelian languages is now widely discredited. The hypothesis was inspired by the existence of the ancient Kingdom of Iberia in the Caucasus and some similarities in societal practices and agriculture between the two populations. Historical comparisons are difficult due to the dearth of historical material for Basque and several of the Kartvelian languages. Typological similarities have been proposed for some of the phonological characteristics and most importantly for some of the details of the ergative constructions, but these alone cannot prove historical relatedness between languages since such characteristics are found in other languages across the world, even if not in Indo-European. According to J. P. Mallory, the hypothesis was also inspired by a Basque place-name ending in &quot;-dze&quot; which is common in Kartvelian. The hypothesis suggested that Basque and Georgian were remnants of a pre-Indo-European group.
* Northeast Caucasian languages, such as Chechen, are seen by some linguists as more likely candidates for a very distant connection.
* Dené–Caucasian: based on the possible Caucasian link, some linguists, for example John Bengtson and Merritt Ruhlen, have proposed including Basque in the Dené–Caucasian superfamily of languages, but this proposed superfamily includes languages from North America and Eurasia, and its existence is highly controversial.
* Indo-European: a genetic link between Basque and the Indo-European languages has been proposed by Forni (2013), and Juliette Blevins, who has identified potential phonological correspondences between Proto-Basque and Proto-Indo-European. Such hypotheses are rejected by most reviewers, both including scholars adhering to the mainstream view of Basque as a language isolate (Gorrochategui, Lakarra), as well as proponents of wide-range genetic relations (Bengtson).

== Geographic distribution ==


The region where Basque is spoken has become smaller over centuries, especially at the northern, southern, and eastern borders. Nothing is known about the limits of this region in ancient times, but on the basis of toponyms and epigraphs, it seems that in the beginning of the Common Era it stretched to the river Garonne in the north (including the south-western part of present-day France); at least to the Val d&#x27;Aran in the east (now a Gascon-speaking part of Catalonia), including lands on both sides of the Pyrenees; the southern and western boundaries are not clear at all.

The Reconquista temporarily counteracted this contracting tendency when the Christian lords called on northern Iberian peoples — Basques, Asturians, and &quot;Franks&quot; — to colonise the new conquests. The Basque language became the main everyday language, while other languages like Spanish, Gascon, French, or Latin were preferred for the administration and high education.

By the 16th century, the Basque-speaking area was reduced basically to the present-day seven provinces of the Basque Country, excluding the southern part of Navarre, the south-western part of Álava, and the western part of Biscay, and including some parts of Béarn.

In 1807, Basque was still spoken in the northern half of Álava—including its capital city Vitoria-Gasteiz—and a vast area in central Navarre, but in these two provinces, Basque experienced a rapid decline that pushed its border northwards. In the French Basque Country, Basque was still spoken in all the territory except in Bayonne and some villages around, and including some bordering towns in Béarn.

In the 20th century, however, the rise of Basque nationalism spurred increased interest in the language as a sign of ethnic identity, and with the establishment of autonomous governments in the Southern Basque Country, it has recently made a modest comeback. In the Spanish part, Basque-language schools for children and Basque-teaching centres for adults have brought the language to areas such as western Enkarterri and the Ribera del Ebro in southern Navarre, where it is not known to ever have been widely spoken; and in the French Basque Country, these schools and centres have almost stopped the decline of the language.

=== Official status ===
Historically, Latin or Romance languages have been the official languages in this region. However, Basque was explicitly recognised in some areas. For instance, the &quot;fuero&quot; or charter of the Basque-colonised Ojacastro (now in La Rioja) allowed the inhabitants to use Basque in legal processes in the 13th and 14th centuries. Basque was allowed in telegraph messages in Spain thanks to the royal decree of 1904.

The Spanish Constitution of 1978 states in Article 3 that the Spanish language is the official language of the nation, but allows autonomous communities to provide a co-official language status for the other languages of Spain. Consequently, the Statute of Autonomy of the Basque Autonomous Community establishes Basque as the co-official language of the autonomous community. The Statute of Navarre establishes Spanish as the official language of Navarre, but grants co-official status to the Basque language in the Basque-speaking areas of northern Navarre. Basque has no official status in the French Basque Country and French citizens are barred from officially using Basque in a French court of law. However, the use of Basque by Spanish nationals in French courts is permitted (with translation), as Basque is officially recognised on the other side of the border.

The positions of the various existing governments differ with regard to the promotion of Basque in areas where Basque is commonly spoken. The language has official status in those territories that are within the Basque Autonomous Community, where it is spoken and promoted heavily, but only partially in Navarre. The (), seen as contentious by many Basques, but considered fitting Navarra&#x27;s linguistic and cultural diversity by some of the main political parties of Navarre, divides Navarre into three language areas: Basque-speaking, non-Basque-speaking, and mixed. Support for the language and the linguistic rights of citizens vary, depending on the area. Others consider it unfair, since the rights of Basque speakers differ greatly depending on the place they live.

=== Demographics ===

The 2021 sociolinguistic survey of all Basque-speaking territories showed that, of all people aged 16 and above:
* In the Basque Autonomous Community, 36.2% were fluent Basque speakers, 18.5% passive speakers and 45.3% did not speak Basque. The percentage was highest in Gipuzkoa (51.8% speakers) and Bizkaia (30.6%) and lowest in Álava (22.4%). These results represent an increase from previous years (33.9% in 2016, 30.1% in 2006, 29.5% in 2001, 27.7% in 1996 and 24.1% in 1991). The highest percentage of speakers can now be found in the 16–24 age range (74.5%) vs. 22.0% in the 65+ age range.
* In the French Basque Country, in 2021, 20.0% were fluent Basque speakers. Because the French Basque Country is not under the influence of the Basque Autonomous Country government, people in the region have fewer incentives from government authorities to learn the language. As such, these results represent another decrease from previous years (22.5% in 2006, 24.8% in 2001 and 26.4 in 1996 or 56,146 in 1996 to 51,197 in 2016). However, for those in the 16-24 age range, the proportion of Basque speakers increased to 21.5%, from 12.2% 20 years earlier.
* In Navarre, 14.1% were fluent Basque speakers, 10.5% passive speakers, and 75.4% did not speak Basque. The percentage was highest in the Basque-speaking zone in the north (62.3% speakers, including 85.9% of youth) and lowest in the non-Basque-speaking zone in the south (1.6%). The overall proportion of 14.1% represented a slight increase from previous years (12.9% in 2016, 11.1% in 2006,10.3% in 2001, 9.6% in 1996 and 9.5% in 1991). Among age groups, the highest percentage of speakers can now be found in the 16–24 age range (28%) vs. 8.3% in the 65+ age range.

In 2021, out of a population of 2,634,800 over 16 years of age (1,838,800 in the Autonomous community, 546,000 in Navarre and 250,000 in the Northern Basque Country), 806,000 spoke Basque, which amounted to 30.6% of the population. Compared to the 1991 figures, this represents an overall increase of 266,000, from 539,110 speakers 30 years previously (430,000 in the BAC, 40,110 in FCN, and 69,000 in the Northern provinces). This number has tended to increase, as in all regions the age group most likely to speak Basque was those between 16 and 24 years old. In the BAC, the proportion in this age group who spoke the language (74.5%) was nearly triple the comparable figure from 1991, when barely a quarter of the population spoke Basque.

While there is a general increase in the number of Basque speakers during this period, this is mainly because of bilingualism. Basque transmission as a sole mother tongue has decreased from 19% in 1991 to 15.1% in 2016, while Basque and another language being used as mother language increased from 3% to 5.4% in the same time period. General public attitude towards efforts to promote the Basque language have also been more positive, with the share of people against these efforts falling from 20.9% in 1991 to 16% in 2016.

In 2021, the study found that in the BAC, when both parents were Basque speakers, 98% of children were only communicated to in Basque, while 2% were communicated to in both Basque and Spanish. When only one parent was a Basque speaker and their first language was Basque, 84% used Basque and Spanish and 16% only Spanish. In Navarre, the family language of 94.3% of the youngest respondents with both Basque parents was Basque. In the Northern Basque Country, however, when both parents were Basque-speaking, just two-thirds transmitted only Basque to their offspring, and as age decreased, the transmission rate also decreased.

Basque is used as a language of commerce both in the Basque Country and in locations around the world where Basques immigrated throughout history.

=== Dialects ===

The modern Basque dialects show a high degree of dialectal divergence, sometimes making cross-dialect communication difficult. This is especially true in the case of Biscayan and Souletin, which are regarded as the most divergent Basque dialects.

Modern Basque dialectology distinguishes five dialects:
* Biscayan or &quot;Western&quot;
* Gipuzkoan or &quot;Central&quot;
* Upper Navarrese
* Navarro-Lapurdian
* Souletin (Zuberoan)

These dialects are divided in 11 subdialects, and 24 minor varieties among them.
According to Koldo Zuazo, the Biscayan dialect or &quot;Western&quot; is the most widespread dialect, with around 300,000 speakers out of a total of around 660,000 speakers. This dialect is divided in two minor subdialects: the Western Biscayan and Eastern Biscayan, plus transitional dialects.

=== Influence on other languages ===

Although the influence of the neighbouring Romance languages on the Basque language (especially the lexicon, but also to some degree Basque phonology and grammar) has been much more extensive, it is usually assumed that there has been some feedback from Basque into these languages as well. In particular Gascon and Aragonese, and to a lesser degree Spanish are thought to have received this influence in the past. In the case of Aragonese and Gascon, this would have been through substrate interference following language shift from Aquitanian or Basque to a Romance language, affecting all levels of the language, including place names around the Pyrenees.

Although a number of words of alleged Basque origin in the Spanish language are circulated (e.g. &#x27;anchovies&#x27;, &#x27;dashing, gallant, spirited&#x27;, &#x27;puppy&#x27;, etc.), most of these have more easily explicable Romance etymologies or not particularly convincing derivations from Basque. Ignoring cultural terms, there is one strong loanword candidate, , long considered the source of the Pyrenean and Iberian Romance words for &quot;left (side)&quot; (, , ). The lack of initial in Gascon could arguably be due to a Basque influence but this issue is under-researched.

The other most commonly claimed substrate influences:
* the Old Spanish merger of and .
* the simple five-vowel system.
* change of initial into (e.g. → , with Old Basque lacking but having ).
* voiceless alveolar retracted sibilant , a sound transitional between laminodental and palatal ; this sound also influenced other Ibero-Romance languages and Catalan.

The first two features are common, widespread developments in many Romance (and non-Romance) languages. The change of to occurred historically only in a limited area (Gascony and Old Castile) that corresponds almost exactly to areas where heavy Basque bilingualism is assumed, and as a result has been widely postulated (and equally strongly disputed). Substrate theories are often difficult to prove (especially in the case of phonetically plausible changes like to ). As a result, although many arguments have been made on both sides, the debate largely comes down to the a priori tendency on the part of particular linguists to accept or reject substrate arguments.

Examples of arguments against the substrate theory, and possible responses:
# Spanish did not fully shift to , instead, it has preserved before consonants such as and (cf , ). (On the other hand, the occurrence of in these words might be a secondary development from an earlier sound such as or and learned words (or words influenced by written Latin form). Gascon does have in these words, which might reflect the original situation.)
# Evidence of Arabic loanwords in Spanish points to continuing to exist long after a Basque substrate might have had any effect on Spanish. (On the other hand, the occurrence of in these words might be a late development. Many languages have come to accept new phonemes from other languages after a period of significant influence. For example, French lost but later regained it as a result of Germanic influence, and has recently gained as a result of English influence.)
# Basque regularly developed Latin into or .
# The same change also occurs in parts of Sardinia, Italy and the Romance languages of the Balkans where no Basque substrate can be reasonably argued for. (On the other hand, the fact that the same change might have occurred elsewhere independently does not disprove substrate influence. Furthermore, parts of Sardinia also have prothetic or before initial , just as in Basque and Gascon, which may actually argue for some type of influence between both areas.)

Beyond these arguments, a number of nomadic groups of Castile are also said to use or have used Basque words in their jargon, such as the gacería in Segovia, the mingaña, the Galician fala dos arxinas and the Asturian Xíriga.

Part of the Romani community in the Basque Country speaks Erromintxela, which is a rare mixed language, with a Kalderash Romani vocabulary and Basque grammar.

==== Basque pidgins ====
A number of Basque-based or Basque-influenced pidgins have existed. In the 16th century, Basque sailors used a Basque–Icelandic pidgin in their contacts with Iceland. The Algonquian–Basque pidgin arose from contact between Basque whalers and the Algonquian peoples in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and Strait of Belle Isle.

== Phonology ==
=== Vowels ===

The Basque language features five vowels: , , , and (the same that are found in Spanish, Asturian and Aragonese). In the Zuberoan dialect, extra phonemes are featured:
* the close front rounded vowel , graphically represented as ;
* a set of contrasting nasal vowels.

There is no distinctive vowel length in Basque, although vowels can be lengthened for emphasis. The mid vowels and are raised before nasal consonants.

Basque has an a-Elision Rule, according to which the vowel is elided before any following vowel. This does not prevent the existence of diphthongs with present.

There are six diphthongs in Basque, all falling and with or as the second element.

=== Consonants ===


In syllable-final position, all plosives are devoiced and are spelled accordingly in Standard Basque. When between vowels, and often when after or , the voiced plosives , , and , are pronounced as the corresponding fricatives , , and .

Basque has a distinction between laminal and apical articulation for the alveolar fricatives and affricates. With the laminal alveolar fricative , the friction occurs across the blade of the tongue, the tongue tip pointing toward the lower teeth. This is the usual in most European languages. It is written with an orthographic . By contrast, the voiceless apicoalveolar fricative is written ; the tip of the tongue points toward the upper teeth and friction occurs at the tip (apex). For example, (singular, respectful) is distinguished from . The affricate counterparts are written and . So, is distinguished from ; is distinguished from .

In the westernmost parts of the Basque country, only the apical and the alveolar affricate are used.

Basque also features postalveolar sibilants (, written , and , written ).
The letter has a variety of realisations according to the regional dialect: , as pronounced from west to east in south Bizkaia and coastal Lapurdi, central Bizkaia, east Bizkaia and Gipuzkoa, south Navarre, inland Lapurdi and Low Navarre, and Zuberoa, respectively.
The letter is pronounced in the northern dialects, but not pronounced in the southern ones. Unified Basque spells it except when it is predictable, in a position following a consonant.

Unless they are recent loanwords (e.g. , , ... ), words may not have initial . In older loans, initial &quot;r-&quot; took a prosthetic vowel, resulting in &quot;err-&quot; ( , ), more rarely &quot;irr-&quot; (for example , ) and &quot;arr-&quot; (for example ).

Basque does not have in syllable final position, and syllable-final assimilates to the place of articulation of following plosives. As a result, is pronounced like , and is realized as .

==== Palatalization ====
Basque has two types of palatalization, automatic palatalization and expressive palatalization. Automatic palatalization occurs in western Labourd, much of Navarre, all of Gipuzkoa, and nearly all of Biscay. As a result of automatic palatalization, and become the palatal nasal and the palatal lateral respectively after the vowel and before another vowel. An exception is the loanword &#x27;lily&#x27;. The same palatalization occurs after the semivowel of the diphthongs &quot;ai, ei, oi, ui&quot;. This palatalization occurs in a wider area, including Soule, all of Gipuzkoa and Biscay, and almost all of Navarre. In a few regions, and can be palatalized even in the absence of a following vowel. After palatalization, the semivowel is usually absorbed by the palatal consonant. This can be seen in older spellings, such as instead of modern &#x27;degree&#x27;. That said, the modern orthography for Standard Basque ignores automatic palatalization.

In certain regions of Gipuzkoa and Biscay, intervocalic is often palatalized after and especially . It may become indistinguishable from the affricate , spelled , so &#x27;father&#x27; may sound like it were spelled or . This type of palatalization is far from general, and is often viewed as substandard.

In Goizueta Basque, there are a few examples of being palatalized after , and optional palatalization of . For example, &#x27;seedbed&#x27; becomes , and &#x27;lamb&#x27; can be .

Basque nouns, adjectives, and adverbs can be expressively palatalized. These express &#x27;smallness&#x27;, rarely literal and often showing affection, in nouns, and mitigation in adjectives and adverbs. This is often used in the formation of pet names and nicknames. In words containing one or more sibilant, these sibilants are palatalized in order to form the palatalized form. That is, &quot;s&quot; and &quot;z&quot; become &quot;x&quot;, and &quot;ts&quot; and &quot;tz&quot; become &quot;tx&quot;. As a result, &#x27;man&#x27; becomes &#x27;little fellow&#x27;, &#x27;crazy, insane&#x27; becomes &#x27;silly, foolish&#x27;, and &#x27;lamb&#x27; becomes &#x27;lambkin, young lamb&#x27;.
In words without sibilants, , , , and can become palatalized. This palatalization is indicated in writing with a double consonant, except in the case of palatalized which is written . Thus, &#x27;drop&#x27; becomes &#x27;droplet&#x27;, and &#x27;grey&#x27; becomes &#x27;grey and pretty, greyish&#x27;.

The pronunciation of &quot;tt&quot; and &quot;dd&quot;, and the existence of &quot;dd&quot;, differ by dialect. In the Gipuzkoan and Biscayan dialects &quot;tt&quot; is often pronounced the same as &quot;tx&quot;, that is, as , and &quot;dd&quot; does not exist. Likewise, in Goizueta Basque, &quot;tt&quot; is a voiceless palatal stop and the corresponding voiced palatal stop, , is absent except as an allophone of . In Goizueta Basque, is sometimes the result of an affectionate palatalization of .

Palatalization of the rhotics is rare and only occurs in the eastern dialects. When palatalized, the rhotics become the palatal lateral . Likewise, palatalization of velars, resulting in &quot;tt&quot; or &quot;tx&quot;, is quite rare.

A few common words, such as &#x27;dog&#x27;, pronounced , use palatal sounds even though in current usage they have lost the diminutive sense, the corresponding non-palatal forms now acquiring an augmentative or pejorative sense: &#x27;big dog&#x27;.

=== Sandhi ===
There are some rules which govern the behavior of consonants in contact with each other. These apply both within and between words. When two plosives meet, the first one is dropped, and the second must become voiceless. If a sibilant follows a plosive, the plosive is dropped, and the sibilant becomes the corresponding affricate. When a plosive follows an affricate, the affricate becomes a sibilant, and a voiced plosive is devoiced. When a voiced plosive follows a sibilant, it is devoiced except in very slow and careful speech. In the central dialects of Basque, a sibilant turns into an affricate when it follows a liquid or a nasal. When a plosive follows a nasal, there is a strong tendency for it to become voiced.

=== Stress and pitch ===

Basque features great dialectal variation in accentuation, from a weak pitch accent in the western dialects to a marked stress in central and eastern dialects, with varying patterns of stress placement. Stress is in general not distinctive (and for historical comparisons not very useful); there are, however, a few instances where stress is phonemic, serving to distinguish between a few pairs of stress-marked words and between some grammatical forms (mainly plurals from other forms), e.g. (, absolutive case) vs. (, absolutive case; an adoption from Spanish ); (, ergative case) vs. (, ergative case) vs. ( or , absolutive case).

Given its great deal of variation among dialects, stress is not marked in the standard orthography and Euskaltzaindia (the Academy of the Basque Language) provides only general recommendations for a standard placement of stress, basically to place a high-pitched weak stress (weaker than that of Spanish, let alone that of English) on the second syllable of a syntagma, and a low-pitched even-weaker stress on its last syllable, except in plural forms where stress is moved to the first syllable.

This scheme provides Basque with a distinct musicality that differentiates its sound from the prosodical patterns of Spanish (which tends to stress the second-to-last syllable). Some (, i.e. second-language Basque-speakers) with Spanish as their first language tend to carry the prosodical patterns of Spanish into their pronunciation of Basque, e.g. pronouncing () as (– – ´ –), instead of as (– ´ – `).

=== Morphophonology ===

The combining forms of nominals in final vary across the regions of the Basque Country. The can stay unchanged, be lowered to an , or it can be lost. Loss is most common in the east, while lowering is most common in the west. For instance, , , has the combining forms and , as in , , and , , whereas , , has the combining form , as in , . Michelena suggests that the lowering to is generalised from cases of Romance borrowings in Basque that retained Romance stem alternations, such as , with combining form , borrowed from Romance &quot;canto&quot;, &quot;canta-&quot;.

== Grammar ==

Basque is an ergative–absolutive language. The subject of an intransitive verb is in the absolutive case (which is unmarked), and the same case is used for the direct object of a transitive verb. The subject of the transitive verb is marked differently, with the ergative case (shown by the suffix &quot;-k&quot;). This also triggers main and auxiliary verbal agreement.

The auxiliary verb, which accompanies most main verbs, agrees not only with the subject, but with any direct object and the indirect object present. Among European languages, this polypersonal agreement is found only in Basque, some languages of the Caucasus (especially the Kartvelian languages), Mordvinic languages, Hungarian, and Maltese (all non-Indo-European). The ergative–absolutive alignment is also rare among European languages—occurring only in some languages of the Caucasus—but not infrequent worldwide.

Consider the phrase:

 is the agent (transitive subject), so it is marked with the ergative case ending &quot;-k&quot; (with an epenthetic &quot;-e-&quot;). has an &quot;-ak&quot; ending, which marks plural object (plural absolutive, direct object case). The verb is , in which is a kind of gerund (&quot;buying&quot;) and the auxiliary means &quot;he/she (does) them for me&quot;. This can be split like this:
* &quot;di-&quot; is used in the present tense when the verb has a subject (ergative), a direct object (absolutive), and an indirect object, and the object is him/her/it/them.
* &quot;-zki-&quot; means the absolutive (in this case the newspapers) is plural; if it were singular there would be no infix; and
* &quot;-t&quot; or &quot;-da-&quot; means &quot;to me/for me&quot; (indirect object).
* in this instance there is no suffix after &quot;-t&quot;. A zero suffix in this position indicates that the ergative (the subject) is third person singular (he/she/it).

The auxiliary verb is composed as di-zki-da-zue and means &#x27;you pl. (do) them for me&#x27;
* &quot;di-&quot; indicates that the main verb is transitive and in the present tense
* &quot;-zki-&quot; indicates that the direct object is plural
* &quot;-da-&quot; indicates that the indirect object is me (to me/for me; -t becomes -da- when not final)
* &quot;-zue&quot; indicates that the subject is you (plural)

The pronoun &#x27;you (plural)&#x27; has the same form both in the nominative or absolutive case (the subject of an intransitive sentence or direct object of a transitive sentence) and in the ergative case (the subject of a transitive sentence). In spoken Basque, the auxiliary verb is never dropped even if it is redundant, e.g. in &#x27;you (pl.) are buying the newspapers for me&#x27;. However, the pronouns are almost always dropped, e.g. in &#x27;you (pl.) are buying the newspapers for me&#x27;. The pronouns are used only to show emphasis: &#x27;it is you (pl.) who buys the newspapers for me&#x27;, or &#x27;it is me for whom you buy the newspapers&#x27;.

Modern Basque dialects allow for the conjugation of about fifteen verbs, called synthetic verbs, some only in literary contexts. These can be put in the present and past tenses in the indicative and subjunctive moods, in three tenses in the conditional and potential moods, and in one tense in the imperative. Each verb that can be taken intransitively has a (absolutive) paradigm and possibly a (absolutive–dative) paradigm, as in the sentence (). Each verb that can be taken transitively uses those two paradigms for antipassive-voice contexts in which no agent is mentioned (Basque lacks a passive voice, and displays instead an antipassive voice paradigm), and also has a (absolutive–ergative) paradigm and possibly a (absolutive–dative–ergative) paradigm. This last is exemplified by above. In each paradigm, each constituent noun can take on any of eight persons, five singular and three plural, with the exception of in which the absolutive can only be third person singular or plural. The most ubiquitous auxiliary, , can be used in any of these paradigms, depending on the nature of the main verb.

There are more persons in the singular (5) than in the plural (3) for synthetic (or filamentous) verbs because of the two familiar persons—informal masculine and feminine second person singular. The pronoun &quot;hi&quot; is used for both of them, but where the masculine form of the verb uses a &quot;-k&quot;, the feminine uses an &quot;-n.&quot; This is a property rarely found in Indo-European languages. The entire paradigm of the verb is further augmented by inflecting for &quot;listener&quot; (the allocutive) even if the verb contains no second person constituent. If the situation calls for the familiar masculine, the form is augmented and modified accordingly. Likewise for the familiar feminine.
(, ; , , , , , ) This multiplies the number of possible forms by nearly three. Still, the restriction on contexts in which these forms may be used is strong, since all participants in the conversation must be friends of the same sex, and not too far apart in age. Some dialects dispense with the familiar forms entirely. Note, however, that the formal second person singular conjugates in parallel to the other plural forms, perhaps indicating that it was originally the second person plural, later came to be used as a formal singular, and then later still the modern second person plural was formulated as an innovation.

All the other verbs in Basque are called periphrastic, behaving much like a participle would in English. These have only three forms in total, called aspects: perfect (various suffixes), habitual (suffix &quot;-t[z]en&quot;), and future/potential (suffix. &quot;-ko/-go&quot;). Verbs of Latinate origin in Basque, as well as many other verbs, have a suffix &quot;-tu&quot; in the perfect, adapted from the Latin perfect passive &quot;-tus&quot; suffix. The synthetic verbs also have periphrastic forms, for use in perfects and in simple tenses in which they are deponent.

Within a verb phrase, the periphrastic verb comes first, followed by the auxiliary.

A Basque noun phrase is inflected in 17 different ways for case, multiplied by four ways for its definiteness and number (indefinite, definite singular, definite plural, and definite close plural: [Basque speaker], [the Basque speaker, a Basque speaker], [Basque speakers, the Basque speakers], and [we Basque speakers, those Basque speakers]). These first 68 forms are further modified based on other parts of the sentence, which in turn are inflected for the noun again. It has been estimated that, with two levels of recursion, a Basque noun may have 458,683 inflected forms.

The common noun is declined as follows:

The proper name (Michael) is declined as follows:

Within a noun phrase, modifying adjectives follow the noun. As an example of a Basque noun phrase, is morphologically analysed as follows by Agirre et al.

Basic syntactic construction is subject–object–verb (unlike Spanish, French or English where a subject–verb–object construction is more common). The order of the phrases within a sentence can be changed for thematic purposes, whereas the order of the words within a phrase is usually rigid. As a matter of fact, Basque phrase order is topic–focus, meaning that in neutral sentences (such as sentences to inform someone of a fact or event) the topic is stated first, then the focus. In such sentences, the verb phrase comes at the end. In brief, the focus directly precedes the verb phrase. This rule is also applied in questions, for instance, &quot;What is this?&quot; can be translated as or , but in both cases the question tag immediately precedes the verb . This rule is so important in Basque that, even in grammatical descriptions of Basque in other languages, the Basque word is used.

In negative sentences, the order changes. Since the negative particle must always directly precede the auxiliary, the topic most often comes beforehand, and the rest of the sentence follows. This includes the periphrastic, if there is one: , , in the negative becomes , in which () is separated from its auxiliary and placed at the end.

== Vocabulary ==
Through contact with neighbouring peoples, Basque has adopted many words from Latin, Spanish, French and Gascon, among other languages. There are a considerable number of Latin loans (sometimes obscured by being subject to Basque phonology and grammar for centuries), for example: (, from ), (, from , ), (, from ), (, from ).

== Writing system ==

Basque is written using the Latin script including and sometimes and . Basque does not use for native words, but the Basque alphabet (established by Euskaltzaindia) does include them for loanwords:
:⟨Aa, Bb, Cc, Dd, Ee, Ff, Gg, Hh, Ii, Jj, Kk, Ll, Mm, Nn, Ññ, Oo, Pp, Qq, Rr, Ss, Tt, Uu, Vv, Ww, Xx, Yy, Zz⟩

The phonetically meaningful digraphs are treated as pairs of letters.

All letters and digraphs represent unique phonemes. The main exception is when precedes and , which in most dialects palatalises their sounds into and , even if these are not written. Hence, can also be written without changing the sound, whereas the proper name requires the mute to break the palatalisation of the .

 is mute in most regions, but it is pronounced in many places in the north-east, the main reason for its existence in the Basque alphabet.
Its acceptance was a matter of contention during the standardisation process because the speakers of the most extended dialects had to learn where to place , silent for them.

In Sabino Arana&#x27;s (1865–1903) alphabet, digraphs and were replaced with and , respectively.

A typically Basque style of lettering is sometimes used for inscriptions.
It derives from the work of stone and wood carvers and is characterised by thick serifs.

=== Number system used by millers ===

Basque millers traditionally employed a separate number system of unknown origin. In this system the symbols are arranged either along a vertical line or horizontally. On the vertical line the single digits and fractions are usually off to one side, usually at the top. When used horizontally, the smallest units are usually on the right and the largest on the left. As with the Basque system of counting in general, it is vigesimal (base 20). Although it is in theory capable of indicating numbers above 100, most recorded examples do not go above 100. Fractions are relatively common, especially .

The exact systems used vary from area to area but generally follow the same principle with 5 usually being a diagonal line or a curve off the vertical line (a V shape is used when writing a 5 horizontally). Units of ten are usually a horizontal line through the vertical. The twenties are based on a circle with intersecting lines. This system is no longer in general use but is occasionally employed for decorative purposes.

== Examples ==
=== Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ===
=== ===
== Language video gallery ==
== See also ==
* Basque dialects
* Vasconic languages
* List of Basques
* Basque Country
* Late Basquisation
* Languages of France
* Languages of Spain
* Aquitanian language
* List of ideophones in Basque
* Basque literature

== References ==
== Further reading ==
=== General and descriptive grammars ===
* Allières, Jacques (1979): &quot;Manuel pratique de basque&quot;, &quot;Connaissance des langues&quot; v. 13, A. &amp; J. Picard (Paris), .
* de Azkue Aberasturi, Resurrección María (1969): &quot;Morfología vasca.&quot; La Gran enciclopedia vasca, Bilbao 1969.
* Campion, Arturo (1884): &quot;Gramática de los cuatro dialectos literarios de la lengua euskara&quot;, Tolosa.
* Euskara Institutua (Euskara Institutuaren ataria (UPV - EHU)), University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Sareko Euskal Gramatika, SEG Aurkezpena [Sareko Euskal Gramatika]
* Hualde, José Ignacio &amp; Ortiz de Urbina, Jon (eds.): &quot;A Grammar of Basque&quot;. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2003. .
* Lafitte, Pierre (1962): &quot;Grammaire basque – navarro-labourdin littéraire.&quot; Elkarlanean, Donostia/Bayonne, . (Dialectal.)
* Lafon, R. (1972): &quot;Basque&quot; In Thomas A. Sebeok (ed.) &quot;Current Trends in Linguistics. Vol. 9. Linguistics in Western Europe&quot;, Mouton, The Hague, Mouton, pp. 1744–1792. Part 2 The study of languages
* Tovar, Antonio, (1957): &quot;The Basque Language&quot;, U. of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
* Urquizu Sarasúa, Patricio (2007): &quot;Gramática de la lengua vasca&quot;. UNED, Madrid, .
* van Eys, Willem J. (1879): &quot;Grammaire comparée des dialectes basques&quot;, Paris.

=== Linguistic studies ===
* Agirre, Eneko, et al. (1992): XUXEN: A spelling checker/corrector for Basque based on two-level morphology.
* Gavel, Henri (1921): &quot;Eléments de phonetique basque&quot; (= &quot;Revista Internacional de los Estudios Vascos = Revue Internationale des Etudes Basques&quot; 12, París. (Study of the dialects.)
* Hualde, José Ignacio (1991): &quot;Basque phonology&quot;, Taylor &amp; Francis, .
* Lakarra Andrinua, Joseba A.; Hualde, José Ignacio (eds.) (2006): &quot;Studies in Basque and historical linguistics in memory of R. L. Trask – R. L. Trasken oroitzapenetan ikerketak euskalaritzaz eta hizkuntzalaritza historikoaz&quot;, (= &quot;Anuario del Seminario de Filología Vasca Julio de Urquijo: International journal of Basque linguistics and philology&quot; Vol. 40, No. 1–2), San Sebastián.
* Lakarra, J. &amp; Ortiz de Urbina, J.(eds.) (1992): &quot;Syntactic Theory and Basque Syntax&quot;, Gipuzkoako Foru Aldundia, Donostia-San Sebastian, .
* Orduña Aznar, Eduardo. 2005. Sobre algunos posibles numerales en textos ibéricos. &quot;Palaeohispanica&quot; 5:491–506. This fifth volume of the journal &quot;Palaeohispanica&quot; consists of Acta Palaeohispanica IX, the proceedings of the ninth conference on Paleohispanic studies.
* de Rijk, R. (1972): &quot;Studies in Basque Syntax: Relative clauses&quot; PhD Dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, US.
* Uhlenbeck, C.C. (1909–1910): &quot;Contribution à une phonétique comparative des dialectes basques&quot;, &quot;Revista Internacional de los Estudios Vascos = Revue Internationale des Etudes Basques&quot; 3 Wayback Machine pp. 465–503 4 Wayback Machine pp. 65–120.
* Zuazo, Koldo (2008): &quot;Euskalkiak: euskararen dialektoak.&quot; Elkar. .

=== Lexicons ===
* Aulestia, Gorka (1989): &quot;Basque–English dictionary&quot; University of Nevada Press, Reno, .
* Aulestia, Gorka &amp; White, Linda (1990): &quot;English–Basque dictionary&quot;, University of Nevada Press, Reno, .
* Azkue Aberasturi, Resurrección María de (1905): &quot;Diccionario vasco–español–francés&quot;, Geuthner, Bilbao/Paris (reprinted many times).
* Michelena, Luis: &quot;Diccionario General Vasco/Orotariko Euskal Hiztegia.&quot; 16 vols. Real academia de la lengua vasca, Bilbao 1987ff. .
* Morris, Mikel (1998): &quot;Morris Student Euskara–Ingelesa Basque–English Dictionary&quot;, Klaudio Harluxet Fundazioa, Donostia
* Sarasola, Ibon (2010–), &quot;Egungo Euskararen Hiztegia EEH&quot; Egungo Euskararen Hiztegia (EEH) - UPV/EHU, Bilbo: Euskara Institutua Euskara Institutuaren ataria (UPV - EHU), The University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU
* Sarasola, Ibon (2010): &quot;Zehazki&quot; Zehazki - UPV/EHU, Bilbo: Euskara Institutua Euskara Institutuaren ataria (UPV - EHU), The University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU
* Sota, M. de la, et al., 1976: &quot;Diccionario Retana de autoridades de la lengua vasca: con cientos de miles de nuevas voces y acepciones, Antiguas y modernas&quot;, Bilbao: La Gran Enciclopedia Vasca. .
* Van Eys, W. J. 1873. &quot;Dictionnaire basque–français&quot;. Paris/London: Maisonneuve/Williams &amp; Norgate.

=== Basque corpora ===
* Sarasola, Ibon; Pello Salaburu, Josu Landa (2011): &quot;ETC: Egungo Testuen Corpusa&quot; Egungo Testuen Corpusa (ETC) - UPV/EHU, Bilbo: Euskara Institutua Euskara Institutuaren ataria (UPV - EHU), The University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU University of the Basque Country
* Sarasola, Ibon; Pello Salaburu, Josu Landa (2009): &quot;Ereduzko Prosa Gaur, EPG&quot; Ereduzko Prosa Gaur (EPG) - UPV/EHU, Bilbo: Euskara Institutua Euskara Institutuaren ataria (UPV - EHU), The University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU University of the Basque Country
* Sarasola, Ibon; Pello Salaburu, Josu Landa (2009–): &quot;Ereduzko Prosa Dinamikoa, EPD&quot; Ereduzko Prosa Dinamikoa (EPD) - UPV/EHU, Bilbo: Euskara Institutua Euskara Institutuaren ataria (UPV - EHU), The University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU University of the Basque Country
* Sarasola, Ibon; Pello Salaburu, Josu Landa (2013): &quot;Euskal Klasikoen Corpusa, EKC&quot; Euskal Klasikoen Corpusa (EKC) - UPV/EHU, Bilbo: Euskara Institutua Euskara Institutuaren ataria (UPV - EHU), The University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU University of the Basque Country
* Sarasola, Ibon; Pello Salaburu, Josu Landa (2014): &quot;Goenkale Corpusa&quot; Goenkale Corpusa - UPV/EHU, Bilbo: Euskara Institutua Euskara Institutuaren ataria (UPV - EHU), The University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU University of the Basque Country
* Sarasola, Ibon; Pello Salaburu, Josu Landa (2010): &quot;Pentsamenduaren Klasikoak Corpusa&quot; Pentsamenduaren Klasikoak Corpusa - UPV/EHU, Bilbo: Euskara Institutua Euskara Institutuaren ataria (UPV - EHU), The University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU University of the Basque Country

=== Other ===
* Agirre Sorondo, Antxon. 1988. &quot;Tratado de Molinología: Los molinos en Guipúzcoa&quot;. San Sebastián: Eusko Ikaskunza-Sociedad de Estudios Vascos. Fundación Miguel de Barandiarán.
* Bakker, Peter, et al. 1991. &quot;Basque pidgins in Iceland and Canada. Anejos del Anuario del Seminario de Filología Vasca &quot;Julio de Urquijo&quot;&quot;, XXIII.
* Deen, Nicolaas Gerard Hendrik. 1937. &quot;Glossaria duo vasco-islandica&quot;. Amsterdam. Reprinted 1991 in &quot;Anuario del Seminario de Filología Vasca Julio de Urquijo&quot;, 25(2):321–426.

=== History of the language and etymologies ===
* Azurmendi, Joxe: &quot;Die Bedeutung der Sprache in Renaissance und Reformation und die Entstehung der baskischen Literatur im religiösen und politischen Konfliktgebiet zwischen Spanien und Frankreich&quot; In: Wolfgang W. Moelleken (Herausgeber), Peter J. Weber (Herausgeber): &quot;Neue Forschungsarbeiten zur Kontaktlinguistik&quot;, Bonn: Dümmler, 1997. 
* Hualde, José Ignacio; Lakarra, Joseba A. &amp; R.L. Trask (eds) (1996): &quot;Towards a History of the Basque Language&quot;, &quot;Current Issues in Linguistic Theory&quot; 131, John Benjamin Publishing Company, Amsterdam, .
* Michelena, Luis, 1990. &quot;Fonética histórica vasca&quot;. Bilbao. 
* Lafon, René (1944): &quot;Le système du verbe basque au XVIe siècle&quot;, Delmas, Bordeaux.
* Löpelmann, Martin (1968): &quot;Etymologisches Wörterbuch der baskischen Sprache.&quot; Dialekte von Labourd, Nieder-Navarra und La Soule. 2 Bde. de Gruyter, Berlin (non-standard etymologies; idiosyncratic).
* Orpustan, J. B. (1999): &quot;La langue basque au Moyen-Age.&quot; Baïgorri, .
* Pagola, Rosa Miren. 1984. &quot;Euskalkiz Euskalki&quot;. Vitoria-Gasteiz: Eusko Jaurlaritzaren Argitalpe.
* Rohlfs, Gerhard. 1980. Le Gascon: études de philologie pyrénéenne. &quot;Zeitschrift für Romanische Philologie&quot; 85.
* Trask, R.L.: &quot;History of Basque&quot;. New York/London: Routledge, 1996. .
* Trask, R.L. † (edited by Max W. Wheeler) (2008): Etymological Dictionary of Basque, University of Sussex (unfinished). Also &quot;Some Important Basque Words (And a Bit of Culture)&quot; Buber&#x27;s Basque Page: The Larry Trask Archive: Some Important Basque Words (And a Bit of Culture)

=== Relationship to other languages ===
====Proto-Indo-European====

==== General reviews of the theories ====
* Jacobsen, William H. Jr. (1999): &quot;Basque Language Origin Theories&quot; In &quot;Basque Cultural Studies&quot;, edited by William A. Douglass, Carmelo Urza, Linda White, and Joseba Zulaika, 27–43. Basque Studies Program Occasional Papers Series, No. 5. Reno: Basque Studies Program, University of Nevada, Reno.
* Lakarra Andrinua, Joseba (1998): &quot;Hizkuntzalaritza konparatua eta aitzineuskararen erroa&quot; (in Basque), &quot;Uztaro&quot; 25, pp. 47–110, (includes review of older theories).
* Lakarra Andrinua, Joseba (1999): &quot;Ná-De-Ná&quot; (in Basque), &quot;Uztaro&quot; 31, pp. 15–84.
* Trask, R.L. (1995): &quot;Origin and Relatives of the Basque Language : Review of the Evidence&quot; in Towards a History of the Basque Language, ed. J. Hualde, J. Lakarra, R.L. Trask, John Benjamins, Amsterdam / Philadelphia.
* Trask, R.L.: &quot;History of Basque&quot;. New York/London: Routledge, 1996. ; pp. 358–414.

==== Afroasiatic hypothesis ====
* Schuchardt, Hugo (1913): &quot;Baskisch-Hamitische wortvergleichungen&quot; &quot;Revista Internacional de Estudios Vascos&quot; = &quot;Revue Internationale des Etudes Basques&quot; 7:289–340.
* Mukarovsky, Hans Guenter (1964/66): &quot;Les rapports du basque et du berbère&quot;, &quot;Comptes rendus du GLECS (Groupe Linguistique d&#x27;Etudes Chamito-Sémitiques)&quot; 10:177–184.
* Trombetti, Alfredo (1925): &quot;Le origini della lingua basca&quot;, Bologna, (new edit ).

==== Dené–Caucasian hypothesis ====
* Bengtson, John D. (1999): &quot;The Comparison of Basque and North Caucasian.&quot; in: &quot;Mother Tongue.&quot; &quot;Journal of the Association for the Study of Language in Prehistory&quot;. Gloucester, Mass.
* Bengtson, John D. (2004): &quot;Some features of Dene–Caucasian phonology (with special reference to Basque).&quot; Cahiers de l&#x27;Institut de Linguistique de Louvain (CILL) 30.4, pp. 33–54.
* Bengtson, John D.. (2006): &quot;Materials for a Comparative Grammar of the Dene–Caucasian (Sino-Caucasian) Languages.&quot; (there is also a preliminary draft)
* Bengtson, John D. (1997): Review of &quot;The History of Basque&quot;. London: Routledge, 1997. Pp.xxii,458&quot; by R.L. Trask.
* Bengtson, John D., (1996): &quot;A Final (?) Response to the Basque Debate in Mother Tongue 1.&quot;

==== Caucasian hypothesis ====
* Bouda, Karl (1950): &quot;L&#x27;Euskaro-Caucasique&quot; &quot;Boletín de la Real Sociedad Vasca de Amigos del País. Homenaje a D. Julio de Urquijo e Ybarra&quot; vol. III, San Sebastián, pp. 207–232.
* Klimov, Georgij A. (1994): &quot;Einführung in die kaukasische Sprachwissenschaft&quot;, Buske, Hamburg, ; pp. 208–215.
* 
* Trombetti, Alfredo (1925): &quot;Le origini della lingua basca&quot;, Bologna, (new edit ).
* Míchelena, Luis (1968): &quot;L&#x27;euskaro-caucasien&quot; in Martinet, A. (ed.) &quot;Le langage&quot;, Paris, pp. 1414–1437 (criticism).
* Uhlenbeck, Christian Cornelius (1924): &quot;De la possibilité d&#x27; une parenté entre le basque et les langues caucasiques&quot;, &quot;Revista Internacional de los Estudios Vascos&quot; = &quot;Revue Internationale des Etudes Basques&quot; 15, pp. 565–588.
* Zelikov, Mixail (2005): &quot;L&#x27;hypothèse basco-caucasienne dans les travaux de N. Marr&quot; &quot;Cahiers de l&#x27;ILSL&quot;, N° 20, pp. 363–381.
* Зыцарь Ю. В. O родстве баскского языка с кавказскими // Вопросы языкознания. 1955. No. 5.

==== Iberian hypothesis ====
* Bähr, Gerhard (1948): &quot;Baskisch und Iberisch&quot; &quot;Eusko Jakintza&quot; II, pp. 3–20, 167–194, 381–455.
* Gorrochategui, Joaquín (1993): La onomástica aquitana y su relación con la ibérica, &quot;Lengua y cultura en Hispania prerromana : actas del V Coloquio sobre lenguas y culturas de la Península Ibérica: (Colonia 25–28 de Noviembre de 1989)&quot; (Francisco Villar and Jürgen Untermann, eds.), , pp. 609–634.
* Rodríguez Ramos, Jesús (2002). La hipótesis del vascoiberismo desde el punto de vista de la epigrafía íbera, &quot;Fontes linguae vasconum: Studia et documenta&quot;, 90, pp. 197–218, .
* Schuchardt, Hugo Ernst Mario (1907): &quot;Die Iberische Deklination&quot;, Wien.

==== Uralic-Altaic hypothesis ====
* Bonaparte, Louis Lucien (1862): &quot;Langue basque et langues finnoises&quot;, London.

==== Vasconic-Old European hypothesis ====
* Vennemann, Theo (2003): &quot;Europa Vasconica – Europa Semitica&quot;, Trends in Linguistics. Studies and Monographs 138, De Gruyter, Berlin, .
* Vennemann, Theo (2007): &quot;Basken wie wir: Linguistisches und Genetisches zum europäischen Stammbaum&quot;, &quot;BiologenHeute&quot; 5/6, 6–11.

==== Other theories ====
* Thornton, R.W. (2002): &quot;Basque Parallels to Greenberg&#x27;s Eurasiatic.&quot; in: &quot;Mother Tongue.&quot; Gloucester, Mass., 2002.

== External links ==


* – Euskaltzaindia (The Royal Academy of the Basque Language)
* An overview of language technology tools for Basque: Automatic translators for Basque, dictionaries, resources to learn Basque... (~ 2016)
* Euskara Institutua, The University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU
* Ahotsak.eus - Basque Oral Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="0" end="6" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="36" end="43" title="Basques" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="71" end="85" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="127" end="135" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="223" end="239" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="691" end="726" title="French Basque Country" label="three &amp;quot;ancient provinces&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q95010" start="738" end="746" title="Gipuzkoa" label="Gipuzkoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q93366" start="756" end="762" title="Biscay" label="Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q81801" start="811" end="816" title="Álava" label="Álava"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="842" end="849" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1122" end="1129" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="1153" end="1165" title="Language shift" label="was replaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q582166" start="1302" end="1312" title="Enkarterri" label="Enkarterri"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="1345" end="1360" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486783" start="1423" end="1442" title="language policies of Francoist Spain" label="repressive policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="1558" end="1571" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="1986" end="1996" title="Basque separatism" label="separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719300" start="2186" end="2199" title="Standard Basque" label="Euskara Batua"/>
<link wikidata="Q202042" start="2222" end="2236" title="Euskaltzaindia" label="Euskaltzaindia"/>
<link wikidata="Q749166" start="2329" end="2337" title="Biscayan dialect" label="Biscayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q954141" start="2339" end="2348" title="Gipuzkoan dialect" label="Gipuzkoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337229" start="2354" end="2369" title="Eastern Navarrese dialect" label="Upper Navarrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12953386" start="2383" end="2402" title="Navarro-Lapurdian dialect" label="Navarrese–Lapurdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746856" start="2407" end="2415" title="Souletin dialect" label="Souletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="2903" end="2919" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2923" end="2929" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356358" start="2977" end="2998" title="origin of the Basques" label="origin of the Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="3083" end="3106" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="3147" end="3153" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="3158" end="3175" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q171263" start="3287" end="3311" title="agglutinative language" label="agglutinative morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q862156" start="3316" end="3345" title="ergative–absolutive alignment" label="ergative–absolutive alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113365" start="3347" end="3361" title="Basque grammar" label="Basque grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q471271" start="3402" end="3427" title="Standard Average European" label="Standard Average European"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="3540" end="3552" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q791275" start="3569" end="3584" title="Basque alphabet" label="Basque alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3685" end="3692" title="Basque dialects#Dialectal divergence" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="3944" end="3952" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="4004" end="4012" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="4021" end="4027" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11967" start="4290" end="4296" title="Huesca" label="Huesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q231455" start="4412" end="4416" title="solidus (coin)" label="sols"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="4543" end="4560" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q536187" start="4718" end="4745" title="pre-Indo-European languages" label="pre-Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995225" start="4749" end="4767" title="prehistoric Europe" label="prehistoric Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="4876" end="4894" title="comparative method (linguistics)" label="comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q185085" start="5223" end="5240" title="Miguel de Unamuno" label="Miguel de Unamuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q523352" start="5245" end="5267" title="Louis Lucien Bonaparte" label="Louis Lucien Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995225" start="5476" end="5494" title="prehistoric Europe" label="prehistoric Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5563" end="5578" title="Origin of the Basques#The aizkora controversy" label="the controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="5635" end="5642" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q938011" start="5665" end="5686" title="proto-Basque language" label="proto-Basque language"/>
<link wikidata="Q500522" start="5854" end="5864" title="Aquitanian language" label="Aquitanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="5923" end="5937" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="5970" end="5978" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q864486" start="6008" end="6025" title="late Basquisation" label="late Basquisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="6067" end="6081" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="6092" end="6124" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="6151" end="6159" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="6181" end="6195" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q855215" start="6265" end="6272" title="Iberian language" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36795" start="6277" end="6296" title="Tartessian language" label="Tartessian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35735" start="6452" end="6458" title="Gascon language" label="Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="6472" end="6479" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736184" start="6500" end="6517" title="Navarro-Aragonese" label="Navarro-Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="6540" end="6547" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719300" start="6833" end="6847" title="Unified Basque" label="Unified Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976109" start="7235" end="7256" title="language technologies" label="language technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q844660" start="7511" end="7539" title="pseudoscientific language comparison" label="pseudoscientific comparisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="7689" end="7697" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36104" start="8024" end="8032" title="Ligurian language (ancient)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q855215" start="8222" end="8229" title="Iberian language" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="8275" end="8292" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q500522" start="8326" end="8336" title="Aquitanian language" label="Aquitanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33956" start="8470" end="8482" title="unclassified language" label="unclassified"/>
<link wikidata="Q202926" start="8609" end="8639" title="Vasconic substratum hypothesis" label="Vasconic substratum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q77723" start="8684" end="8698" title="Theo Vennemann" label="Theo Vennemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="8719" end="8730" title="toponymy" label="toponymical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="8946" end="8954" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34030" start="8978" end="8998" title="Kartvelian languages" label="Kartvelian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19083" start="9086" end="9103" title="Kingdom of Iberia (antiquity)" label="Kingdom of Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="9111" end="9119" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387544" start="9691" end="9704" title="J. P. Mallory" label="J. P. Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q27387" start="9916" end="9945" title="Northeast Caucasian languages" label="Northeast Caucasian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33350" start="9955" end="9962" title="Chechen language" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q507968" start="10050" end="10064" title="Dené–Caucasian languages" label="Dené–Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394809" start="10132" end="10145" title="John Bengtson" label="John Bengtson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922057" start="10150" end="10164" title="Merritt Ruhlen" label="Merritt Ruhlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="10371" end="10384" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848644" start="10487" end="10503" title="Juliette Blevins" label="Juliette Blevins"/>
<link wikidata="Q938011" start="10571" end="10583" title="Proto-Basque language" label="Proto-Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="11147" end="11157" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077" start="11184" end="11191" title="Garonne" label="Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12602" start="11279" end="11294" title="Val d&amp;#x27;Aran" label="Val d&amp;#x27;Aran"/>
<link wikidata="Q35735" start="11314" end="11320" title="Gascon language" label="Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="11338" end="11347" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="11387" end="11395" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="11460" end="11471" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573453" start="11594" end="11603" title="Asturians" label="Asturians"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="11615" end="11621" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="11743" end="11750" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35735" start="11752" end="11758" title="Gascon language" label="Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="11760" end="11766" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="11771" end="11776" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81801" start="12028" end="12033" title="Álava" label="Álava"/>
<link wikidata="Q213763" start="12095" end="12100" title="Béarn" label="Béarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14318" start="12193" end="12208" title="Vitoria-Gasteiz" label="Vitoria-Gasteiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="12350" end="12371" title="French Basque Country" label="French Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="12428" end="12435" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q213763" start="12500" end="12505" title="Béarn" label="Béarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="12550" end="12568" title="Basque nationalism" label="Basque nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151943" start="12702" end="12725" title="Southern Basque Country" label="Southern Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q582166" start="12915" end="12925" title="Enkarterri" label="Enkarterri"/>
<link wikidata="Q123550" start="13331" end="13336" title="fuero" label="fuero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769940" start="13378" end="13387" title="Ojacastro" label="Ojacastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727" start="13396" end="13404" title="La Rioja (Spain)" label="La Rioja"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="13586" end="13614" title="Spanish Constitution of 1978" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="13644" end="13660" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q534191" start="13790" end="13808" title="languages of Spain" label="languages of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="13855" end="13882" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="15375" end="15402" title="Basque Autonomous Community" label="Basque Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437124" start="15445" end="15461" title="passive speaker (language)" label="passive speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q95010" start="15524" end="15532" title="Gipuzkoa" label="Gipuzkoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q93366" start="15554" end="15561" title="Bizkaia" label="Bizkaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="15859" end="15880" title="French Basque Country" label="French Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="16412" end="16419" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="17834" end="17846" title="bilingualism" label="bilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q749166" start="19350" end="19381" title="Biscayan dialect" label="Biscayan or &amp;quot;Western&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q954141" start="19384" end="19416" title="Gipuzkoan dialect" label="Gipuzkoan or &amp;quot;Central&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125314" start="19419" end="19434" title="Upper Navarrese dialect" label="Upper Navarrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12953386" start="19437" end="19454" title="Navarro-Lapurdian dialect" label="Navarro-Lapurdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746856" start="19457" end="19476" title="Souletin dialect" label="Souletin (Zuberoan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138338" start="19572" end="19583" title="Koldo Zuazo" label="Koldo Zuazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="19936" end="19953" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35735" start="20198" end="20204" title="Gascon language" label="Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8765" start="20209" end="20218" title="Aragonese language" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="20243" end="20250" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730913" start="20374" end="20383" title="Substratum (linguistics)" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="20407" end="20421" title="language shift" label="language shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q500522" start="20427" end="20437" title="Aquitanian language" label="Aquitanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="20902" end="20910" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q749533" start="20971" end="20986" title="Iberian Romance" label="Iberian Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088025" start="21200" end="21211" title="Old Spanish" label="Old Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q334723" start="21335" end="21372" title="voiceless alveolar retracted sibilant" label="voiceless alveolar retracted sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q765443" start="21404" end="21416" title="Laminal consonant" label="laminodental"/>
<link wikidata="Q231978" start="21421" end="21428" title="Palatal consonant" label="palatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q749533" start="21464" end="21487" title="Ibero-Romance languages" label="Ibero-Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="21492" end="21499" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="21669" end="21676" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043594" start="21681" end="21692" title="Old Castile" label="Old Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="23436" end="23444" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="23625" end="23632" title="nomadic" label="nomadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516174" start="23727" end="23734" title="gacería" label="gacería"/>
<link wikidata="Q55283" start="23738" end="23745" title="Segovia (province)" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23751" end="23758" title="mingaña" label="mingaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327150" start="23773" end="23789" title="fala dos arxinas" label="fala dos arxinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="23798" end="23806" title="Asturias" label="Asturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753824" start="23807" end="23813" title="Xíriga" label="Xíriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="23828" end="23834" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122188" start="23874" end="23886" title="Erromintxela language" label="Erromintxela"/>
<link wikidata="Q33694" start="23904" end="23918" title="mixed language" label="mixed language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640329" start="23927" end="23936" title="Kalderash" label="Kalderash"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="23937" end="23943" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="24047" end="24053" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q810378" start="24112" end="24135" title="Basque–Icelandic pidgin" label="Basque–Icelandic pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886400" start="24172" end="24196" title="Algonquian–Basque pidgin" label="Algonquian–Basque pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="24231" end="24238" title="whaling" label="whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="24247" end="24265" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="24273" end="24295" title="Gulf of Saint Lawrence" label="Gulf of Saint Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q815831" start="24300" end="24320" title="Strait of Belle Isle" label="Strait of Belle Isle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24435" end="24442" title="Spanish phonology#Vowels" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24444" end="24452" title="Asturian language#Vowels" label="Asturian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24457" end="24466" title="Aragonese language#Vowels" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746856" start="24476" end="24484" title="Zuberoan" label="Zuberoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q740728" start="24529" end="24554" title="close front rounded vowel" label="close front rounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="24609" end="24621" title="nasal vowels" label="nasal vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="24952" end="24961" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q779384" start="25088" end="25096" title="Final-obstruent devoicing" label="devoiced"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="25258" end="25268" title="fricatives" label="fricatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q765443" start="25313" end="25320" title="laminal consonant" label="laminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q618621" start="25325" end="25331" title="Apical consonant" label="apical"/>
<link wikidata="Q334723" start="25627" end="25660" title="voiceless apicoalveolar fricative" label="voiceless apicoalveolar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q369390" start="26676" end="26686" title="Prothesis (linguistics)" label="prosthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207874" start="27052" end="27066" title="palatalization (sound change)" label="palatalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q671023" start="27167" end="27174" title="Labourd" label="Labourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="27184" end="27191" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q95010" start="27200" end="27208" title="Gipuzkoa" label="Gipuzkoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q93366" start="27228" end="27234" title="Biscay" label="Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q463495" start="27292" end="27305" title="palatal nasal" label="palatal nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q855287" start="27314" end="27329" title="palatal lateral" label="palatal lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q757410" start="27473" end="27482" title="semivowel" label="semivowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q673040" start="27583" end="27588" title="Soule" label="Soule"/>
<link wikidata="Q303366" start="28292" end="28300" title="Goizueta, Navarre" label="Goizueta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19501023" start="29780" end="29802" title="voiceless palatal stop" label="voiceless palatal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441804" start="31296" end="31308" title="Pitch-accent language" label="pitch accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="31947" end="31958" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q202042" start="31963" end="31977" title="Euskaltzaindia" label="Euskaltzaindia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303637" start="32220" end="32228" title="Syntagmatic structure" label="syntagma"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="32452" end="32462" title="Prosody (linguistics)" label="prosodical"/>
<link wikidata="Q862156" start="33389" end="33417" title="ergative–absolutive language" label="ergative–absolutive language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166153" start="33437" end="33454" title="intransitive verb" label="intransitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q332734" start="33465" end="33480" title="absolutive case" label="absolutive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="33536" end="33549" title="direct object" label="direct object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774805" start="33555" end="33570" title="transitive verb" label="transitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q324305" start="33639" end="33652" title="ergative case" label="ergative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="33752" end="33766" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401947" start="33928" end="33950" title="polypersonal agreement" label="polypersonal agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237297" start="33981" end="34006" title="languages of the Caucasus" label="languages of the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34030" start="34023" end="34043" title="Kartvelian languages" label="Kartvelian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q627313" start="34046" end="34065" title="Mordvinic languages" label="Mordvinic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="34067" end="34076" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="34082" end="34089" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q878035" start="34395" end="34405" title="epenthesis" label="epenthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q287232" start="36955" end="36972" title="antipassive voice" label="antipassive voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="37486" end="37492" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124935" start="37570" end="37578" title="T–V distinction" label="informal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733035" start="37937" end="37947" title="allocutive" label="allocutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="38914" end="38921" title="Grammatical aspect" label="aspects"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="39942" end="39951" title="recursion" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="40282" end="40301" title="subject–object–verb" label="subject–object–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="40345" end="40364" title="subject–verb–object" label="subject–verb–object"/>
<link wikidata="Q933845" start="40693" end="40698" title="Topic (linguistics)" label="topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435289" start="40725" end="40730" title="Focus (linguistics)" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="41577" end="41582" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="41584" end="41591" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="41593" end="41599" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35735" start="41604" end="41610" title="Gascon language" label="Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="41877" end="41889" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q202042" start="41998" end="42012" title="Euskaltzaindia" label="Euskaltzaindia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="42186" end="42194" title="Digraph (orthography)" label="digraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="42271" end="42278" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q332663" start="42866" end="42878" title="Sabino Arana" label="Sabino Arana"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="43116" end="43121" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="43375" end="43384" title="Fraction (mathematics)" label="fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q842387" start="43587" end="43596" title="vigesimal" label="vigesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218937" start="44324" end="44339" title="Basque dialects" label="Basque dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669240" start="44342" end="44360" title="Vasconic languages" label="Vasconic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244382" start="44363" end="44378" title="List of Basques" label="List of Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="44381" end="44395" title="Basque Country (historical territory)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q864486" start="44398" end="44415" title="Late Basquisation" label="Late Basquisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q496250" start="44418" end="44437" title="Languages of France" label="Languages of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q534191" start="44440" end="44458" title="Languages of Spain" label="Languages of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q500522" start="44461" end="44480" title="Aquitanian language" label="Aquitanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348966" start="44483" end="44511" title="List of ideophones in Basque" label="List of ideophones in Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429508" start="44514" end="44531" title="Basque literature" label="Basque literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q64008074" start="45165" end="45185" title="José Ignacio Hualde" label="Hualde, José Ignacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138345" start="45291" end="45306" title="Pierre Lafitte Ithurralde" label="Lafitte, Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q64008074" start="46267" end="46287" title="José Ignacio Hualde" label="Hualde, José Ignacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138338" start="47594" end="47606" title="Koldo Zuazo" label="Zuazo, Koldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090538" start="51363" end="51378" title="Joxe Azurmendi" label="Azurmendi, Joxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457804" start="51952" end="51967" title="Koldo Mitxelena" label="Michelena, Luis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499834" start="52642" end="52653" title="Larry Trask" label="Trask, R.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q1949650" start="54705" end="54718" title="Mother Tongue (journal)" label="Mother Tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017410" start="54942" end="54995" title="Cahiers de l&amp;#x27;Institut de Linguistique de Louvain" label="Cahiers de l&amp;#x27;Institut de Linguistique de Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4194921" start="56437" end="56449" title="Yuri Zytsar" label="Зыцарь Ю. В."/>
<link wikidata="Q1949650" start="57845" end="57858" title="Mother Tongue (journal)" label="Mother Tongue"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3740" wikidata="Q179682" url="?curid=3740" title="Björn Ulvaeus">
<text>Björn Kristian Ulvaeus (; born 25 April 1945) is a Swedish musician, singer, songwriter, and producer best known as a member of the musical group ABBA. He is also the co-composer of the musicals &quot;Chess&quot;, &quot;Kristina från Duvemåla&quot;, and &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; He co-produced the films &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; and &quot;Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again&quot; with fellow ABBA member and close friend Benny Andersson. He is the oldest member of the group.

== Early life ==
Björn Kristian Ulvaeus was born in Gothenburg on 25 April 1945. At aged 6, he moved with his family to Västervik, Kalmar County. His parents were Aina Eliza Viktoria (née Bengtsson; 1909–2005) and Erik Gunnar Ulvaeus (1912–1999). Ulvaeus has one sister, Eva Margareta (born 1948). Ulvaeus did military service.

== Career ==
=== Pre-ABBA ===
Before gaining international recognition with ABBA, Ulvaeus was a member of the Swedish folk-schlager band Hootenanny Singers, known earlier as the &quot;West Bay Singers&quot;, who had an enormous following in Scandinavia. While on the road in southern Sweden in 1966, they encountered the Hep Stars, and Ulvaeus quickly became friends with the group&#x27;s keyboard player, Benny Andersson. The two musicians shared a passion for songwriting, and each found a composing partner in the other. On meeting again that summer, they composed their first song together: &quot;Isn&#x27;t It Easy To Say&quot;, a song soon to be recorded by Andersson&#x27;s group. The two continued teaming up for music, helping out each other&#x27;s bands in the recording studio, and adding guitar or keyboards respectively to the recordings. In 1968, they composed two songs together: &quot;A Flower in My Garden&quot;, recorded by Hep Stars, and their first real hit &quot;Ljuva Sextiotal&quot;, performed by popular Swedish artist Brita Borg, for which Stig Anderson wrote lyrics. The latter, a cabarét-style ironic song about the 1960s, was submitted for the 1969 Swedish heats for the Eurovision Song Contest, but was rejected; it was later recorded by diva Brita Borg. Another hit came in 1969 with &quot;Speleman&quot;, also recorded by Hep Stars.

While filming a nostalgic schlager special for television in May 1969, Björn met eighteen-year-old future wife and singer-songwriter Agnetha Fältskog.

Björn Ulvaeus continued recording and touring with Hootenanny Singers to great acclaim while working as in-house producer at Polar Record Company (headed by future manager Stig Anderson), with Benny as his new partner. The twosome produced records by other artists and continued writing songs together. Polar artist Arne Lamberts Swedish version of &quot;A Flower in My Garden&quot; (&quot;Fröken Blåklint&quot;) was one of Björn &amp; Benny&#x27;s first in-house productions. In December 1969, they recorded the new song &quot;She&#x27;s My Kind of Girl&quot;, which became their first single as a duo. It was released in March 1970, giving them a minor hit in Sweden and a top-ten hit in Japan two years later.

The Hootenanny Singers entered Svensktoppen, the Swedish radio charts, in 1970 with &quot;Omkring Tiggarn Från Luossa&quot;, a cover of an old folk-schlager song. It remained on the charts for 52 consecutive weeks, a record which endured until 1990; the song was produced by Björn and Benny, and had Ulvaeus&#x27;s solo vocal and Benny&#x27;s piano.

=== ABBA years ===
Björn Ulvaeus&#x27;s girlfriend Agnetha Fältskog eventually joined Björn&amp;Benny becoming Björn, Benny &amp; Agnetha, Frida eventually shortening it to ABBA. Björn was the guitar player in the band, but he also sang lead vocals in the following songs: People Need Love, Merry Go Round, Santa Rosa, Another Town Another Train, I Saw It in the Mirror, Love Isn&#x27;t Easy (But It Sure Is Hard Enough), He Is Your Brother, Rock&#x27;n Roll Band, She&#x27;s My Kind of Girl, Honey Honey, Sitting in the Palmtree, King King Song, Watch Out, Man in the Middle, Rock Me, Crazy World, Why Did It Have To Be Me?, Summer Night City, Does Your Mother Know, Two for the Price Of One.

Björn and Agnetha Fältskog divorced, and the band broke up shortly after the divorce.

=== Post-ABBA ===
After ABBA went on hiatus in 1982, Ulvaeus and Andersson created the musicals &quot;Chess&quot;, a collaboration with lyricist Tim Rice, &quot;Kristina från Duvemåla&quot; (based on &quot;The Emigrants&quot; novels by Swedish writer Vilhelm Moberg), and &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; (based on ABBA songs).

Together with Andersson, Ulvaeus was nominated for the Drama Desk Award in the category &quot;Outstanding Music&quot; (for the musical &quot;Chess&quot;), and for a Tony Award in a category &quot;Best Orchestrations&quot; (for the musical &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot;). The original cast recordings for both musicals were nominated for a Grammy Award.

For the 2004 semi-final of the Eurovision Song Contest in Istanbul, thirty years after ABBA had won the 1974 contest in Brighton, UK, Ulvaeus appeared briefly in a special comedy video made for the interval act, entitled &quot;Our Last Video&quot;. Each of the four members of the group appeared briefly in cameo roles, as did others such as Cher and Rik Mayall. The video was not included in the official DVD release of the Eurovision Contest, but was issued as a separate DVD release. It was billed as the first time the four had worked together since the group split. In fact, they each filmed their appearances separately.

Ulvaeus also shared with Andersson &quot;The Special International Ivor Novello Award&quot; from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors, &quot;The Music Export Prize&quot; from the Swedish Ministry of Industry and Trade (2008), and &quot;Lifetime Achievement Award&quot; from the Swedish Music Publishers Association (SMFF).

On 15 April 2013, it was officially announced by the EBU and the SVT that Ulvaeus and Andersson, with the late Swedish DJ and record producer Avicii, had composed the anthem for the 2013 Eurovision Song Contest. The song was performed for the first time in the Final on 18 May.

In 2016 American media reported that British entrepreneur Simon Fuller had approached Ulvaeus and other members of ABBA with his idea to create a virtual reality ABBA using new technology. In November that year Fuller was photographed in London meeting with Ulvaeus. In September 2017, Benny Andersson told Swedish newspaper &quot;Expressen&quot; that there were plans for ABBA to tour &quot;virtually&quot;, using digital avatars of the group and Ulvaeus told the BBC that the idea had been proposed to the band by Simon Fuller. In April 2018, the four members issued a statement saying that during preparations for the tour, they had regrouped with Fuller in the studio and recorded two new songs, titled &quot;I Still Have Faith in You&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Shut Me Down&quot;.

In 2019, Ulvaeus worked with Swedish songwriter Andreas Carlsson to arrange an English dub of Tomas Ledin&#x27;s jukebox musical film &quot;En del av mitt hjärta&quot; (English: &quot;A Piece of My Heart&quot;) directed by Edward af Sillén. Ulvaeus was asked to write English lyrics for Ledin&#x27;s songs as they are long-term friends.

In 2020, Björn Ulvaeus has been appointed President of CISAC, the International Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers.

On 2 September 2021, via YouTube livestream, ABBA announced their virtual concert residency &quot;ABBA Voyage&quot;, as well as the release of a studio album, recorded between 2017 and 2021. The new record, their first in 40 years, features ten tracks, including &quot;I Still Have Faith In You&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Shut Me Down&quot;, which were first shown in the aforementioned livestream event and released as a double A-side single. On 5 November 2021, the &quot;Voyage&quot; album was released worldwide, and on 27 May 2022, ABBA Voyage opened in a purpose-built venue named the ABBA Arena at the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in London.

Since November 2021, Ulvaeus and British actor Ian McKellen have posted Instagram videos featuring the pair knitting Christmas jumpers and other festive attire. In 2023, it was revealed that Ulvaeus and McKellen would be knitting stagewear for Kylie Minogue as part of her &quot;More Than Just a Residency&quot; concert residency at Voltaire at The Venetian Las Vegas. 

In October 2023, it was confirmed that Ulvaeus would be the keynote speaker for The Business Day at Bridlington Spa in the United Kingdom on Friday 7 June 2024. Ulvaeus is expected to discuss the creation of ABBA Voyage, leadership, entrepreneurship, artificial intelligence (AI), Technology, Innovation, Meta Data and the complexity of business in the music industry.

== Personal life ==

On 6 July 1971, Ulvaeus married Agnetha Fältskog. They had two children: Linda Elin Ulvaeus (born 23 February 1973), and Peter Christian Ulvaeus (born 4 December 1977). The couple separated in early 1979, and their divorce was finalised in July 1980. 

Ulvaeus married music journalist Lena Källersjö on 6 January 1981. They have two daughters. Ulvaeus and Källersjö lived on a private island in Djursholm, an upscale area in Danderyd Municipality north of Stockholm. From 1984 to 1990 they lived in the United Kingdom, where Ulvaeus founded an IT business with his brother. In February 2022, Ulvaeus and Källersjö announced their separation.

In 2021 whilst producing &quot;Voyage&quot;, Ulvaeus met Christina Sas, a product manager at Universal Music Group, and they began dating the following year. Ulvaeus and Sas were married on 21 September 2024 in Copenhagen, Denmark. The ceremony was officiated by Sandi Toksvig.

Ulvaeus is one of the four owners (along with Per Gessle) of NoteHeads, a Swedish company which publishes the music notation program Igor Engraver.

Ulvaeus is a member of the International Humanist and Ethical Union&#x27;s Swedish member organisation Humanisterna, and was awarded their annual prize, &quot;Hedenius-priset&quot;, in 2006. Ulvaeus describes himself as an atheist. He has appeared on several shows discussing his views about religion.

Ulvaeus suffered from severe long-term memory loss. However, in a 2009 interview, he stated that reports of his memory loss were &quot;hugely exaggerated&quot;. In a TV interview with Fredrik Skavlan, Ulvaeus said the memory loss pertained to episodic memory. He said that, for instance, he was not nostalgic for his days with ABBA: &quot;It was good while it lasted.&quot;

&quot;The Guardian&quot; called him Sweden&#x27;s &quot;highest-profile cash-free campaigner&quot;, explaining that &quot;after his son was robbed several years ago, Ulvaeus became an evangelist for the electronic payment movement, claiming that cash was the primary cause of crime and that &#x27;all activity in the black economy requires cash&#x27;&quot;. He has reportedly been living cash-free for more than a decade, and ABBA The Museum has operated cash-free since it opened in May 2013.

=== Tax vindication ===
The Swedish Tax Agency accused Björn Ulvaeus of failing to pay 90 million kronor (US$12.8 million) in back taxes for eight years ending in 2005. The agency claimed that he &quot;laundered&quot; his music royalty income through institutions in several foreign countries. Ulvaeus paid the taxes as a precautionary measure during the 2½-year dispute. In October 2008, the county administrative court decided the case in Ulvaeus&#x27; favour, ruling that he never owed any of the 90 million kronor.

=== Awards ===
On 21 March 2024, all four members of ABBA were appointed &quot;Commander, First Class, of the Royal Order of Vasa&quot; by His Majesty King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden. This was the first time in almost 50 years that the Swedish Royal Orders of Knighthood was bestowed on Swedes, also the 50th anniversary of ABBA winning the Eurovision Song Contest. ABBA shared the honour with nine other people.

* : Royal Order of Vasa, Commander First Class (21 March 2024)

== Discography ==

=== Björn solo singles ===
* 1968: &quot;Raring&quot; (Swedish version of &quot;Honey&quot;)/&quot;Vill du ha en vän&quot;
* 1968: &quot;Fröken Fredriksson&quot; (Swedish version of &quot;Harper Valley PTA&quot;)/&quot;Vår egen sång&quot; – (Polar POS 162)
* 1969: &quot;Saknar du något min kära&quot; (Swedish version of &quot;Where Do You Go To (My Lovely)?&quot;/&quot;Gömt är inte glömt&quot;)
* 1969: &quot;Partaj-aj-aj-aj&quot;/&quot;Kvinnan i mitt liv&quot;
=== Björn and Benny singles ===
* 1970: &quot;She&#x27;s My Kind of Girl&quot;/&quot;Inga Theme&quot;
* 1970: &quot;Hej, gamle man!&quot;/&quot;Lycka&quot; (Happiness)
* 1971: &quot;Hey, Musikant&quot;/&quot;Was die Liebe sagt&quot;
* 1971: &quot;Det kan ingen doktor hjälpa&quot; (It Can&#x27;t Be Remedied by a Doctor)/&quot;På bröllop&quot;
* 1971: &quot;Tänk om jorden vore ung&quot; (If Only We Had The Time)/&quot;Träskofolket&quot;
* 1972: &quot;En karusell&quot; (Merry-Go-Round)/&quot;Att finnas till&quot;
* 1972: &quot;Love Has Its Ways&quot;/&quot;Rock &#x27;N&#x27; Roll Band&quot; (Benny &amp; Björn 1st version)

=== Björn and Benny albums ===
* 1970: &quot;Lycka&quot;
* 1984: &quot;Chess&quot; (concept album with Tim Rice)
* 1986: &quot;Chess Pieces&quot;
* 1988: &quot;Chess: Original Broadway Cast Recording&quot;
* 1994: &quot;Chess in Concert&quot;
* 1996: &quot;Kristina från Duvemåla&quot;
* 1998: &quot;Från Waterloo till Duvemåla&quot;
* 1999: &quot;16 favoriter ur Kristina från Duvemåla&quot;
* 1999: &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; (Original Cast Recording)
* 2000: &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; (Original Broadway Cast Recording)
* 2002: &quot;Chess på svenska&quot;
* 2005: &quot;Mamma Mia! på svenska&quot;
* 2008: &quot;Mamma Mia! – The Movie Soundtrack&quot;
* 2009: &quot;Chess in Concert&quot; (London)
* 2010: &quot;Kristina at Carnegie Hall&quot;
* 2013: &quot;Hjälp sökes&quot;

=== Gemini ===
* 1985: &quot;Gemini&quot;
* 1987: &quot;Geminism&quot;

=== Josefin Nilsson ===
* 1993: &quot;Shapes&quot;

== See also ==
*List of Swedes in music
*Abbacadabra

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179682" start="0" end="22" title="Björn Ulvaeus" label="Björn Kristian Ulvaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="146" end="150" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q843284" start="201" end="206" title="Chess (musical)" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q142885" start="220" end="242" title="Kristina från Duvemåla" label="Kristina från Duvemåla"/>
<link wikidata="Q686861" start="260" end="270" title="Mamma Mia! (musical)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q188850" start="308" end="318" title="Mamma Mia! (film)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q36951175" start="335" end="362" title="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again" label="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q214582" start="410" end="425" title="Benny Andersson" label="Benny Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="518" end="528" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q54764" start="586" end="595" title="Västervik" label="Västervik"/>
<link wikidata="Q103707" start="597" end="610" title="Kalmar County" label="Kalmar County"/>
<link wikidata="Q783911" start="776" end="792" title="Swedish Armed Forces" label="military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="871" end="875" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q959583" start="918" end="926" title="schlager" label="schlager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627509" start="932" end="950" title="Hootenanny Singers" label="Hootenanny Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="1036" end="1047" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546806" start="1116" end="1125" title="Hep Stars" label="Hep Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q214582" start="1201" end="1216" title="Benny Andersson" label="Benny Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546806" start="1737" end="1746" title="Hep Stars" label="Hep Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q264668" start="1838" end="1848" title="Brita Borg" label="Brita Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q449763" start="1860" end="1873" title="Stig Anderson" label="Stig Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="1994" end="2004" title="Eurovision" label="Eurovision"/>
<link wikidata="Q264668" start="2067" end="2077" title="Brita Borg" label="Brita Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q173144" start="2293" end="2309" title="Agnetha Fältskog" label="Agnetha Fältskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q78512988" start="2437" end="2457" title="Polar Record Company" label="Polar Record Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q449763" start="2484" end="2497" title="Stig Anderson" label="Stig Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004990" start="3057" end="3069" title="Svensktoppen" label="Svensktoppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q173144" start="3428" end="3444" title="Agnetha Fältskog" label="Agnetha Fältskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q201908" start="3516" end="3521" title="Anni-Frid Lyngstad" label="Frida"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="3550" end="3554" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003660" start="3650" end="3666" title="People Need Love" label="People Need Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003660" start="3668" end="3682" title="People Need Love" label="Merry Go Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702279" start="3684" end="3694" title="He Is Your Brother" label="Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660577" start="3696" end="3722" title="Another Town, Another Train" label="Another Town Another Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q10299570" start="3724" end="3746" title="I Saw It in the Mirror" label="I Saw It in the Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661595" start="3748" end="3797" title="Love Isn&amp;#x27;t Easy (But It Sure Is Hard Enough)" label="Love Isn&amp;#x27;t Easy (But It Sure Is Hard Enough)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702279" start="3799" end="3817" title="He Is Your Brother" label="He Is Your Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019276" start="3819" end="3840" title="Rock&amp;#x27;n Roll Band" label="Rock&amp;#x27;n Roll Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049397" start="3842" end="3868" title="She&amp;#x27;s My Kind of Girl" label="She&amp;#x27;s My Kind of Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626845" start="3870" end="3881" title="Honey, Honey" label="Honey Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500285" start="3908" end="3922" title="King Kong Song" label="King King Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q744013" start="3924" end="3933" title="Watch Out (ABBA song)" label="Watch Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585621" start="3935" end="3952" title="SOS (ABBA song)" label="Man in the Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704065" start="3954" end="3961" title="Rock Me (ABBA song)" label="Rock Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q929870" start="3963" end="3974" title="Money, Money, Money" label="Crazy World"/>
<link wikidata="Q590220" start="4003" end="4020" title="Summer Night City" label="Summer Night City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234579" start="4022" end="4043" title="Does Your Mother Know" label="Does Your Mother Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q15713306" start="4045" end="4069" title="Two for the Price of One (ABBA song)" label="Two for the Price Of One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173144" start="4082" end="4098" title="Agnetha Fältskog" label="Agnetha Fältskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q843284" start="4261" end="4266" title="Chess (musical)" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q298295" start="4304" end="4312" title="Tim Rice" label="Tim Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q142885" start="4320" end="4342" title="Kristina från Duvemåla" label="Kristina från Duvemåla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847492" start="4365" end="4378" title="The Emigrants (novels)" label="The Emigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q365406" start="4410" end="4424" title="Vilhelm Moberg" label="Vilhelm Moberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q686861" start="4437" end="4447" title="Mamma Mia! (musical)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="4533" end="4549" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="4643" end="4653" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="4810" end="4822" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="4883" end="4891" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q207541" start="4929" end="4941" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1974" label="1974 contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="4945" end="4953" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="5132" end="5137" title="Cameo appearance" label="cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="5167" end="5171" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q439095" start="5176" end="5186" title="Rik Mayall" label="Rik Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q436693" start="5520" end="5532" title="Ivor Novello" label="Ivor Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969396" start="5554" end="5607" title="British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors" label="British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="5851" end="5854" title="EBU" label="EBU"/>
<link wikidata="Q215363" start="5863" end="5866" title="Sveriges Television" label="SVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q505476" start="5940" end="5946" title="Avicii" label="Avicii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10162" start="5980" end="6008" title="2013 Eurovision Song Contest" label="2013 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q214582" start="6363" end="6378" title="Benny Andersson" label="Benny Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q971383" start="6408" end="6417" title="Expressen" label="Expressen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="6542" end="6545" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q367691" start="6593" end="6605" title="Simon Fuller" label="Simon Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q109551247" start="6790" end="6815" title="I Still Have Faith in You" label="I Still Have Faith in You"/>
<link wikidata="Q108386526" start="6832" end="6855" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Shut Me Down" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Shut Me Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026020" start="6912" end="6928" title="Andreas Carlsson" label="Andreas Carlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q955209" start="6958" end="6969" title="Tomas Ledin" label="Tomas Ledin"/>
<link wikidata="Q643684" start="6977" end="6992" title="jukebox musical" label="jukebox musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q60737704" start="7004" end="7025" title="En del av mitt hjärta (film)" label="En del av mitt hjärta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346042" start="7087" end="7103" title="Edward af Sillén" label="Edward af Sillén"/>
<link wikidata="Q739586" start="7257" end="7262" title="Confédération Internationale des Sociétés d&amp;#x27;Auteurs et Compositeurs" label="CISAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315424" start="7410" end="7427" title="concert residency" label="concert residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q108296072" start="7434" end="7445" title="ABBA Voyage" label="ABBA Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q109551247" start="7605" end="7630" title="I Still Have Faith In You" label="I Still Have Faith In You"/>
<link wikidata="Q108386526" start="7647" end="7670" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Shut Me Down" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Shut Me Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q108384663" start="7810" end="7816" title="Voyage (ABBA album)" label="Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q525481" start="7945" end="7973" title="Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park" label="Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="8033" end="8045" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="8058" end="8067" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q193188" start="8094" end="8102" title="knitting" label="knitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111551" start="8103" end="8120" title="Christmas jumper" label="Christmas jumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q121878945" start="8265" end="8291" title="More Than Just a Residency" label="More Than Just a Residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315424" start="8298" end="8315" title="concert residency" label="concert residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049209" start="8331" end="8353" title="The Venetian Las Vegas" label="The Venetian Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q960189" start="8417" end="8432" title="Keynote" label="keynote speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765618" start="8457" end="8472" title="Bridlington Spa" label="Bridlington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8480" end="8494" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="8590" end="8606" title="entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="8608" end="8631" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="8662" end="8671" title="Metadata" label="Meta Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="8710" end="8724" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q173144" start="8780" end="8796" title="Agnetha Fältskog" label="Agnetha Fältskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q449255" start="8821" end="8839" title="Linda Ulvaeus" label="Linda Elin Ulvaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q990076" start="9144" end="9153" title="Djursholm" label="Djursholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q113679" start="9174" end="9195" title="Danderyd Municipality" label="Danderyd Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="9205" end="9214" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q108384663" start="9423" end="9429" title="Voyage (ABBA album)" label="Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="9485" end="9506" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="9603" end="9613" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q293020" start="9655" end="9668" title="Sandi Toksvig" label="Sandi Toksvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q312801" start="9717" end="9727" title="Per Gessle" label="Per Gessle"/>
<link wikidata="Q64601" start="9781" end="9803" title="Scorewriter" label="music notation program"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253779" start="9804" end="9817" title="Igor Engraver" label="Igor Engraver"/>
<link wikidata="Q986980" start="9847" end="9887" title="International Humanist and Ethical Union" label="International Humanist and Ethical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582355" start="9923" end="9935" title="Humanisterna" label="Humanisterna"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="10152" end="10168" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770862" start="10307" end="10322" title="Fredrik Skavlan" label="Fredrik Skavlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646" start="10366" end="10381" title="episodic memory" label="episodic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10504" end="10516" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="10815" end="10828" title="Black market" label="black economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743819" start="10924" end="10939" title="ABBA The Museum" label="ABBA The Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q836916" start="11021" end="11039" title="Swedish Tax Agency" label="Swedish Tax Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="11091" end="11097" title="Swedish krona" label="kronor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839370" start="11119" end="11129" title="back taxes" label="back taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="11195" end="11204" title="Money laundering" label="laundered"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="11221" end="11228" title="Royalties" label="royalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258644" start="11623" end="11642" title="Royal Order of Vasa" label="Royal Order of Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45068" start="11669" end="11684" title="Carl XVI Gustaf" label="Carl XVI Gustaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258644" start="11930" end="11949" title="Order of Vasa" label="Royal Order of Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893394" start="12089" end="12094" title="Honey (Bobby Goldsboro song)" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q430858" start="12197" end="12214" title="Harper Valley PTA" label="Harper Valley PTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25668" start="12337" end="12368" title="Where Do You Go To (My Lovely)?" label="Where Do You Go To (My Lovely)?"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049397" start="12520" end="12546" title="She&amp;#x27;s My Kind of Girl" label="She&amp;#x27;s My Kind of Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953408" start="13147" end="13152" title="Lycka" label="Lycka"/>
<link wikidata="Q843284" start="13173" end="13178" title="Chess (musical)" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q298295" start="13205" end="13213" title="Tim Rice" label="Tim Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q843284" start="13262" end="13301" title="Chess (musical)" label="Chess: Original Broadway Cast Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q142885" start="13359" end="13381" title="Kristina från Duvemåla" label="Kristina från Duvemåla"/>
<link wikidata="Q686861" start="13509" end="13519" title="Mamma Mia (musical)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993996" start="13905" end="13911" title="Gemini (Gemini album)" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479451" start="13932" end="13940" title="Geminism" label="Geminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q358074" start="14016" end="14039" title="List of Swedes in music" label="List of Swedes in music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820226" start="14041" end="14052" title="Abbacadabra" label="Abbacadabra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3741" wikidata="Q214582" url="?curid=3741" title="Benny Andersson">
<text>Göran Bror Benny Andersson (; born 16 December 1946) is a Swedish musician, composer and producer best known as a member of the pop group ABBA and co-composer of the musicals &quot;Chess&quot;, &quot;Kristina från Duvemåla&quot;, and &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; For the 2008 film version of &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; and its 2018 sequel, &quot;Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again&quot;, he worked also as an executive producer. Since 2001, he has been active with his own band Benny Anderssons orkester.

==Early life==
Göran Bror Benny Andersson was born 16 December 1946 in the Vasastan district of Stockholm to civil engineer Gösta Andersson (1912–1973) and his wife Laila (1920–1971). His sister Eva-Lis Andersson followed in 1948. Andersson&#x27;s musical background comes from his father and grandfather (Efraim); they both enjoyed playing the accordion, and at six, Benny got his own. His father and grandfather taught him Swedish folk music, traditional music, and schlager. The first records Benny bought were &quot;Du Bist Musik&quot; by Italian schlager singer Caterina Valente and Elvis Presley&#x27;s &quot;Jailhouse Rock&quot;. He was especially impressed by the flip side, &quot;Treat Me Nice&quot;, as this featured a piano. This variety of different kinds of music influenced him through the years.

At ten, Andersson got his own piano and taught himself to play. He was influenced by Brian Jones, left school at 15 and began to perform at youth clubs. This is when he met his first girlfriend Christina Grönvall, with whom he had two children: Peter (born 1963) and Heléne (born 1965). In early 1964, Benny and Christina joined &quot;Elverkets Spelmanslag&quot; (&quot;The Electricity Board Folk Music Group&quot;); the name was a punning reference to their electric instruments. Their repertoire consisted mainly of instrumentals, including &quot;Baby Elephant Walk&quot;; he also wrote his first songs.

==Career==
===Hep Stars (1964–1969)===

In October 1964 he joined the Hep Stars as keyboardist and they made a breakthrough in March 1965 with their hit &quot;Cadillac&quot;, eventually becoming the most celebrated of the Swedish 1960s pop bands. Andersson secured his place as the band&#x27;s keyboardist and musical driving force as well as a teen idol. The band performed mostly covers of international hits, but Andersson soon started writing his own material, and gave the band the classic hits &quot;No Response&quot;, &quot;Sunny Girl&quot;, &quot;Wedding&quot;, &quot;Consolation&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s Nice To Be Back&quot; and &quot;She Will Love You&quot;, among others.

===Before ABBA (1969–1972)===
Andersson met Björn Ulvaeus in June 1966, and the two men started writing songs together, their first being &quot;Isn&#x27;t It Easy To Say&quot;, eventually recorded by the Hep Stars. He also had a fruitful songwriting collaboration with Lasse Berghagen, with whom he wrote several songs and submitted &quot;Hej, Clown&quot; for the 1969 Melodifestivalen – the Swedish Eurovision Song Festival finals. The song finished in second place. During this contest, he met vocalist Anni-Frid Lyngstad, and they soon became a couple. Around the same time, his songwriting companion Ulvaeus met vocalist Agnetha Fältskog.

The personal relationships and Andersson and Ulvaeus&#x27; songwriting collaboration led quite naturally to the very close cooperation which the four friends had during the following years. Benny and Björn scored their first hits as songwriters in the spring of 1969: &quot;Ljuva sextital&quot; (a hit with Brita Borg) and &quot;Speleman&quot; (a hit for the Hep Stars). As the two couples began supporting each other during recording sessions, the sound of the women&#x27;s voices convinced the songwriters to model their &#x27;group&#x27; on various MOR acts such as Blue Mink, Middle of the Road and Sweet.

===ABBA (1972–1982)===
The group&#x27;s breakthrough came with winning the Eurovision Song Contest for Sweden with &quot;Waterloo&quot; on 6 April 1974. During the next eight years, Andersson (together with Ulvaeus) wrote music for and produced eight studio albums with ABBA. The group achieved great success globally and scored a chain of No. 1 hits.

With ABBA, Benny sang lead vocal on only one song – &quot;Suzy-Hang-Around&quot;, from the &quot;Waterloo&quot; album.

===After ABBA: &quot;Chess&quot;, &quot;Kristina&quot; and &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; (1983–present)===
After ABBA, Andersson continued writing music with Ulvaeus. Their first project was the stage musical &quot;Chess&quot;, written with Tim Rice. The &quot;Chess&quot; concept album – with vocals by Elaine Paige, Barbara Dickson, Murray Head and Swedes Tommy Körberg and Björn Skifs – was released in October 1984, selling two million copies worldwide. The Paige/Dickson duet &quot;I Know Him So Well&quot; became a major UK No. 1 hit, and Murray Head&#x27;s &quot;One Night in Bangkok&quot; gave Andersson/Ulvaeus a US No. 3 hit.

&quot;Chess&quot; was staged in London&#x27;s West End Prince Edward Theatre in May 1986 and received mixed to positive reviews, running for about three years. A revised staging on Broadway in April 1988 received poor reviews, running for two months.

In 1985, Andersson produced and released an album with brother and sister Anders and Karin Glenmark, featuring new songs by Andersson/Ulvaeus. The duo named themselves Gemini, and a second album with more music by Björn and Benny was released in April 1987, containing the big hit &quot;Mio My Mio&quot;; also to be found on the soundtrack to the film &quot;Mio in the Land of Faraway&quot;, for which Andersson co-produced the music.

In 1987, Andersson released his first solo album &quot;Klinga Mina Klockor&quot; (&quot;Chime, My Bells&quot;). All the music was written by and performed by himself on accordion, backed by the &quot;Orsa Spelmän&quot; (Orsa Folk Musicians) on fiddles. A second solo album followed: &quot;November 1989&quot;.

In 1990, Andersson scored a Swedish No. 1 hit with &quot;Lassie&quot;, sung by female cabaret group Ainbusk, for whom he also wrote the Svensktoppen hits &quot;Älska Mig&quot; and &quot;Drömmarnas Golv&quot;. He decided to produce an album with Josefin Nilsson from this quartet, resulting in the 1993 English-language album &quot;Shapes&quot;, featuring ten new Andersson/Ulvaeus compositions.

In 1992, he wrote the introduction melody for the European football championship, which was organised by Sweden that year.

From the late 1980s, Andersson had worked on an idea for an epic Swedish language musical based on his affection for traditional folk music, and in October 1995, &quot;Kristina från Duvemåla&quot; premiered in Sweden. The musical was based on &quot;The Emigrants&quot; novels by Swedish writer Vilhelm Moberg. The musical ran successfully for almost five years, before closing in June 1999. An English-language version, simply titled &quot;Kristina&quot;, was staged in concert at Carnegie Hall in New York City for two nights in September 2009, yielding a live recording, and at the Royal Albert Hall for one night in April 2010.

Andersson&#x27;s next project was &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot;, a musical built around 24 of ABBA&#x27;s songs, which has become a worldwide box-office blockbuster, with versions in several languages being played in many countries, including the UK (West End premiere in April 1999), Canada (Toronto premiere in 2000), the USA (Broadway premiere in 2001), and Sweden (Swedish language premiere in 2005).

For the 2004 semi-final of the Eurovision Song Contest, staged in Istanbul thirty years after ABBA had won the contest in Brighton, Benny appeared briefly in a special comedy video made for the interval act, entitled &quot;Our Last Video&quot;. Each of the four members of the group appeared briefly in cameo roles, as did others such as Cher and Rik Mayall. The video was not included in the official DVD release of the Eurovision Contest, but was issued as a separate DVD release. It was billed as the first time the four had worked together since the group split; however, Frida&#x27;s appearance was filmed separately.

A film version of &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; premiered on 18 July 2008. In April/May 2007, Andersson worked on the film soundtrack, re-recording the ABBA songs with musicians from the original ABBA recording sessions. &quot;Mamma Mia! The Movie&quot; has become the most successful film musical of all time, and the biggest-selling DVD ever in the UK.

===Benny Anderssons Orkester (2001–present)===
Andersson currently performs with his own band of 16 musicians, Benny Anderssons Orkester (&quot;Benny Andersson&#x27;s orchestra&quot;, BAO), with fellow Swedes Helen Sjöholm (of &quot;Kristina from Duvemåla&quot;) and Tommy Körberg (of &quot;Chess&quot;), with lyrics to new material sometimes written by Björn Ulvaeus. BAO has released five albums to huge success in Sweden, all containing hit singles.

In 2009 BAO achieved a new record in Sweden on the Svensktoppen chart by staying there for 243 weeks with the song &quot;Du är min man&quot; (&quot;You Are My Man&quot;), sung by Sjöholm.

===New compositions (1984–present)===

Andersson composes primarily for his band BAO, with vocalists Sjöholm and Körberg, but he keeps his older material alive by re-visiting it, as in &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; and the Swedish version of &quot;Chess&quot;.

For a compilation album of the Glenmark duo Gemini, Andersson had Björn Ulvaeus write new Swedish lyrics for the re-recording of two songs from 1984 and 1987.

Andersson and Ulvaeus have continuously been writing new material; most recently the two wrote seven songs for Andersson&#x27;s BAO 2011 album O klang och jubeltid, performed as usual by vocalists Sjöholm, Körberg and Kalle Moraeus. In July 2009, BAO, now named &quot;The Benny Andersson Band&quot;, released their first international record, the album &quot;The Story of a Heart&quot;. It was a compilation of 14 tracks from Andersson&#x27;s five Swedish-language releases between 1987 and 2007, including five songs now recorded with lyrics by Ulvaeus in English, and the new title song premiered on BBC2&#x27;s &quot;Ken Bruce Show&quot;. A Swedish-language version of the title track, &quot;Sommaren Du Fick&quot; (&quot;The Summer You Got&quot;), was released as a single in Sweden prior to the English version, with vocals by Helen Sjöholm.

In the spring of 2009, Andersson also released a single recorded by the staff at his privately owned Stockholm hotel Hotel Rival, titled &quot;2nd Best to None&quot;, accompanied by a video showing the staff at work. In 2008, Andersson and Ulvaeus wrote a song for Swedish singer Sissela Kyle, titled &quot;Jag vill bli gammal&quot; (&quot;I Wanna Grow Old&quot;), for her Stockholm stage show &quot;Your Days Are Numbered&quot;, which was never recorded and released but did get a TV performance. Ulvaeus also contributed lyrics to ABBA&#x27;s 1976 instrumental track &quot;Arrival&quot; for Sarah Brightman&#x27;s cover version recorded for her 2008 album &quot;A Winter Symphony&quot;. New English lyrics have also been written for Andersson&#x27;s 1999 song &quot;Innan Gryningen&quot; (then also named &quot;Millennium Hymn&quot;), with the new title &quot;The Silence of the Dawn&quot; for Barbara Dickson was performed live, but not yet recorded and released. In 2007, they wrote the new song &quot;Han som har vunnit allt&quot; (&quot;He Who&#x27;s Won It All&quot;) for actor and singer Anders Ekborg.

Ulvaeus wrote English lyrics for two older songs from Andersson&#x27;s solo albums &quot;I Walk with You Mama&quot; (&quot;Stockholm by Night&quot;, 1989) and &quot;After the Rain&quot; (&quot;Efter regnet&quot;, 1987) for opera singer Anne Sofie Von Otter, for her Andersson tribute album &quot;I Let the Music Speak&quot;. Barbara Dickson recorded an Ulvaeus and Andersson song called &quot;The Day The Wall Came Tumbling Down&quot;; the song eventually was released by Australian &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; musical star Anne Wood&#x27;s album of ABBA covers, &quot;Divine Discontent&quot;. As of October 2012, Ulvaeus had mentioned writing new material with Andersson for a BAO Christmas release (also mentioned as a BAO box), and Andersson is busy writing music for a Swedish language obscure musical, &quot;Hjälp Sökes&quot; (&quot;Help is Wanted&quot;) together with Kristina Lugn and Lars Rudolfsson, premiering 8 February 2013.

Andersson has also written music for a documentary film about Olof Palme, re-recording the track &quot;Sorgmarch&quot; from his last album as a theme throughout the film.
The song &quot;&quot;Kärlekens Tid&quot;, recorded 2004 by Helen Sjöholm with BAO, has also been performed in concert in English (lyrics by Ylva Eggehorn) by opera baritone Bryn Terfel.
On 15 April 2013, it was officially announced by the EBU and the SVT that Andersson, along with Ulvaeus and the late Stockholm based DJ and record producer Avicii, had composed the anthem for the 2013 Eurovision Song Contest. The song was performed for the first time in the Final on 18 May.

A new album of Andersson compositions presented in a choral style was released on 18 September 2015. &quot;Kärlekens Tid&quot;&quot; was produced in Andersson&#x27;s Mono Music studio, under the direction of choirmaster Gustaf Sjökvist, who died before the album&#x27;s release. Gustaf Sjökvists Choir, conducted by Cecilia Rydinger Alin, performed two concerts at Skeppsholmen on 20 September, featuring Benny Andersson on piano. The album includes songs in Swedish and English from a range of Andersson&#x27;s projects, such as &quot;Chess&quot;, &quot;Kristina&quot; and BAO.

In November 2018, Deutsche Grammophon released &quot;Piano&quot;, a collection of ABBA tunes, tunes from Chess and original compositions all played by Andersson on solo piano.

Andersson reunited with ABBA in 2018. On 2 September 2021, via YouTube livestream, ABBA announced their upcoming virtual concert residency &quot;ABBA Voyage&quot;, as well as the imminent release of an eponymous album, recorded between 2017 and 2021. The new record, their first studio album in 40 years, features ten tracks, including &quot;I Still Have Faith In You&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Shut Me Down&quot;, which also were first shown in the aforementioned livestream event and released as a double A-side single. On 5 November 2021, the &quot;Voyage&quot; album was released worldwide. On 27 May 2022, ABBA Voyage opened in a purpose-built venue named the ABBA Arena at the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in London.

===Film music===
Andersson has written music to several films for screen and television; the first attempt in the early 1970s for the Swedish erotica movie &quot;The Seduction of Inga&quot;; the film was not a success, but the &#x27;Björn &amp; Benny&#x27; single &quot;She&#x27;s My Kind of Girl&quot; surprised the composers by being released in Japan and becoming a Top 10 hit (the song renamed in Japan as &quot;The Little Girl of the Cold Wind&quot;).

In 1987, Andersson wrote music and co-produced the soundtrack with Anders Eljas for the film &quot;Mio in the Land of Faraway&quot;, based on Swedish author Astrid Lindgrens &quot;Mio, My Son&quot;. The title song became a huge hit in Sweden for Gemini.

In 2000, he wrote the music for fellow Swede (no relation) Roy Andersson&#x27;s film &quot;Songs from the Second Floor&quot; (the music later re-recorded, featuring new lyrics, with BAO! with vocals by Helen Sjöholm). He also wrote the theme for Roy Andersson&#x27;s next film, &quot;You, the Living&quot;, from 2007.

Andersson worked on the film adaptation of &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot;. He also wrote the film score for the 2012 documentary &quot;Palme&quot; about Swedish prime minister Olof Palme. He later won a Guldbagge Award for Best Original Score, for that film at the 48th Guldbagge Awards.

==Awards==
Together with Ulvaeus, Andersson was nominated for a Drama Desk Award in a category &quot;Outstanding Music&quot; (for the musical &quot;Chess&quot;), and for a Tony Award in a category &quot;Best Orchestrations&quot; (for musical &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot;). Original cast recordings of both musicals were nominated for a Grammy Award. Andersson/Ulvaeus also won a Touring Broadway Award for the musical &quot;Mamma Mia&quot; (best score).

During his post-ABBA career Andersson won four Swedish Grammis awards, and together with Ulvaeus received the &quot;Special International&quot; Ivor Novello award from &#x27;The British Academy of Composers and Songwriters&#x27;, twice &quot;The Music Export Prize&quot; from the Swedish Ministry of Industry and Trade (2008), as well as the &quot;Lifetime Achievement&quot; award from the Swedish Music Publishers Association (SMFF). In 2002, Andersson was given an honorary professorship by the Swedish Government for his &quot;ability to create high-class music reaching people around the world&quot;.

In 2007, he was elected a member of Royal Swedish Academy of Music, and in 2008 received an Honorary Doctorate from the Stockholm University Faculty of Humanities for contributing importantly both to the preservation and the growth of the Swedish folk music tradition.

On 15 March 2010, Andersson appeared on stage in New York with former wife Anni-Frid Lyngstad to accept ABBA&#x27;s award of induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. During his acceptance speech he reflected on the important influence of traditional European music and the melancholy of the Swedish soul on ABBA&#x27;s brand of pop music. &quot;If you live in a country like Sweden, with five, six months of snow, and the sun disappears totally for like two months, that would be reflected in the work of artists,&quot; he said. &quot;It&#x27;s definitely in the Swedish folk music, you can hear it in the Russian folk songs, you can hear in the music from Jean Sibelius or Edvard Grieg from Norway, you can see it in the eyes of Greta Garbo and you can hear it in the voice of Jussi Björling. And you can hear in the sound of Frida and Agnetha on some of our songs too.&quot;

In 2012, he received an Honorary Doctorate of Philosophy from the Luleå Tekniska Universitet Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences.

Andersson won the Swedish &quot;Guldbaggen&quot; award in 2012 as composer of the music for the film &quot;Palme&quot;.

For his album &quot;Piano&quot; he received the Opus Klassik award in 2018.

On 21 March 2024, all four members of ABBA were appointed &quot;Commander, First Class, of the Royal Order of Vasa&quot; by His Majesty King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden. This was the first time in almost 50 years that the Swedish Royal Orders of Knighthood was bestowed on Swedes, also the 50th anniversary of ABBA winning the Eurovision Song Contest. ABBA shared the honour with nine other persons.

* : Royal Order of Vasa, Commander First Class (21 March 2024)

==Personal life==

Andersson was engaged to Christina Grönvall. They have two children. The couple split in 1966 and Christina kept custody of the children as Andersson was then at the peak of his Hep Stars&#x27; success. In the 1990s, their son Peter Grönvall formed One More Time, a group that enjoyed European success with the ABBA-like &quot;Highland&quot; and, later, as Sweden&#x27;s entry to the Eurovision Song Contest 1996.

Andersson was in a relationship with Anni-Frid Lyngstad of ABBA for about 11 years, from 1969 till 1980. They married on 6 October 1978, but separated on 26 November 1980 and divorced in 1981.

He married Swedish TV presenter Mona Nörklit in 1981 and had a son, Ludvig. Ludvig is also one of the producers of the concert residency ABBA Voyage.

Andersson was an alcoholic through much of his adult life. He has remained a teetotaler since 2001. Andersson did not disclose the extent of his substance abuse problems until a 2011 interview, at which point he had maintained nearly a decade of sobriety.

==Discography==

==Also appears on==
*&quot;Beginner&#x27;s Guide to Scandinavia&quot; (3CD, Nascente 2011)

==See also==

*List of Swedes in music

==References==
==External links==
* Deutsche Grammophon page on Benny Andersson 
* BBC Radio 3 New Generation Artists page
* icethesite (Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus news site)
* The Hep Stars International Official website (Benny before ABBA)
* Chronology: Benny Andersson
* Official ABBA site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214582" start="0" end="10" title="Benny Andersson" label="Göran Bror"/>
<link wikidata="Q214582" start="11" end="16" title="Benny Andersson" label="Benny"/>
<link wikidata="Q214582" start="17" end="26" title="Benny Andersson" label="Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="138" end="142" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q843284" start="181" end="186" title="Chess (musical)" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q142885" start="200" end="222" title="Kristina från Duvemåla" label="Kristina från Duvemåla"/>
<link wikidata="Q686861" start="240" end="250" title="Mamma Mia! (musical)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q188850" start="265" end="308" title="Mamma Mia! (film)" label="2008 film version of &amp;quot;Mamma Mia!&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q36951175" start="336" end="363" title="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again" label="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889936" start="461" end="486" title="Benny Anderssons orkester" label="Benny Anderssons orkester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646335" start="564" end="572" title="Vasastan, Stockholm" label="Vasastan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="585" end="594" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="834" end="843" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="922" end="932" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="934" end="951" title="traditional music" label="traditional music"/>
<link wikidata="Q959583" start="957" end="965" title="schlager" label="schlager"/>
<link wikidata="Q242535" start="1056" end="1072" title="Caterina Valente" label="Caterina Valente"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="1077" end="1090" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353423" start="1104" end="1118" title="Jailhouse Rock (song)" label="Jailhouse Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q204943" start="1386" end="1397" title="Brian Jones" label="Brian Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838266" start="1850" end="1868" title="Baby Elephant Walk" label="Baby Elephant Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546806" start="1978" end="1987" title="Hep Stars" label="Hep Stars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2067" end="2075" title="Brand New Cadillac#Hep Stars version" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356348" start="2414" end="2425" title="No Response" label="No Response"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683950" start="2439" end="2449" title="Sunny Girl (song)" label="Sunny Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q97367058" start="2463" end="2470" title="Wedding (song)" label="Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078156" start="2484" end="2495" title="Consolation (song)" label="Consolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179682" start="2635" end="2648" title="Björn Ulvaeus" label="Björn Ulvaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q493733" start="2860" end="2875" title="Lasse Berghagen" label="Lasse Berghagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58884" start="2960" end="2976" title="Melodifestivalen" label="Melodifestivalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="2991" end="3015" title="Eurovision Song Festival" label="Eurovision Song Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q201908" start="3096" end="3114" title="Anni-Frid Lyngstad" label="Anni-Frid Lyngstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q173144" start="3216" end="3232" title="Agnetha Fältskog" label="Agnetha Fältskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q10568495" start="3509" end="3523" title="Ljuva sextital" label="Ljuva sextital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328660" start="3787" end="3790" title="Middle of the road (music)" label="MOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q885770" start="3804" end="3813" title="Blue Mink" label="Blue Mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q787667" start="3815" end="3833" title="Middle of the Road (band)" label="Middle of the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q487919" start="3838" end="3843" title="The Sweet" label="Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="3921" end="3944" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q32503" start="3967" end="3975" title="Waterloo (ABBA song)" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q744013" start="4296" end="4304" title="Waterloo (album)" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="4507" end="4520" title="stage musical" label="stage musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q843284" start="4527" end="4532" title="Chess (musical)" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q298295" start="4553" end="4561" title="Tim Rice" label="Tim Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q233962" start="4616" end="4628" title="Elaine Paige" label="Elaine Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q807398" start="4630" end="4645" title="Barbara Dickson" label="Barbara Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q610267" start="4647" end="4658" title="Murray Head" label="Murray Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q920220" start="4670" end="4683" title="Tommy Körberg" label="Tommy Körberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q714167" start="4688" end="4699" title="Björn Skifs" label="Björn Skifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136344" start="4799" end="4817" title="I Know Him So Well" label="I Know Him So Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815337" start="4882" end="4902" title="One Night in Bangkok" label="One Night in Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431387" start="5004" end="5025" title="Prince Edward Theatre" label="Prince Edward Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753783" start="5275" end="5281" title="Anders Glenmark" label="Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950264" start="5286" end="5300" title="Karin Glenmark" label="Karin Glenmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q851834" start="5369" end="5375" title="Gemini (Swedish band)" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q10585943" start="5488" end="5498" title="Mio My Mio (song)" label="Mio My Mio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368378" start="5559" end="5585" title="Mio in the Land of Faraway" label="Mio in the Land of Faraway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427001" start="5837" end="5849" title="Orsa Spelmän" label="Orsa Spelmän"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356543" start="6048" end="6055" title="Ainbusk" label="Ainbusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004990" start="6084" end="6096" title="Svensktoppen" label="Svensktoppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969649" start="6193" end="6208" title="Josefin Nilsson" label="Josefin Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q142885" start="6636" end="6658" title="Kristina från Duvemåla" label="Kristina från Duvemåla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847492" start="6717" end="6730" title="The Emigrants (novels)" label="The Emigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q365406" start="6762" end="6776" title="Vilhelm Moberg" label="Vilhelm Moberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="6949" end="6962" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="7052" end="7069" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q686861" start="7140" end="7150" title="Mamma Mia! (musical)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527553" start="7386" end="7393" title="Royal Alexandra Theatre" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="7462" end="7478" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="7530" end="7553" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="7593" end="7597" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="7837" end="7841" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q439095" start="7846" end="7856" title="Rik Mayall" label="Rik Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q686861" start="8147" end="8157" title="Mamma Mia! (musical)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q188850" start="8343" end="8363" title="Mamma Mia! (film)" label="Mamma Mia! The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889936" start="8583" end="8608" title="Benny Anderssons Orkester" label="Benny Anderssons Orkester"/>
<link wikidata="Q468134" start="8681" end="8694" title="Helen Sjöholm" label="Helen Sjöholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q920220" start="8739" end="8752" title="Tommy Körberg" label="Tommy Körberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q179682" start="8826" end="8839" title="Björn Ulvaeus" label="Björn Ulvaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004990" start="8977" end="8989" title="Svensktoppen" label="Svensktoppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q851834" start="9414" end="9420" title="Gemini (Swedish band)" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073374" start="9673" end="9693" title="O klang och jubeltid" label="O klang och jubeltid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348115" start="9748" end="9761" title="Kalle Moraeus" label="Kalle Moraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="10479" end="10488" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633589" start="10521" end="10537" title="2nd Best to None" label="2nd Best to None"/>
<link wikidata="Q301452" start="10658" end="10670" title="Sissela Kyle" label="Sissela Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151814" start="10971" end="10986" title="Sarah Brightman" label="Sarah Brightman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894993" start="11042" end="11059" title="A Winter Symphony" label="A Winter Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q807398" start="11274" end="11289" title="Barbara Dickson" label="Barbara Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753766" start="11474" end="11487" title="Anders Ekborg" label="Anders Ekborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q234973" start="11726" end="11746" title="Anne Sofie Von Otter" label="Anne Sofie Von Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q53713" start="12485" end="12495" title="Olof Palme" label="Olof Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q31687" start="12758" end="12766" title="baritone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q322211" start="12767" end="12778" title="Bryn Terfel" label="Bryn Terfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="12833" end="12836" title="EBU" label="EBU"/>
<link wikidata="Q215363" start="12845" end="12848" title="Sveriges Television" label="SVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q505476" start="12936" end="12942" title="Avicii" label="Avicii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10162" start="12976" end="13004" title="2013 Eurovision Song Contest" label="2013 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q168407" start="13671" end="13690" title="Deutsche Grammophon" label="Deutsche Grammophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q843284" start="13758" end="13763" title="Chess (musical)" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315424" start="13951" end="13968" title="concert residency" label="concert residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q108296072" start="13975" end="13986" title="ABBA Voyage" label="ABBA Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q108384663" start="14382" end="14388" title="Voyage (ABBA album)" label="Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q525481" start="14513" end="14541" title="Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park" label="Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368378" start="15111" end="15137" title="Mio in the Land of Faraway" label="Mio in the Land of Faraway"/>
<link wikidata="Q55767" start="15169" end="15184" title="Astrid Lindgren" label="Astrid Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q178688" start="15192" end="15203" title="Mio, My Son" label="Mio, My Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q851834" start="15258" end="15264" title="Gemini (Swedish band)" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q703513" start="15326" end="15339" title="Roy Andersson" label="Roy Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301516" start="15358" end="15385" title="Songs from the Second Floor" label="Songs from the Second Floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q387727" start="15551" end="15566" title="You, the Living" label="You, the Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805748" start="15713" end="15718" title="Palme (film)" label="Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q53713" start="15754" end="15764" title="Olof Palme" label="Olof Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359606" start="15781" end="15796" title="Guldbagge Award" label="Guldbagge Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4145008" start="15843" end="15864" title="48th Guldbagge Awards" label="48th Guldbagge Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="15931" end="15947" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="16039" end="16049" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="16197" end="16209" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829073" start="16240" end="16262" title="Touring Broadway Awards" label="Touring Broadway Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542122" start="16371" end="16378" title="Grammis" label="Grammis"/>
<link wikidata="Q436693" start="16460" end="16472" title="Ivor Novello" label="Ivor Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541450" start="16958" end="16988" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Music" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q221645" start="17042" end="17062" title="Stockholm University" label="Stockholm University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972721" start="18142" end="18168" title="Luleå Tekniska Universitet" label="Luleå Tekniska Universitet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274158" start="18382" end="18394" title="Opus Klassik" label="Opus Klassik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258644" start="18506" end="18525" title="Royal Order of Vasa" label="Royal Order of Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45068" start="18552" end="18567" title="Carl XVI Gustaf" label="Carl XVI Gustaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258644" start="18814" end="18833" title="Order of Vasa" label="Royal Order of Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q630091" start="19142" end="19155" title="One More Time (band)" label="One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q10523935" start="19220" end="19228" title="Highland (song)" label="Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207815" start="19277" end="19305" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1996" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q201908" start="19345" end="19363" title="Anni-Frid Lyngstad" label="Anni-Frid Lyngstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q108296072" start="19639" end="19650" title="ABBA Voyage" label="ABBA Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="19730" end="19740" title="teetotaler" label="teetotaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q358074" start="20034" end="20057" title="List of Swedes in music" label="List of Swedes in music"/>
</links>
</doc>
