<doc id="1530" wikidata="Q101828" url="?curid=1530" title="Ainu people">
<text>The Ainu are an indigenous ethnic group who reside in northern Japan and southeastern Russia, including Hokkaido and the Tōhoku region of Honshu, as well as the land surrounding the Sea of Okhotsk, such as Sakhalin, the Kuril Islands, the Kamchatka Peninsula, and the Khabarovsk Krai. They have occupied these areas, known to them as &quot;Ainu Mosir&quot; (), since before the arrival of the modern Yamato and Russians. These regions are often referred to as and its inhabitants as in historical Japanese texts. Along with the Yamato and Ryukyu ethnic groups, the Ainu people are one of the primary historic ethnic groups of Japan.

Official surveys of the known Ainu population in Hokkaido received 11,450 responses in 2023, and the Ainu population in Russia was estimated at 300 in 2021. Unofficial estimates in 2002 placed the total population in Japan at 200,000 or higher, as the near-total assimilation of the Ainu into Japanese society has resulted in many individuals of Ainu descent having no knowledge of their ancestry.

The Ainu are one of the few ethnic minorities native to the Japanese islands. They were subject to forced assimilation and colonization by the Japanese since at least the 18th century. Japanese assimilation policies in the 19th century around the Meiji Restoration included forcing Ainu peoples off their land. This, in turn, forced them to give up traditional ways of life such as subsistence hunting and fishing. Ainu people were not allowed to practice their religion and were placed into Japanese-language schools, where speaking the Ainu language was forbidden. In 1966, there were about 300 native Ainu speakers; in 2008, there were about 100. In recent years, there have been increasing efforts to revitalize the Ainu language.

==Names==
This people&#x27;s most widely known ethnonym, (; ; ), means &#x27;human&#x27; in the Ainu language, particularly as opposed to , &#x27;divine beings&#x27;. Ainu also identify themselves as (&#x27;comrades&#x27; or &#x27;people&#x27;). Official documents use both names.

The name first appeared as in a 1591 Latin manuscript titled . This document gives the native name of Hokkaido as , or , &#x27;land of the Ainu&#x27;. The terms and did not come into common use as ethnonyms until the early 19th century. The ethnonym first appeared in an 1819 German encyclopedia article. Neither European nor Japanese sources conceived of the Ainu as a distinct ethnic group until the late 1700s.

The Ainu were also called the Kuye by their neighbors. The Qing dynasty called Sakhalin (&quot;island of the Ainu&quot;). The island was also called . The word used by the Qing is &quot;most probably related to &quot;kuyi&quot;, the name given to the Sakhalin Ainu by their Nivkh and Nanai neighbors.&quot; When the Ainu migrated onto the mainland, the Chinese described a &quot;strong Kui (or Kuwei, Kuwu, Kuye, Kugi, i.e. Ainu) presence in the area otherwise dominated by the Gilemi or Jilimi (Nivkh and other Amur peoples).&quot; Related names were in widespread use in the region, for example the Kuril Ainu called themselves .

The Old Japanese exonym () was coined according to the &quot;Kojiki-den&quot; from (&quot;shrimp&quot;) + (&quot;barbarian&quot;) as a reference to their hairiness and savagery. The term is considered an insult by contemporary Ainu.

==History==

The Ainu are considered the native people of Hokkaido, southern Sakhalin, and the Kurils. Ainu toponyms support the historical view that the Ainu people lived in several places throughout northern Honshu. There is also a possibility that Ainu speakers lived throughout the Amur region as suggested by various Ainu loanwords found in the Uilta and Ulch languages. Ainu shares a number of cognates with Old Korean, that appear unlikely to be the result of a Japonic intermediary.

The ancestors of the Ainu, who were referred to as Emishi, came under Japanese subjugation starting in the 9th century and were pushed to the northern islands.

===Ainu Culture period (Nibutani period)===
Following the Zoku-Jōmon period, which began in the 5th century BC, and the subsequent Satsumon period, from around the 13th century the Ainu established their own culture by absorbing the surrounding culture while engaging in transit trade between Honshu and north-east Asia. This is called the Ainu Culture period or Nibutani period.

Active contact between the Wajin (ethnonym for Japanese, also known as Yamato people) and the Ainu of Ezogashima (now known as Hokkaidō) began in this period. The Ainu formed a society of hunter-gatherers, surviving mainly by hunting and fishing. They followed a religion that was based on natural phenomena.

After the Mongols conquered the Jin dynasty (1234), Karafuto (Sakhalin)-Ainu suffered raids by the Nivkh and Udege peoples. In response, the Mongols established an administration post at Nurgan (present-day Tyr, Russia) at the junction of the Amur and Amgun rivers in 1263, and forced the submission of the two peoples. In 1264, the Karafuto-Ainu invaded the land of the Nivkh people. They also started an expedition into the Amur region, which was then controlled by the Yuan dynasty, resulting in reprisals by the Mongols who invaded Sakhalin.

From the Nivkh perspective, their surrender to the Mongols essentially established a military alliance against the Ainu who had invaded their lands. According to the &quot;History of Yuan&quot;, a group of people known as the &quot;Guwei&quot; (, the phonetic approximation of the Nivkh name for Ainu) from Sakhalin invaded and fought with the Jilimi (Nivkh people) every year. On November 30, 1264, the Mongols attacked the Ainu. The Karafuto-Ainu resisted the Mongol invasions but by 1308 had been subdued. They paid tribute to the Mongol Yuan dynasty at posts in Wuliehe, Nanghar, and Boluohe.

The Chinese Ming dynasty (1368–1644) placed Sakhalin under its &quot;system for subjugated peoples&quot; (&quot;ximin tizhi&quot;). From 1409 to 1411 the Ming established an outpost called the Nurgan Regional Military Commission near the ruins of Tyr on the Siberian mainland, which continued operating until the mid-1430s. There is some evidence that the Ming eunuch Admiral Yishiha reached Sakhalin in 1413 during one of his expeditions to the lower Amur, and granted Ming titles to a local chieftain.

The Ming recruited headmen from Sakhalin for administrative posts such as commander (), assistant commander (), and &quot;official charged with subjugation&quot; (). In 1431, one such assistant commander, Alige, brought marten pelts as tribute to the Wuliehe post. In 1437, four other assistant commanders (Zhaluha, Sanchiha, Tuolingha, and Alingge) also presented tribute. According to the &quot;Ming Veritable Records&quot;, these posts, like the position of headman, were hereditary and passed down the patrilineal line. During these tributary missions, the headmen would bring their sons, who later inherited their titles. In return for tribute, the Ming awarded them with silk uniforms.

Nivkh women in Sakhalin married Han Chinese Ming officials when the Ming took tribute from Sakhalin and the Amur River region. Due to Ming rule in Manchuria, Chinese cultural and religious influence such as Chinese New Year, the &quot;Chinese god&quot;, and motifs such as dragons, spirals, and scrolls spread among the Ainu, Nivkh, and Amur natives such as the Udeghes, Ulchis, and Nanais. These groups also adopted material goods and practices such as agriculture, husbandry, heating, iron cooking pots, silk, and cotton.

The Manchu Qing dynasty, which came to power in China in 1644, called Sakhalin &quot;Kuyedao&quot; () or &quot;Kuye Fiyaka&quot; (). The Manchus called it &quot;Sagaliyan ula angga hada&quot; (Island at the Mouth of the Black River). The Qing first asserted influence over Sakhalin after the 1689 Treaty of Nerchinsk, which defined the Stanovoy Mountains as the border between the Qing and the Russian Empires. In the following year the Qing sent forces to the Amur estuary and demanded that the residents, including the Sakhalin Ainu, pay tribute. This was followed by several further visits to the island as part of the Qing effort to map the area. To enforce its influence, the Qing sent soldiers and mandarins across Sakhalin, reaching most parts of the island except the southern tip. The Qing imposed a fur-tribute system on the region&#x27;s inhabitants.

The Qing dynasty established an office in Ningguta, situated midway along the Mudan River, to handle fur from the lower Amur and Sakhalin. Tribute was supposed to be brought to regional offices, but the lower Amur and Sakhalin were considered too remote, so the Qing sent officials directly to these regions every year to collect tribute and to present awards. By the 1730s, the Qing had appointed senior figures among the indigenous communities as &quot;clan chief&quot; (&quot;hala-i-da&quot;) or &quot;village chief&quot; (&quot;gasan-da&quot; or &quot;mokun-da&quot;). In 1732, 6 &quot;hala&quot;, 18 &quot;gasban&quot;, and 148 households were registered as tribute bearers in Sakhalin. Manchu officials gave tribute missions rice, salt, other necessities, and gifts during the duration of their mission. Tribute missions occurred during the summer months. During the reign of the Qianlong Emperor (r. 1735–95), a trade post existed at Delen, upstream of Kiji (Kizi) Lake, according to Rinzo Mamiya. There were 500–600 people at the market during Mamiya&#x27;s stay there.

Local native Sakhalin chiefs had their daughters taken as wives by Manchu officials as sanctioned by the Qing dynasty when the Qing exercised jurisdiction in Sakhalin and took tribute from them.

===Japanese colonization===
In 1635, Matsumae Kinhiro, the second daimyō of Matsumae Domain in Hokkaidō, sent Satō Kamoemon and Kakizaki Kuroudo on an expedition to Sakhalin. One of the Matsumae explorers, Kodō Shōzaemon, stayed in the island in the winter of 1636 and sailed along the east coast to Taraika (now Poronaysk) in the spring of 1637. The Tokugawa bakufu (feudal government) granted the Matsumae clan exclusive rights to trade with the Ainu in the northern part of the island. Later, the Matsumae began to lease out trading rights to Japanese merchants, and contact between Japanese and Ainu became more extensive. Throughout this period, Ainu groups competed with each other to import goods from the Japanese, and epidemic diseases such as smallpox reduced the population. In an early colonization attempt, a Japanese settlement was established at Ōtomari on Sakhalin&#x27;s southern end in 1679.

In the 1780s, the influence of the Japanese Tokugawa Shogunate on the Ainu of southern Sakhalin increased significantly. By the beginning of the 19th century, the Japanese economic zone extended midway up the east coast, to Taraika. With the exception of the Nayoro Ainu located on the west coast in close proximity to China, most Ainu stopped paying tribute to the Qing dynasty. The Matsumae clan was nominally in charge of Sakhalin, but they neither protected nor governed the Ainu there. Instead they extorted the Ainu for Chinese silk, which they sold in Honshu as Matsumae&#x27;s special product. To obtain Chinese silk, the Ainu fell into debt, owing much fur to the Santan (Ulch people), who lived near the Qing office. The Ainu also sold the silk uniforms (&quot;mangpao&quot;, &quot;bufu&quot;, and &quot;chaofu&quot;) given to them by the Qing, which made up the majority of what the Japanese knew as &quot;nishiki&quot; and &quot;jittoku&quot;. As dynastic uniforms, the silk was of considerably higher quality than that traded at Nagasaki, and enhanced Matsumae prestige as exotic items. Eventually the Tokugawa government, realizing that they could not depend on the Matsumae, took control of Sakhalin in 1807.

From 1799 to 1806, the Tokugawa shogunate took direct control of southern Hokkaido. Japan proclaimed sovereignty over Sakhalin in 1807, and in 1809 Mamiya Rinzō claimed that it was an island. During this period, Ainu women were separated from their husbands and either subjected to rape or forcibly married to Japanese men. Meanwhile, Ainu men were deported to merchant subcontractors for five- and ten-year terms of service. Policies of family separation and assimilation, combined with the impact of smallpox, caused the Ainu population to drop significantly in the early 19th century. In the 18th century, there were 80,000 Ainu, but by 1868, there were only about 15,000 Ainu in Hokkaido, 2,000 in Sakhalin, and around 100 in the Kuril Islands.
Despite their growing influence in the area in the early 19th century as a result of these policies, the Tokugawa shogunate was unable to gain a monopoly on Ainu trade with those on the Asian mainland, even by the year 1853. Santan traders, a group composed mostly of the Ulchi, Nanai, and Oroch peoples of the Amur River, commonly interacted with the Ainu people independent of the Japanese government, especially in the northern part of Hokkaido. In addition to their trading ventures, Santan traders sometimes kidnapped or purchased Ainu women from Rishiri to become their wives. This further escalated Japan&#x27;s presence in the area, as the Tokugawa shogunate believed a monopoly on the Santan trade would better protect the Ainu people.

===Japanese annexation of Hokkaido===
In 1869, the imperial government established the Hokkaidō Development Commission as part of the Meiji Restoration. Researcher Katarina Sjöberg quotes Yūko Baba&#x27;s 1980 account of the Japanese government&#x27;s reasoning:

As a result of the Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1875), the Kuril Islandsalong with their Ainu inhabitantscame under Japanese administration. In 1899, the Japanese government passed an act labeling the Ainu as &quot;former aborigines&quot;, with the idea that they would assimilate. This resulted in the Japanese government taking the land where the Ainu people lived and placing it under Japanese control. Also at this time, the Ainu were granted automatic Japanese citizenship, effectively denying them the status of an indigenous group.

The Ainu went from being a relatively isolated group of people to having their land, language, religion, and customs assimilated into those of the Japanese. Their land was distributed to the Yamato Japanese settlers to create and maintain farms in the model of Western industrial agriculture. It was known as &quot;colonization&quot; (拓殖) at the time, but later by the euphemism, &quot;opening up undeveloped land&quot; (). Additionally, factories like flour mills and beer breweries, along with mining practices, resulted in the creation of infrastructure such as roads and railway lines during a development period that lasted until 1904. During this time, the Ainu were ordered to cease religious practices such as animal sacrifice and the custom of tattooing. The same act applied to the native Ainu on Sakhalin after its annexation as Karafuto Prefecture.

===Assimilation after annexation===
The Ainu have historically suffered from economic and social discrimination, as both the Japanese government and mainstream population regarded them as dirty and primitive barbarians. The majority of Ainu were forced to be petty laborers during the Meiji Restoration, which saw the introduction of Hokkaido into the Japanese Empire and the privatization of traditional Ainu lands. During the 19th and 20th centuries, the Japanese government denied the rights of the Ainu to their traditional cultural practices, such as hunting, gathering, and speaking their native language.

The legal denial of Ainu cultural practices mostly stemmed from the 1899 Hokkaido Former Aborigines Protection Act. This law and its associated policies were designed to fully integrate the Ainu into Japanese society while erasing Ainu culture and identity. The Ainu&#x27;s position as manual laborers and their forced integration into larger Japanese society have led to discriminatory practices by the Japanese government that can still be felt today.

Intermarriage between Japanese and Ainu was actively promoted by the Ainu to lessen the chances of discrimination against their offspring. As a result, many Ainu today are indistinguishable from their Japanese neighbors, but some Ainu-Japanese are interested in traditional Ainu culture. For example, Oki, born as the child of an Ainu father and a Japanese mother, became a musician who plays the traditional Ainu instrument, the . There are also many small towns in the southeastern or Hidaka region of Hokkaido where ethnic Ainu live, such as in Nibutani ().

From the early 1870s, Christian missionary work was conducted among the Ainu. The Anglican Communion missionaries included the Rt. Rev. Philip Fyson, Bishop of Hokkaido, and the Rev. John Batchelor. Batchelor wrote extensively in English about the beliefs and daily life of the Ainu in Yezo (or Ezo), and his publications are a source of photographs of the Japanese and Ainu close to the missions.

===Standard of living===
The discrimination and negative stereotypes assigned to the Ainu have manifested in lower levels of education, income, and participation in the economy as compared to their ethnically Japanese counterparts. The Ainu community in Hokkaido in 1993 received welfare payments at a 2.3 times higher rate than that of Hokkaido as a whole. They also had an 8.9% lower enrollment rate from junior high school to high school and a 15.7% lower enrollment into college from high school. Due to this noticeable and growing gap, the Japanese government has been lobbied by activists to research the Ainu&#x27;s standard of living nationwide. The Japanese government will provide ¥7 million (US$63,000), beginning in 2015, to conduct surveys nationwide on this matter.

===Ainu and ethnic homogeneity in Japan===
The existence of the Ainu has challenged the notion of ethnic homogeneity in post-WWII Japan. After the demise of the multi-ethnic Empire of Japan in 1945, successive governments forged a single Japanese identity by advocating monoculturalism and denying the existence of more than one ethnic group in Japan.

Following the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in 2007, Hokkaido politicians pressured the government to recognize Ainu rights. Prime Minister Fukuda Yasuo answered a parliamentary question on May 20, 2008, by stating,

On June 6, 2008, the National Diet of Japan passed a non-binding, bipartisan resolution calling upon the government to recognize the Ainu as indigenous people.

In 2019, eleven years after this resolution, the Diet finally passed an act recognizing the Ainu as an indigenous people of Japan. Despite this recognition of the Ainu as an ethnically distinct group, political figures in Japan continue to define ethnic homogeneity as key to the overall Japanese national identity. For example, then Deputy Prime Minister Tarō Asō notably claimed in 2020, &quot;No other country but this one has lasted for as long as 2,000 years with one language, one ethnic group, and one dynasty.&quot;

==Origins==
The Ainu are regarded as having descended from the indigenous Japanese hunter-gatherers who lived in Japan during the Jōmon period ( 14,000 to 300 BCE).

The exact origins of the early Ainu remain unclear, but it is generally agreed to be linked to the Satsumon culture of the Epi-Jōmon period, with later influences from the nearby Okhotsk culture. The Ainu culture may be better described as an &quot;Ainu cultural complex&quot;, taking into account the regional variable subgroups of Ainu peoples. While the Ainu can be considered a continuation of the indigenous Jomon culture, they also display links to surrounding cultures, pointing to a larger cultural complex flourishing around the Sea of Okhotsk. Some authors have also described the development of the Ainu culture as the &quot;resistance&quot; of a Jomon society to the emerging Japanese state.

One of their , or legends, tells that &quot;[T]he Ainu lived in this place a hundred thousand years before the Children of the Sun came.&quot;

The historical Ainu economy was based on farming as well as hunting, fishing, and gathering.

The general consensus among historians is to associate the Ainu with the Satsumon culture, which was located in an area stretching from northern Honshu to Hokkaido. Linguists such as Juha Janhunen and Alexander Vovin argue for a Satsumon origin of Ainu dialects, with deeper links to cultures centered in Central or Northern Honshu. This is in part supported by Ainu-derived loanwords observed in Eastern Old Japanese and the probable distant link between the Ainu and the Emishi.

It has also been noted that the Okhotsk culture played a role in the formation of the later Ainu culture. The origin of the Okhotsk culture itself is subject to research. While Okhotsk remains display affinity to the modern Nivkh people of northern Sakhalin, both also display affinities to the Jōmon peoples of Japan, pointing to a possible heterogeneous makeup of Okhotsk society. Satsumon pottery has been found among Okhotsk sites, pointing to a complex network of contacts in the wider area around the Sea of Okhotsk.

The emergence of the Ainu culture is henceforth primarily attributed to the Satsumon culture, which later received some contributions from the Okhotsk culture via cultural contacts in northern Hokkaido after the Satsumon culture expanded northwards and into Sakhalin. This view has been corroborated by later analyses.

===Relationship with the historical Emishi===
While the view that the ancient Emishi were identical to the Ainu has been largely disproven by current research, the exact relationship between them is still under dispute. It is agreed that at least some Emishi spoke Ainu languages and were ethnically related to the Ainu. The Emishi may, however, have also included non-Ainu groups, which can either be associated with groups distantly related to the Ainu (Ainu-like groups) but forming their own ethnicity, or early Japonic-speakers outside the influence of the Yamato court. The Emishi display clear material culture links to the Ainu of Hokkaido. Based on Ainu-like toponyms throughout Tohoku, it is argued that the Emishi, like the Ainu, descended from the Epi-Jōmon tribes and initially spoke Ainu-related languages.

The term &quot;Emishi&quot; in the Nara period (710–794) referred to people who lived in the Tohoku region and whose lifestyle and culture differed markedly from that of the Yamato people; it was originally a highly cultural and political concept with no racial distinction.

From the mid-Heian period onward, Emishi who did not fall under the governance of the Yamato Kingship were singled out as northern Emishi. They began to be referred to as &quot;Ezo&quot; (Emishi).

The first written reference to &quot;Ezo&quot;, which is thought to be Ainu, can be found in &quot;Suwa Daimyōjin Ekotoba&quot;, which was written in 1356. Indeed, Ainu have lived in Sakhalin, the Kuril Islands, Hokkaido, and the northern Tohoku region since the 13th century.

===Genetics===
====Paternal lineages====
An analysis of 16 Ainu male individuals found that the majority (14/16) belong to Y-DNA Haplogroup D-M55, while a minority (2/16) belongs to Haplogroup C-M217. D-M55 is found throughout the Japanese archipelago, with very high frequencies among the Ainu of Hokkaido. C-M217 is found more commonly among populations from Northeast Asia and Central Asia. Another analysis found that one out of four Ainu men belonged to haplogroup C-M217, while the remaining three belonged to haplogroup D-M55.

====Maternal lineages====
An analysis of 51 Ainu individuals found that around 51% of their mtDNA subclades are unique to the Ainu, while the remaining haplogroups are shared with other Asian populations, especially with the Nivkhs in northern Sakhalin and the Koryaks on the Kamchatka Peninsula.

Of the 51 Ainu individuals, around 27% (14/51) belong to N9 (of which 10 were assigned to subclade Y and four to unclassifed N9 clades), around 24% (12/51) to D, around 20% (10/51) to M7, and around 20% (10/51) to G; the minor haplogroups are A (2/51), B (1/51), F (1/51), and an unclassified subclade of M not belonging to M7, M8, CZ, D, or G.

====Autosomal DNA====
The Ainu appear genetically most closely related to the Jōmon period peoples of Japan. Previous genetic analyses of Jomon remains found them to represent a deeply diverged East Asian lineage. The Jomon lineage is inferred to have diverged from Ancient East Asians before the divergence between Ancient Northern East Asians and Ancient Southern East Asians, but after the divergence of the basal Tianyuan man and/or Hoabinhians. Beyond their broad affinity with Eastern Asian lineages, the Jomon also display a weak affinity for Ancient North Eurasians (ANE), which may be associated with the introduction of microblade technology to Northeast Asia and northern East Asia during the Last Glacial Maximum via the ANE or Ancient Paleo-Siberians.

The genetic makeup of the Ainu represents a &quot;deep branch of East Asian diversity&quot;. Compared to contemporary East Asian populations, the Ainu share &quot;a closer genetic relationship with northeast Siberians&quot;. The Ainu also display a relative closer genetic affinity with &quot;lowland East Asians&quot; than &quot;highland East Asians&quot; and may have contributed some ancestry to surrounding populations around the Sea of Okhotsk. Differences in the frequency of the derived EDAR gene variant between the Ainu and contemporary East Asians suggest that the ancestors of the Ainu may not have shared the selective pressures with other Ancestral East Asian populations. The Ainu, however, share two variants in the ADH gene cluster with other East Asians at high frequency, unlike Tibetans and Sherpa, &quot;raising the possibility that selective pressure on these variants was different in the high-altitude environments.&quot;

The closest modern ethnic groups to the Ainu are the Ryukyuans in southern Japan, followed by contemporary Japanese people. Compared with other East Asian populations, the Ainu are an outgroup, pointing to long-lasting isolation after their divergence. By analyzing the SNP loci of Ainu individuals, it was found that they carry genes associated with facial structure found among Europeans and hair and tooth morphology found among East Asians. Genetic analyses of HLA I and HLA II genes as well as HLA-A, B, and DRB1 gene frequencies placed the Ainu in an intermediate position between indigenous peoples of the Americas and contemporary Northeast Asians.

Studies on modern-day Ainu estimate that they derive between 66% and 79.3% of their ancestry from the Jōmon lineage. Another study on modern Ainu individuals found that they derive c. 49% of their ancestry directly from the Jōmon people, c. 22% from the Okhotsk people (who themselves could be modeled as 54% Ancient Northeast Asian, 22% Ancient Paleo-Siberian, and 24% Jōmon), and ~29% from the Yamato Japanese (who carried around 11% Jōmon and 89% Yayoi ancestry), corresponding with historical events.

==Military service==

===Russo-Japanese War===
Ainu men were first recruited into the Japanese military in 1898. Sixty-four Ainu served in the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905), eight of whom died in battle or from illness contracted during military service. Two received the Order of the Golden Kite, granted for bravery, leadership, or command in battle.

==Culture==

Traditional Ainu culture is quite different from Japanese culture. According to Tanaka Sakurako from the University of British Columbia, the Ainu culture can be included into a wider &quot;northern circumpacific region&quot;, referring to various indigenous cultures of Northeast Asia and &quot;beyond the Bering Strait&quot; in North America. The Ainu culture developed from the 13th century (late Kamakura period) to the present day. While most Ainu in Japan now live outwardly similar lives to the Wajin (ethnic Japanese) due to assimilation policies, many still maintain their Ainu identity and respect for traditional Ainu ways, known as &quot;Ainu puri&quot;. The distinctive Ainu patterns (Ainu mon&#x27;yō) and oral literature (Yukar) have been designated as Hokkaido Heritage.

===Language===
In 2008, the news block &quot;World Watch&quot; gave an estimate of fewer than 100 remaining speakers of the Ainu language. In 1993, linguist Alexander Vovin placed the number at fewer than 15 speakers, characterizing the language as &quot;almost extinct&quot;. Because so few present-day speakers are left, study of the Ainu language is limited and is based largely on historical research. Historically, the status of the Ainu language was rather high and was used by early Russian and Japanese administrative officials to communicate with each other and with the Ainu people.
Despite the small number of native speakers of Ainu, there is an active movement to revitalize the language, mainly in Hokkaido but also elsewhere, such as in Kanto. Ainu oral literature has been documented both in hopes of safeguarding it for future generations and for use as a teaching tool for language learners. As of 2011, there were an increasing number of second-language learners, especially in Hokkaido.

The resurgence of Ainu culture and language is in large part due to the pioneering efforts of the late Ainu folklorist, activist, and former Diet member Shigeru Kayano, himself a native speaker. He first opened an Ainu language school in 1987, funded by Ainu Kyokai.

Although some researchers have attempted to show that the Ainu and Japanese languages are related, modern scholars have rejected the idea that the relationship goes beyond contact, such as the mutual borrowing of words. No attempt to show a relationship with Ainu to any other language has gained wide acceptance, and linguists currently classify Ainu as a language isolate. Most Ainu people speak either Japanese or Russian.

The Ainu language has no indigenous system of writing and has historically been transliterated using Japanese kana or Russian Cyrillic. , it was typically written either in katakana or in the Latin alphabet.

Many of the Ainu dialects, especially those from different extremities of Hokkaido, are not mutually intelligible. However, all Ainu speakers understand the classic Ainu language of the , a form of Ainu epic. Without a writing system, the Ainu were masters of narration, with the and other forms of narration such as () tales being committed to memory and related at gatherings that often lasted many hours or even days.

Concepts expressed with prepositions in English, such as &#x27;to&#x27;, &#x27;from&#x27;, &#x27;by&#x27;, &#x27;in&#x27;, and &#x27;at&#x27;, appear as postpositional forms in Ainu. Whereas prepositions come before the word they modify, postpositions come after it. A single sentence in Ainu can comprise many added or agglutinated sounds or affixes that represent nouns or ideas.

===Social structure===

Ainu society was traditionally organized into small villages called kotan, typically located in river basins or along seashores where food was readily available, particularly in rivers where salmon traveled upstream. In early modern times, Ainu were forced to relocate their kotan near Japanese fishing grounds to provide labor. As a result, traditional kotan disappeared, and large villages of several dozen families were formed around fishing grounds. The Ainu social structure included chiefs, but judicial functions were not entrusted to them. Instead, an indefinite number of community members sat in judgment upon criminals. Capital punishment did not exist, nor did the community resort to imprisonment. Beating was considered a sufficient and final penalty. However, in the case of murder, the nose and ears of the culprit were cut off, or the tendons of their feet were severed.

===Appearance and dress===

Never shaving after a certain age, the men have full beards and moustaches. Men and women alike cut their hair level with the shoulders at the sides of the head, trimmed semi-circularly behind. The women tattoo () their mouths and sometimes their forearms. The mouth tattoos start at a young age with a small spot on the upper lip, gradually increasing in size. The soot deposited on a pot hung over a fire of birch bark is used for color.
Traditional Ainu dress consists of a robe spun from the inner bark of the elm tree, called or . The various styles consist generally of a simple short robe with straight sleeves, folded around the body, and tied with a band around the waist. The sleeves end at the wrist or forearm, and the length generally is to the calves. Women also wear an undergarment of Japanese cloth.
In winter, the skins of animals are worn, with leggings of deerskin and, in Sakhalin, boots made from the skin of dogs or salmon. Ainu culture regards earrings, traditionally made from grapevines, as gender-neutral. Women also wear a beaded necklace called a tamasay. Modern craftswomen weave and embroider traditional garments that command very high prices.

===Dwellings===

Their traditional habitations are reed-thatched huts, the largest about square, without partitions and having a fireplace in the center. There is no chimney; there is only a hole at the angle of the roof. One window sits on the eastern side, along with two doors. The house of the village head is used as a public meeting-place when one is needed.
Another kind of traditional Ainu house is called . The chise is typically oriented east to west or parallel to a river, with the entrance on the west side also serving as a storeroom. It has three windows, including the sacred rorun-puyar on the east side, through which gods enter and leave and ceremonial tools are taken in and out. The Ainu regard this window as sacred and are told never to look in through it. A chise has a fireplace near the entrance. A husband and wife would traditionally sit on the fireplace&#x27;s left side (called shiso). Children and guests would sit facing them on the fireplace&#x27;s right side (called harkiso). The chise has a platform for valuables called iyoykir behind the shiso. The Ainu place sintoko (hokai) and ikayop (quivers) there.

===Cuisine===
Traditional Ainu cuisine consists of the meat of bears, foxes, wolves, badgers, oxen, and horses, as well as fish, fowl, millet, vegetables, herbs, and roots. The Ainu traditionally never eat raw fish or meat, always boiling or roasting it. They also cultivated crops such as millet (piyapa), foxtail millet (munchiro), and barnyard millet (menkur), which were used to make a type of sake called &quot;tonoto&quot; for ceremonial purposes.
Salmon was particularly important, referred to as kamuy chep (god&#x27;s fish) or shipe (true food). In autumn, large quantities of salmon were caught and processed into dried fish for preservation. This served not only as a staple food but also as a major trade item with the Japanese. The Ainu also made extensive use of the bulbs of the Cardiocrinum cordatum (turep), from which they extracted and preserved starch. This tradition of starch usage made it easy for them to adopt potatoes when they were introduced. Ainu cuisine is not commonly eaten outside Ainu communities. Only a few restaurants in Japan – mainly in Tokyo and Hokkaido – serve traditional Ainu dishes.

===Hunting===

The Ainu traditionally hunt from late autumn to early summer, in part because in late autumn, plant gathering, salmon fishing, and other activities of securing food come to an end, and hunters readily find game in fields and mountains in which plants have withered. A village typically possesses a hunting-ground of its own, or several villages use a joint hunting territory, called an . Heavy penalties were imposed on any outsiders trespassing on such hunting grounds or on joint hunting territory. The Ainu traditionally hunt Ussuri brown bears, Asian black bears, Ezo deer (a subspecies of sika deer), hares, red foxes, Japanese raccoon dogs, and other animals. Ezo deer are a particularly important food resource for the Ainu, as are salmon. The Ainu also hunt sea eagles, such as white-tailed sea eagles, along with ravens and other birds. The Ainu hunted eagles for their tail feathers, which they used in trade with the Japanese. Historically, the Ainu hunted sea-otters and traded their pelts in the Japanese market.

The Ainu hunted with arrows and spears with poison-coated points. They obtained the poison, called , from the roots and stalks of aconites. The recipe for this poison was a household secret that differed from family to family. They enhanced the poison with mixtures of roots and stalks of dog&#x27;s bane, boiled juice of Mekuragumo (a type of harvestman), Matsumomushi (&quot;Notonecta triguttata&quot;, a species of backswimmer), tobacco, and other ingredients. They also used stingray stingers or skin-covering stingers.
They traditionally hunt in groups with dogs. Before hunting, particularly for bears and similar animals, they may pray to the , the house guardian goddess, to convey their wishes for a large catch and to the god of mountains for safe hunting. The Ainu traditionally hunt bears during the spring thaw. At that time, bears are weak because they haven&#x27;t eaten during their long hibernation. Ainu hunters catch hibernating bears or bears that have just left hibernation dens. When they hunt bears in summer, they use a spring trap loaded with an arrow, called an . The Ainu usually use arrows to hunt deer. Also, they drive deer into a river or sea and shoot them with arrows. For a large catch, a whole village would drive a herd of deer off a cliff and club them to death.

====Fishing====

Fishing is important to Ainu culture. They largely catch trout in summer and salmon in autumn, as well as (Japanese huchen), dace, and other fish. Spears called were often used. Other methods were fishing, fishing, and fishing. Many villages were built near rivers or along the coast. Each village or individual had a definite river fishing territory. Outsiders could not freely fish there and needed to ask the owner.

===Japanese lacquerware===

Japanese lacquerware was used in everyday life as tableware and often used in ceremonies (ritual utensils), such as the cups used to offer alcohol when praying to the kamui. Lacquerware was often treated as treasure, and it was also used as containers for storing other treasures.

One of the characteristics of Ainu lacquerware is that it is almost entirely imported from the south of Honshu. Some pieces may have been lacquered in Matsumae in southern Hokkaido, but since the technique of lacquering is from Honshu, lacquerware can be considered an introduced item among Ainu folk implements.

There are examples of spatulas and other objects used by the Ainu people for ceremonial purposes that remain in clusters of the same size, and some are specifically produced for trading with the Ainu.

===Ornaments===

Traditionally, Ainu men wear a crown called a for important ceremonies. are made from wood fiber with bundles of partially shaved wood. The crown has wooden figures of animal gods and other ornaments in its center. Men carry an (ceremonial sword) secured by an strap to their shoulders.

Ainu women traditionally wear , embroidered headbands, and , metal earrings with balls. and were originally also worn by men. Furthermore, aprons called are now part of women&#x27;s formal clothes. However, some old documents state that men wore . Women sometimes wear a bracelet called a .

Women may wear a necklace called a , a long, narrow strip of cloth with metal plaques. They may also wear a necklace that reaches the breast, called a or , usually made from glass balls. Some glass balls came from trade with the Asian continent. The Ainu also obtained glass balls secretly made by the Matsumae clan.

===Housing===
A village is called a in the Ainu language. were traditionally located in river basins and along seashores where food was readily available, particularly in the basins of rivers through which salmon traveled upstream. In early modern times, the Ainu people were forced to labor at Japanese fishing grounds. Ainu were also forced to relocate to near fishing grounds so that the Japanese could secure a labor force. When the Japanese moved to other fishing grounds, Ainu were forced to accompany them. As a result, the traditional disappeared, and large villages of several dozen families were formed around the fishing grounds.

 or (houses) in a are made of cogon grass, bamboo grass, bark, etc. The length lays east to west or parallel to a river. A is about seven by five meters, with an entrance at the west end that also serves as a storeroom. A has three windows, including the , a window located on the side facing the entrance (i.e., on the east side), through which gods enter and leave and ceremonial tools are taken in and out. The Ainu regard this window as sacred and are told never to look in through it. A has a fireplace near the entrance. A husband and wife would traditionally sit on the fireplace&#x27;s left side (called ). Children and guests would sit facing them on the fireplace&#x27;s right side (called ). The has a platform for valuables called behind the . The Ainu place () and (quivers) there.

===Traditions===

The Ainu people have various types of marriage. A child is traditionally promised in marriage by arrangement between their parents and the parents of their betrothed, or by a go-between. When the betrothed reach a marriageable age, they are told who their spouse is to be. There are also traditional marriages based on the mutual consent of both sexes. In some areas, when a daughter reaches a marriageable age, her parents allow her to live in a small room called a , annexed to the southern wall of the house. The parents choose her husband from the men who visit her.

The age of marriage is 17 to 18 years of age for men and 15 to 16 years of age for women, who are traditionally tattooed. At these ages, both sexes are regarded as adults.

When a man proposes to a woman in traditional fashion, he visits her house, and she hands him a full bowl of rice. He then eats half of the rice and returns the rest to her. If the woman eats the remaining rice, she accepts his proposal. If she does not and instead puts it beside her, she rejects his proposal. When a man and woman become engaged or learn that their engagement has been arranged, they exchange gifts. The man sends her a small engraved knife, a workbox, a spool, and other gifts. She sends him embroidered clothes, coverings for the back of the hand, leggings, and other handmade clothes.

The worn-out fabric of old clothing is used for baby clothes because soft cloth is good for their skin. Additionally, worn-out material was thought to protect babies from the gods of illness and demons, due to these entities&#x27; abhorrence of dirty things. Before a baby is breast-fed, they are given a decoction of the endodermis of an alder and the roots of butterburs to discharge impurities. Children are raised almost naked until about the ages of four to five. Even when they wear clothes, they do not wear belts and leave the front of their clothes open. Subsequently, they wear bark clothes without patterns, such as , until they come of age.

Ainu babies traditionally are not given permanent names when they are born. Rather, they are called by various temporary names until the age of two or three. 
Newborn babies are named (&quot;a baby&#x27;s crying&quot;), , (&quot;small excrement&quot;), and (&quot;old excrement&quot;). Their tentative names have a portion meaning &quot;excrement&quot; or &quot;old things&quot; to ward off the demon of ill-health. Some children are named based on their behavior or habits; others are named after notable events or after their parents&#x27; wishes for their future. When children are named, they are never given the same names as others.

Men traditionally wear loincloths and have their hair dressed properly for the first time at age 15 to 16. Women are also considered adults at the age of 15 to 16. They traditionally wear underclothes called and have their hair dressed properly, with wound waistcloths called and around their bodies.
When women reached the age of 12 or 13, the lips, hands, and arms were traditionally tattooed. When they reached the age of 15 or 16, their tattoos would be completed, indicating their qualification for marriage.

===Religion===

The Ainu are traditionally animists, believing that everything in nature has a (spirit or god) on the inside. The most important include:
* , goddess of the hearth
* , god of bears and mountains
* , god of the sea, fishing, and marine animals
* , regarded as the creator of the world in the Ainu religion
Ainu craftsmen, and the Ainu as a whole, traditionally believed that &quot;anything made with deep sincerity was imbued with spirit and also became a []&quot;. They also held the belief that ancestors and the power of the family could be invoked through certain patterns in art to protect them from malignant influences.

The Ainu religion has no priests by profession. Instead, the village chief performs whatever religious ceremonies are necessary. Ceremonies are confined to making libations of , saying prayers, and offering willow sticks with wooden shavings attached to them. These sticks are called (singular) and (plural).

They are placed on an altar used to &quot;send back&quot; the spirits of killed animals. Ainu ceremonies for sending back bears are called . The Ainu people give thanks to the gods before eating and pray to the deity of fire in times of sickness. Traditional Ainu belief holds that their spirits are immortal and that their spirits will be rewarded hereafter by ascending to (Land of the Gods).

The Ainu are part of a larger collective of indigenous people who practice &quot;arctolatry&quot;, or bear worship. The Ainu believe that the bear holds particular importance as &#x27;s chosen method of delivering the gift of the bear&#x27;s hide and meat to humans.

John Batchelor reported that the Ainu view the world as being a spherical ocean on which many islands float, a view based on the fact that the sun rises in the east and sets in the west. He wrote that they believe the world rests on the back of a large fish, which, when it moves, causes earthquakes.

Ainu assimilated into mainstream Japanese society have adopted Buddhism and Shintō; some northern Ainu were converted as members of the Russian Orthodox Church. Regarding Ainu communities in Shikotan and other areas that fall within the Russian sphere of cultural influence, there have been a few churches constructed, and some Ainu are reported to have accepted the Christian faith. There have also been reports that the Russian Orthodox Church has performed some missionary projects in the Sakhalin Ainu community. However, there are only reports of a few conversions to Christianity. Converts have been scorned as (Russian Ainu) by other members of the Ainu community. Reports indicate that many Ainu have kept their faith in their traditional deities.

According to a 2012 survey conducted by Hokkaidō University, a high percentage of Ainu are members of their household family religion, which is Buddhism (especially Buddhism). However, it is noted that, similar to the Japanese religious consciousness, there is not a strong feeling of identification with a particular religion, with Buddhist and traditional beliefs both being part of their daily lives.

====Rituals====
The Ainu religion consists of a pantheistic animist structure in which the world is founded on interactions between humans and . Within all living beings, natural forces, and objects, there is a (sacred life force) that is an extension of a greater . are gods or spirits that choose to visit the human world in temporary physical forms, both animate and inanimate, within the human world. Once the physical vessel dies or breaks, the returns to the and leaves its physical form behind as a gift to humans. If the humans treated the vessel and with respect and gratitude, then the would return out of delight for the human world. Due to this interaction, the Ainu lived with deep reverence for nature and all objects and phenomena in the hopes that the would return. The Ainu believed that the granted humans objects, skills, and knowledge to use tools, and thus deserve respect and worship. Daily practices included the moderation of hunting, gathering, and harvesting to not disturb the . Often, the Ainu would make offerings of an (sacred shaved stick), which usually consisted of whittled willow tree wood with decorative shavings still attached, and wine to the . They also built sacred altars called (a fence-like row of taller Inau decorated with bear skulls), separated from the main house and raised storehouses and often observed outdoor rituals.

The Ainu observed a ritual that would return , a divine or spiritual being in Ainu mythology, to the spiritual realm. This sending ritual was called Omante. A bear cub would be captured alive during hibernation and raised in the village as a child. Women would care for the cubs as if they were their children, sometimes even nursing them if needed. Once the bears reached maturity, they would hold another ritual every 5 to 10 years called Iomante (sometimes Iyomante). People from neighboring villages were invited to help celebrate this ritual, in which members of the village would send the bear back to the realm of spirits by gathering around it in a central area and using special ceremonial arrows to shoot it. Afterwards, they would eat the meat. However, in 1955, this ritual was outlawed as animal cruelty. In 2007, it became exempt due to its cultural significance to the Ainu. The ritual has since been modified; it is now an annual festival. The festival begins at sundown with a torch parade. A play is then performed, and this is followed by music and dancing.

Other rituals were performed for things such as food and illness. The Ainu had a ritual to welcome the salmon, praying for a big catch, and another to thank the salmon at the end of the season. There was also a ritual for warding off that would bring epidemics, using strong-smelling herbs placed in doorways, windows, and gardens to turn away epidemic . Similarly to many religions, the Ainu also gave prayers and offerings to their ancestors in the spirit world or afterlife. They would also pray to the fire to deliver their offerings of broken snacks and fruit, as well as tobacco.

=====Dancing in rituals=====
Traditional dances are performed at ceremonies and banquets. Dancing is a part of the newly organized cultural festivals, and it is even done privately in daily life. Ainu traditional dances often involve large circles of dancers, and sometimes there are onlookers that sing without musical instruments. In rituals, these dances are intimate; they involve the calls and movements of animals and/or insects. Some, like the sword and bow dances, are rituals that were used to worship and give thanks for nature. This was to thank deities that they believed were in their surroundings. There was also a dance in Iomante that mimicked the movements of a living bear. However, some dances are improvised and meant just for entertainment. Overall, Ainu traditional dancing reinforced their connection to nature and the religious world and provided a link to other Arctic cultures.

=====Funerals=====
Funerals included prayers and offerings to the fire , as well as verse laments expressing wishes for a smooth journey to the next world. The items that were to be buried with the dead were first broken or cracked to allow spirits to be released and travel to the afterlife together. Sometimes a burial would be followed by burning the residence of the dead. In the event of an unnatural death, there would be a speech raging against the gods.

In the afterlife, recognized ancestral spirits moved through and influenced the world, though neglected spirits would return to the living world and cause misfortune. Prosperity of family in the afterlife would depend on prayers and offerings left by living descendants; this often led to Ainu parents teaching their children to look after them in the afterlife.

==Institutions==

Most Hokkaidō Ainu, and some other Ainu, are members of an umbrella group called the Hokkaido Ainu Association. The organization changed its name to Hokkaidō Utari Association in 1961 due to the fact that the word Ainu was often used in a derogatory manner by the non-Ainu ethnic Japanese. It was changed back to the Hokkaido Ainu Association in 2009 after the passing of the new law regarding the Ainu. The organization was originally controlled by the government to speed Ainu assimilation and integration into the Japanese nation-state. It is now run exclusively by Ainu and operates mostly independently of the government.
Other key institutions include &quot;The Foundation for Research and Promotion of Ainu Culture (FRPAC)&quot;, established by the Japanese government after the enactment of the Ainu Culture Law in 1997; the Hokkaidō University Center for Ainu and Indigenous Studies, established in 2007; and various museums and cultural centers. The Ainu people living in Tokyo have also developed a vibrant political and cultural community.

Since late 2011, the Ainu have developed cultural exchange and cooperation with the Sámi people of northern Europe. Both the Sámi and the Ainu participate in the organization for Arctic indigenous peoples and the Sámi research office in Lapland (Finland).

Currently, there are several Ainu museums and cultural parks. Some of them are:
* National Ainu Museum
* Kawamura Kaneto Ainu Museum
* Ainu Kotan
* Ainu Folklore Museum
* Hokkaido Museum of Northern Peoples
* Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum
* Shinhidaka Ainu Museum

==Ethnic rights==
===Legal action===

On March 27, 1997, the Sapporo District Court decided a landmark case that, for the first time in Japanese history, recognized the right of the Ainu people to enjoy their distinct culture and traditions. The case arose because of a 1978 government plan to build two dams in the Saru River watershed in southern Hokkaidō. The dams were part of a series of development projects under the Second National Development Plan that were intended to industrialize the north of Japan. The planned location for one of the dams was across the valley floor near Nibutani village, the home of a large community of Ainu people and an important center of Ainu culture and history. When the government commenced construction on the Nibutani Dam in the early 1980s, two Ainu landowners refused to agree to the expropriation of their property. These landowners were Tadashi Kaizawa and Shigeru Kayano—well-known and important leaders in the Ainu community. After Kaizawa and Kayano declined to sell their land, the Hokkaidō Development Bureau applied for and was subsequently granted a Project Authorization, which required the men to vacate their land. When their appeal of the Authorization was denied, Kayano and Kaizawa&#x27;s son Koichi (Kaizawa died in 1992) filed suit against the Hokkaidō Development Bureau.

The final decision denied the relief sought by the plaintiffs for pragmatic reasons (the dam was already in place), but the decision was nonetheless heralded as a landmark victory for the Ainu people. Nearly all of the plaintiffs&#x27; claims were recognized. Moreover, the decision marked the first time Japanese case law acknowledged the Ainu as an indigenous people and contemplated the responsibility of the Japanese nation to the indigenous people within its borders. The decision included broad fact-finding that underscored the long history of the oppression of the Ainu people by Japan&#x27;s majority, referred to as in the case, and discussions about the case. The decision was issued on March 27, 1997. Because of the broad implications for Ainu rights, the plaintiffs decided not to appeal the decision, which became final two weeks later. After the decision was issued, on May 8, 1997, the Diet passed the Ainu Culture Law and repealed the Ainu Protection Act—the 1899 law that had been the vehicle of Ainu oppression for almost one hundred years. While the Ainu Culture Law has been widely criticized for its shortcomings, the shift that it represents in Japan&#x27;s view of the Ainu people is a testament to the importance of the Nibutani decision. In 2007, the &quot;Cultural Landscape along the Sarugawa River resulting from Ainu Tradition and Modern Settlement&quot; was designated an Important Cultural Landscape of Japan. A later action seeking the restoration of Ainu assets held in trust by the Japanese government was dismissed in 2008.

===Governmental bodies on Ainu affairs===
There is no single government body to coordinate Ainu affairs. Rather, various advisory boards are set up by the Hokkaido government to advise on specific matters. One such committee operated in the late 1990s, and its work resulted in the . This panel was criticized for including no Ainu members.

In 2006, another panel was established, which notably included an Ainu member for the first time. It completed its work in 2008, issuing a major report that included an extensive historical record and called for substantial government policy changes towards the Ainu.

===Formation of Ainu political party===
On January 21, 2012, the was founded after a group of Ainu activists in Hokkaidō announced the formation of a political party for the Ainu on October 30, 2011. The Ainu Association of Hokkaidō reported that Kayano Shiro, the son of the former Ainu leader Kayano Shigeru, would head the party. Their aim is to contribute to the realization of a society where the Ainu and Japanese can coexist and possess equal rights in Japan.

===Official promotion===
The &quot;2019 Ainu act&quot; simplified procedures for obtaining various permissions from authorities in regards to the traditional lifestyle of the Ainu and nurtured the identity and cultures of the Ainu without defining the ethnic group by blood lineage.

On July 12, 2020, the National Ainu Museum was opened. It had originally been scheduled to open on April 24, 2020, prior to the Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games scheduled in the same year in Shiraoi, Hokkaidō. The park was planned to be a base for the protection and promotion of Ainu people, culture, and language. The museum promotes the culture and habits of the Ainu people, who are the original inhabitants of Hokkaidō. Upopoy in the Ainu language means &quot;singing in a large group&quot;. The National Ainu Museum building has images and videos exhibiting the history and daily life of the Ainu.
The Ainu cultural contribution is also recognized by a UNESCO listing, in consequence of a UNESCO decision to list non-physical cultural assets, including songs and dancing.

In July 2023, it was reported that a group of Ainu from Hokkaido was suing the government to reclaim the right of salmon river fishing. This has been outlawed for a century, except for the exemption of a limited number of salmon for ceremonial purposes. The group claimed the Japanese government did not abide by the 2007 United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People, which it had signed.

==Geography==

The traditional locations of the Ainu are Hokkaido, Sakhalin, the Kuril Islands, Kamchatka, and the northern Tōhoku region. Many of the place names that remain in Hokkaido and the Kuril Islands have a phonetic equivalent of the Ainu place names.

In 1756 CE, a &quot;kanjō-bugyō&quot; (a high-ranking Edo period official responsible for finance) implemented an assimilation policy for Ainu engaged in fishing in the Tsugaru Peninsula. From that point on, Ainu culture rapidly disappeared from Honshu.

After the Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1875), most of the Ainu from the Kuril islands were moved to the island of Shikotan by providing the pioneers with essential life supplies and for defense purposes (Kurishima Cruise Diary).

In 1945, the Soviet Union invaded Japan and occupied Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands. The Ainu who lived there were repatriated to their home country, Japan, except for those who indicated their willingness to remain.

===Russia===

As a result of the Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1875), the Kuril Islands, along with their Ainu inhabitants, came under Japanese administration. A total of 83 North Kuril Ainu arrived in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky on September 18, 1877, after they decided to remain under Russian rule. They refused the offer by Russian officials to move to new reservations in the Commander Islands. An agreement was reached in 1881, and the Ainu decided to settle in the village of Yavin, Kamchatka. In March 1881, the group left Petropavlovsk and started the journey towards Yavin on foot. Four months later, they arrived at their new homes. Another village, Golygino, was founded later. Under Soviet rule, both villages were forced to disband, and residents were moved to the Russian-dominated Zaporozhye rural settlement in Ust-Bolsheretsky Raion. As a result of intermarriage, the three ethnic groups assimilated to form the Kamchadal community. In 1953, K. Omelchenko, the minister for the protection of military and state secrets in the USSR, banned the press from publishing any more information on the Ainu living in the USSR. This order was revoked after two decades.

, the North Kuril Ainu of Zaporozhye form the largest Ainu subgroup in Russia. The Nakamura clan (South Kuril Ainu on their paternal side), the smallest group, numbers just six people residing in Petropavlovsk. On Sakhalin Island, a few dozen people identify themselves as Sakhalin Ainu, but many more with partial Ainu ancestry do not acknowledge it. Most of the 888 Japanese people living in Russia (2010 Census) are of mixed Japanese–Ainu ancestry, although they do not acknowledge it (full Japanese ancestry gives them the right of visa-free entry to Japan). Similarly, no one identifies themselves as Amur Valley Ainu, although people of partial descent live in Khabarovsk. There is no evidence of living descendants of the Kamchatka Ainu.

In the 2010 Census of Russia, nearly 100 people tried to register themselves as ethnic Ainu in the village, but the governing council of Kamchatka Krai rejected their claim and enrolled them as ethnic Kamchadal. In 2011, the leader of the Ainu community in Kamchatka, Alexei Vladimirovich Nakamura, requested that Vladimir Ilyukhin (Governor of Kamchatka) and Boris Nevzorov (Chairman of the State Duma) include the Ainu in the central list of the Indigenous small-numbered peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East. This request was also denied.

Ethnic Ainu living in Sakhalin Oblast and Khabarovsk Krai are not organized politically. According to Alexei Nakamura, , only 205 Ainu live in Russia (up from just 12 people who self-identified as Ainu in 2008). They, along with the Kurile Kamchadals (Itelmen of the Kuril Islands), are fighting for official recognition. Since the Ainu are not recognized in the official list of the peoples living in Russia, they are counted as people without nationality, as ethnic Russians, or as Kamchadals.

The Ainu have emphasized that they were the natives of the Kuril Islands, and that the Japanese and Russians were both invaders. In 2004, the small Ainu community living in Russia in Kamchatka Krai wrote a letter to Vladimir Putin, urging him to reconsider any move to award the Southern Kuril Islands to Japan. In the letter, they blamed the Japanese, the Tsarist Russians, and the Soviets for crimes against the Ainu, such as killings and assimilation; they also urged him to recognize the Japanese genocide against the Ainu people. This proposal was rejected.
, both the Kuril Ainu and Kuril Kamchadal ethnic groups lack the fishing and hunting rights that the Russian government grants to the indigenous tribal communities of the far north.

In March 2017, Alexei Nakamura revealed that plans for an Ainu village to be created in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky and plans for an Ainu dictionary are underway.

==Population==
The population of the Ainu during the Edo period was a maximum of 26,800; it has since declined, due in part to the spread of infectious diseases. It was traditionally regarded as a Tenryō territory.

According to the 1897 Russian census, 1,446 Ainu native speakers lived in Russian territory.

Currently, there is no Ainu category in the Japanese national census, and no fact-finding has been conducted by national institutions. Therefore, the exact number of Ainu people is unknown. However, multiple surveys have been conducted that provide an indication of the total population.

According to a 2006 Hokkaido Agency survey, there were 23,782 Ainu people in Hokkaido. When viewed by the branch office (currently the Promotion Bureau), there are many in the Iburi / Hidaka branch office. The definition of &quot;Ainu&quot; by the Hokkaido Agency in this survey is &quot;a person who seems to have inherited the blood of Ainu&quot; or &quot;the same livelihood as those with marriage or adoption.&quot; Additionally, if the other person is declared not to be &quot;Ainu&quot;, then it is not subject to investigation.

A 1971 survey determined an Ainu population of 77,000. Another survey yielded a total of 200,000 Ainu living in Japan. However, there are no other surveys that support this high estimate.

Many Ainu live outside of Hokkaido. A 1988 survey estimated that the population of Ainu living in Tokyo was 2,700. According to a 1989 survey report on Utari living in Tokyo, it is estimated that the Ainu population of the Tokyo area alone exceeds 10% of Ainu living in Hokkaido; there are more than 10,000 Ainu living in the Tokyo metropolitan area.

In addition to Japan and Russia, it was reported in 1992 that there was a descendant of Kuril Ainu in Poland, but there are also indications that they are a descendant of the Aleut.
 On the other hand, the descendant of the children born in Poland by the Polish anthropologist Bronisław Piłsudski, who was a leading Ainu researcher and left a vast amount of research material, such as photographs and wax tubes, was born in Japan.

According to a 2017 survey, the Ainu population in Hokkaido is about 13,000. This is a sharp drop from 24,000 in 2006. However, this is partially due to a decrease in membership in the Ainu Association of Hokkaido, which is cooperating with the survey. Additionally, interest in protecting personal information has increased. It is thought that the number of individuals who cooperate is declining and that it does not match the actual population of Ainu people.

===Subgroups===
These are unofficial subgroups of the Ainu people, with location and population estimates.

==In popular culture==

* The characters Nakoruru, Rimururu, and Rera from the SNK game series &quot;Samurai Shodown&quot; are Ainu.
* In the 2006 video game Ōkami, the Oina people, who inhabit the northern land of Kamui, are heavily inspired by the Ainu.
* The manga and anime series &quot;Golden Kamuy&quot; has an Ainu girl, Asirpa, as one of the protagonists and features many aspects of Ainu culture.
* The character Fredzilla from &quot;Big Hero 6&quot; is of Ainu descent.
* The character Okuru from the anime series &quot;Samurai Champloo&quot; is the sole survivor of an Ainu village wiped out by disease.
* Usui Horokeu, also known as Horohoro in the manga series &quot;Shaman King,&quot; is a member of an Ainu tribe.
* &quot;Ainu&quot; is a playable nation in the game &quot;Europa Universalis IV&quot;.
* The history of the island of Hokkaidō and of the Ainu people are part of the plot of a chapter in the manga &quot;Silver Spoon&quot;.
* A coming-of-age film, &quot;Ainu Mosir&quot;, was released in Japan on October 17, 2020. The film portrays Kanto, a sensitive 14-year-old Ainu boy who struggles to come to terms with his father&#x27;s death and his identity. The film also focuses on the dilemma of the controversial bear sacrifice ritual under the shadow of modern Japanese society and the Ainu&#x27;s heavy reliance on tourists for their livelihood. Along with other restless teenagers, Kanto is under pressure to retain his Ainu identity and participate in the cultural rituals.
* In the James Bond novel &quot;You Only Live Twice&quot; and film, Bond&#x27;s character spends some time living in an Ainu village and (in the film) is supposedly disguised as one of the local people, &quot;marrying&quot; a local pearl fisher () as part of his cover.
* In the 2013 samurai film &quot;Unforgiven&quot;, starring Ken Watanabe and which is a remake of the 1992 Clint Eastwood Western film of the same name, the character of Goro Sawada (Yuya Yagira) is half-Ainu.

==See also==

* Ainu-ken
* Ainu Revolution Theory
* Akira Ifukube
* Anti-Japaneseism
* Bibliography of the Ainu
* Bikki Sunazawa
* Burakumin
* Constitution of Japan
* Ethnic issues in Japan
** Human rights in Japan
** Racism in Japan
* Ethnocide
* Genocide of indigenous peoples
* Hiram M. Hiller Jr.
* Kankō Ainu
* Matagi
* Mieko Chikappu
* Shizue Ukaji

===Ainu culture===
* Ainu flag
* Ainu genre painting
* Ikupasuy

==References==

===Citations===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
; Genetic studies
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


; Language
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Hitchingham, Masako Yoshida (trans.), Act for the Promotion of Ainu Culture &amp; Dissemination of Knowledge Regarding Ainu Traditions, Asian-Pacific Law &amp; Policy Journal, vol. 1, no. 1 (2000).
* Kayano, Shigeru (1994). &quot;Our Land Was A Forest: An Ainu Memoir&quot;. Westview Press. . .
* (Harvard University, digitized January 24, 2006)
* 
* (Indiana University, digitized September 3, 2009)
* [Original from Harvard University Digitized January 30, 2008] [YOKOHAMA : R. MEIKLEJOHN &amp; CO., NO 49.]

* &quot;The Collected Works of Bronisław Piłsudski&quot;, translated and edited by Alfred F. Majewicz with the assistance of Elzbieta Majewicz. 
** Volume 1: The Aborigines of Sakhalin
** Volume 2: Materials for the Study of the Ainu Language and Folklore (Kraków 1912)
** Volume 3: Materials for the Study of the Ainu Language and Folklore II
** Volume 4: Materials for the Study of Tungusic Languages and Folklore

==External links==

; Organizations
* Hokkaido Utari Kyokai/Ainu Association of Hokkaido 
* Sapporo Pirka Kotan Ainu Cultural Center 
* Foundation for Research and Promotion of Ainu Culture (centers located in Sapporo and Tokyo) 
* Hokkaido University Center for Ainu and Indigenous Studies 
* Institute for the Study of Languages and Cultures of Ainu in Samani, Hokkaidō
* Foundation for Ainu Culture 

; Museums and exhibits
* Smithsonian Institution
* The Boone Collection
* Nibutani Ainu Cultural Museum 
* The Ainu Museum at Shiraoi
* Ainu Komonjo (18th &amp; 19th century records) – Ohnuki Collection
* The Regions: North America—Ainu–North American cultural similarities

; Articles
* &quot;Japan&#x27;s Ainu hope new identity leads to more rights&quot; in &quot;The Christian Science Monitor&quot;, June 9, 2008
* A Salmon&#x27;s Life: An Incredible Journey (Columbia River basin, June 8, 2016)—Posterback Activities

; Video
* &quot;A Trip through Japan with the YWCA (ca. 1919)&quot; —Rare Japanese video featuring Ainu
* &quot;The Ainu: The First Peoples of Japan&quot;. Old videos and photographs arranged by Rawn Joseph
* &quot;The Despised Ainu People&quot;. The Ainus&#x27; Tense Relationship with Japan. 1994. Journeyman.tv</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101828" start="4" end="8" title="Ainu people" label="Ainu"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="16" end="39" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="104" end="112" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q129465" start="121" end="134" title="Tōhoku region" label="Tōhoku region"/>
<link wikidata="Q41602" start="182" end="196" title="Sea of Okhotsk" label="Sea of Okhotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="206" end="214" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="220" end="233" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="239" end="258" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788" start="268" end="283" title="Khabarovsk Krai" label="Khabarovsk Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q640605" start="400" end="406" title="Yamato people" label="Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q618292" start="411" end="419" title="Treaty of Aigun" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208167" start="539" end="545" title="Ryukyuan people" label="Ryukyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404260" start="609" end="631" title="ethnic groups of Japan" label="ethnic groups of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="897" end="909" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371354" start="1132" end="1151" title="forced assimilation" label="forced assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="1156" end="1168" title="colonization" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="1280" end="1297" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969" start="1571" end="1584" title="Ainu language" label="Ainu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="1816" end="1824" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969" start="1865" end="1878" title="Ainu language" label="Ainu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="2153" end="2161" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="2248" end="2256" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="2525" end="2537" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="2545" end="2553" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60046" start="2740" end="2745" title="Nivkhs" label="Nivkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q504574" start="2750" end="2755" title="Nanais" label="Nanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="2978" end="2982" title="Amur" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410835" start="3160" end="3170" title="Kojiki-den" label="Kojiki-den"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="3391" end="3399" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="3401" end="3418" title="Sakhalin" label="southern Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="3428" end="3434" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kurils"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="3441" end="3449" title="Toponymy" label="toponyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886" start="3619" end="3630" title="Amur region" label="Amur region"/>
<link wikidata="Q33928" start="3683" end="3688" title="Uilta language" label="Uilta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13239" start="3693" end="3697" title="Ulch language" label="Ulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q715364" start="3747" end="3757" title="Old Korean" label="Old Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11607084" start="4044" end="4061" title="Zoku-Jōmon period" label="Zoku-Jōmon period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614019" start="4117" end="4132" title="Satsumon culture" label="Satsumon period"/>
<link wikidata="Q640605" start="4394" end="4399" title="Yamato people" label="Wajin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040184" start="4469" end="4472" title="Ezo" label="Ezo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="4494" end="4502" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="4687" end="4694" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014253" start="4695" end="4727" title="Mongol conquest of Jin China" label="conquered the Jin dynasty (1234)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60046" start="4776" end="4781" title="Nivkh people" label="Nivkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420414" start="4786" end="4798" title="Udege people" label="Udege people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4467096" start="4884" end="4895" title="Tyr, Russia" label="Tyr, Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="4920" end="4924" title="Amur" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q470542" start="4929" end="4934" title="Amgun River" label="Amgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="5149" end="5161" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344677" start="5193" end="5221" title="Mongol invasions of Sakhalin" label="Mongols who invaded Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345223" start="5396" end="5411" title="History of Yuan" label="History of Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="5765" end="5777" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="5834" end="5846" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070102" start="6015" end="6050" title="Nurgan Regional Military Commission" label="Nurgan Regional Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4467096" start="6069" end="6072" title="Tyr, Russia" label="Tyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q713247" start="6198" end="6205" title="Yishiha" label="Yishiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q26533" start="6547" end="6553" title="marten" label="marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q28772" start="6724" end="6746" title="Ming Veritable Records" label="Ming Veritable Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q60046" start="7020" end="7025" title="Nivkh people" label="Nivkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="7227" end="7243" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322674" start="7255" end="7266" title="Caishen" label="Chinese god"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420414" start="7382" end="7388" title="Udeghe people" label="Udeghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465429" start="7391" end="7396" title="Ulch people" label="Ulchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504574" start="7403" end="7409" title="Nanai people" label="Nanais"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="7556" end="7568" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="7675" end="7675" title="Manchu language" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="7682" end="7689" title="Manchus" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q696094" start="7842" end="7861" title="Treaty of Nerchinsk" label="Treaty of Nerchinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q214284" start="7881" end="7899" title="Stanovoy Mountains" label="Stanovoy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="7939" end="7953" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="8006" end="8010" title="Amur" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321612" start="8450" end="8458" title="Ningguta" label="Ningguta"/>
<link wikidata="Q618668" start="8486" end="8497" title="Mudan River" label="Mudan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="9294" end="9310" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q952891" start="9399" end="9411" title="Rinzo Mamiya" label="Rinzo Mamiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514279" start="9720" end="9736" title="Matsumae Kinhiro" label="Matsumae Kinhiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q18669712" start="9759" end="9774" title="Matsumae Domain" label="Matsumae Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q183093" start="9996" end="10005" title="Poronaysk" label="Poronaysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="10034" end="10049" title="Tokugawa bakufu" label="Tokugawa bakufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="10436" end="10444" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q155331" start="10544" end="10551" title="Korsakov (town)" label="Ōtomari"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="10638" end="10656" title="Tokugawa Shogunate" label="Tokugawa Shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061883" start="10978" end="10991" title="Matsumae clan" label="Matsumae clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="11153" end="11159" title="Honshu" label="Honshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465429" start="11275" end="11286" title="Ulch people" label="Ulch people"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="11636" end="11644" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="11842" end="11860" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q952891" start="11967" end="11979" title="Mamiya Rinzō" label="Mamiya Rinzō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465429" start="12840" end="12845" title="Ulch people" label="Ulchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504574" start="12847" end="12852" title="Nanai people" label="Nanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q368316" start="12858" end="12863" title="Oroch people" label="Oroch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="12879" end="12883" title="Amur" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q495476" start="13120" end="13127" title="Rishiri Island" label="Rishiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="13365" end="13384" title="Empire of Japan" label="imperial government"/>
<link wikidata="Q524428" start="13401" end="13432" title="Hokkaidō Development Commission" label="Hokkaidō Development Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="13448" end="13465" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197271" start="13597" end="13630" title="Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1875)" label="Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1875)"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="13847" end="13857" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q640605" start="14308" end="14323" title="Yamato people" label="Yamato Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="14486" end="14495" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="14924" end="14932" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q696736" start="14957" end="14976" title="Karafuto Prefecture" label="Karafuto Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="15264" end="15281" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="15331" end="15346" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402793" start="15665" end="15706" title="Hokkaido Former Aborigines Protection Act" label="Hokkaido Former Aborigines Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036293" start="16348" end="16351" title="Oki (musician)" label="Oki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137954" start="16534" end="16540" title="Hidaka Subprefecture" label="Hidaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024242" start="16595" end="16603" title="Nibutani" label="Nibutani"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="16691" end="16709" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476350" start="16736" end="16744" title="Rt. Rev." label="Rt. Rev."/>
<link wikidata="Q14088857" start="16745" end="16757" title="Philip Fyson" label="Philip Fyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191810" start="16759" end="16777" title="Bishop of Hokkaido" label="Bishop of Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618150" start="16792" end="16806" title="John Batchelor (missionary)" label="John Batchelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040184" start="16904" end="16907" title="Ezo" label="Ezo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="17631" end="17649" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="17699" end="17700" title="Japanese yen" label="¥"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="17711" end="17714" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046461" start="17909" end="17924" title="Postwar Japan" label="post-WWII Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="17963" end="17978" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761112" start="18027" end="18044" title="Japanese identity" label="Japanese identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238114" start="18059" end="18074" title="monoculturalism" label="monoculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138309" start="18171" end="18218" title="Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples" label="Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q101137" start="18315" end="18327" title="Fukuda Yasuo" label="Fukuda Yasuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="18413" end="18435" title="National Diet" label="National Diet of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="18533" end="18550" title="indigenous people" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q132596" start="18909" end="18917" title="Tarō Asō" label="Tarō Asō"/>
<link wikidata="Q130436" start="19005" end="19016" title="History of Japan" label="2,000 years"/>
<link wikidata="Q909452" start="19058" end="19069" title="Imperial House of Japan" label="one dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11608110" start="19141" end="19177" title="Jōmon people" label="indigenous Japanese hunter-gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q52824" start="19208" end="19220" title="Jōmon period" label="Jōmon period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614019" start="19343" end="19359" title="Satsumon culture" label="Satsumon culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11607084" start="19367" end="19383" title="Epi-Jōmon period" label="Epi-Jōmon period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093651" start="19423" end="19438" title="Okhotsk culture" label="Okhotsk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41602" start="19782" end="19796" title="Sea of Okhotsk" label="Sea of Okhotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614019" start="20260" end="20276" title="Satsumon culture" label="Satsumon culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493941" start="20370" end="20383" title="Juha Janhunen" label="Juha Janhunen"/>
<link wikidata="Q848595" start="20388" end="20403" title="Alexander Vovin" label="Alexander Vovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="20512" end="20518" title="Honshu" label="Honshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q65247957" start="20584" end="20604" title="Eastern Old Japanese" label="Eastern Old Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q932574" start="20660" end="20666" title="Emishi" label="Emishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093651" start="20701" end="20716" title="Okhotsk culture" label="Okhotsk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q60046" start="20893" end="20905" title="Nivkh people" label="Nivkh people"/>
<link wikidata="Q11608110" start="20964" end="20976" title="Jōmon people" label="Jōmon people"/>
<link wikidata="Q932574" start="21591" end="21597" title="Emishi" label="Emishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q50111972" start="21778" end="21792" title="Ainu languages" label="Ainu languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33612" start="22029" end="22045" title="Japonic languages" label="Japonic-speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11607084" start="22273" end="22289" title="Epi-Jōmon period" label="Epi-Jōmon tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189178" start="22370" end="22381" title="Nara period" label="Nara period"/>
<link wikidata="Q129465" start="22428" end="22434" title="Tohoku" label="Tohoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q640605" start="22509" end="22522" title="Yamato people" label="Yamato people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658252" start="22697" end="22712" title="Yamato Kingship" label="Yamato Kingship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631818" start="22908" end="22930" title="Suwa Daimyōjin Ekotoba" label="Suwa Daimyōjin Ekotoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="23210" end="23215" title="Y-DNA" label="Y-DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326667" start="23216" end="23232" title="Haplogroup D-M55" label="Haplogroup D-M55"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651742" start="23269" end="23286" title="Haplogroup C-M217" label="Haplogroup C-M217"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="23318" end="23338" title="Japanese archipelago" label="Japanese archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="23714" end="23719" title="Mitochondrial DNA" label="mtDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q60046" start="23847" end="23853" title="Nivkh people" label="Nivkhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q281117" start="23883" end="23890" title="Koryaks" label="Koryaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663632" start="24019" end="24020" title="Haplogroup Y" label="Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q920052" start="24079" end="24080" title="Haplogroup D (mtDNA)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544382" start="24134" end="24135" title="Haplogroup G (mtDNA)" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584149" start="24163" end="24164" title="Haplogroup A (mtDNA)" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584150" start="24173" end="24174" title="Haplogroup B (mtDNA)" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526359" start="24183" end="24184" title="Haplogroup F (mtDNA)" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="Q11608110" start="24344" end="24364" title="Jōmon people" label="Jōmon period peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q26764649" start="24460" end="24470" title="East Asian people" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904209" start="24582" end="24609" title="Ancient Northern East Asian" label="Ancient Northern East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q120776277" start="24615" end="24642" title="Ancient Southern East Asian" label="Ancient Southern East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431198" start="24683" end="24695" title="Tianyuan man" label="Tianyuan man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621515" start="24703" end="24713" title="Hoabinhian" label="Hoabinhian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790291" start="24816" end="24838" title="Ancient North Eurasian" label="Ancient North Eurasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839277" start="24896" end="24917" title="microblade technology" label="microblade technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="24970" end="24990" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q118164371" start="25006" end="25028" title="Ancient Paleo-Siberian" label="Ancient Paleo-Siberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18035943" start="25526" end="25530" title="EDAR" label="EDAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208167" start="26031" end="26040" title="Ryukyuan people" label="Ryukyuans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391886" start="26248" end="26256" title="SNP genotyping" label="SNP loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q14906952" start="26477" end="26482" title="HLA-A" label="HLA-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18026920" start="26484" end="26485" title="HLA-B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q20771631" start="26491" end="26495" title="HLA-DRB1" label="DRB1"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="26565" end="26599" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q118144644" start="26945" end="26968" title="Ancient Northeast Asian" label="Ancient Northeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q118164371" start="26974" end="26996" title="Ancient Paleo-Siberian" label="Ancient Paleo-Siberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q640605" start="27032" end="27038" title="Yamato people" label="Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="27285" end="27303" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q697797" start="27415" end="27439" title="Order of the Golden Kite" label="Order of the Golden Kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="27559" end="27575" title="Culture of Japan" label="Japanese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="27615" end="27645" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="27816" end="27829" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036472" start="28342" end="28353" title="World Watch" label="World Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q848595" start="28454" end="28469" title="Alexander Vovin" label="Alexander Vovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q844244" start="28974" end="28984" title="Language revitalization" label="revitalize"/>
<link wikidata="Q132480" start="29049" end="29054" title="Kantō region" label="Kanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="29446" end="29450" title="Japanese Diet" label="Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q290222" start="29458" end="29472" title="Shigeru Kayano" label="Shigeru Kayano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697542" start="29559" end="29570" title="Ainu Kyokai" label="Ainu Kyokai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="29930" end="29946" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q187659" start="30110" end="30114" title="kana" label="kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q187846" start="30118" end="30134" title="Russian alphabet" label="Russian Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="30173" end="30181" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="30192" end="30206" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="30412" end="30416" title="Epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="30655" end="30667" title="Preposition and postposition" label="prepositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q393272" start="30951" end="30962" title="agglutinate" label="agglutinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="30974" end="30979" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="31749" end="31756" title="Corporal punishment" label="Beating"/>
<link wikidata="Q42804" start="32008" end="32013" title="beard" label="beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179" start="32019" end="32028" title="moustache" label="moustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q253671" start="32365" end="32375" title="birch bark" label="birch bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="32469" end="32477" title="elm" label="elm tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623698" start="32831" end="32839" title="deerskin" label="deerskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133325" start="32894" end="32900" title="Oncorhynchus" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680933" start="33031" end="33038" title="tamasay" label="tamasay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697541" start="34301" end="34313" title="Ainu cuisine" label="Ainu cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961398" start="34338" end="34343" title="Bear hunting" label="bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q837741" start="34352" end="34358" title="Hokkaido wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576038" start="34360" end="34367" title="Japanese badger" label="badgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q473194" start="34369" end="34371" title="ox" label="ox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124327" start="34379" end="34385" title="horse meat" label="horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q853058" start="34404" end="34408" title="fowl" label="fowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="34410" end="34416" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="34441" end="34445" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="35513" end="35528" title="plant gathering" label="plant gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278878" start="35948" end="35965" title="Ussuri brown bear" label="Ussuri brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q124410" start="35968" end="35984" title="Asian black bear" label="Asian black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q190516" start="36013" end="36022" title="sika deer" label="sika deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180035" start="36025" end="36030" title="Mountain hare" label="hares"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="36032" end="36039" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q122835073" start="36043" end="36063" title="Japanese raccoon dog" label="Japanese raccoon dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253080" start="36185" end="36194" title="sea eagle" label="sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="36205" end="36227" title="white-tailed sea eagle" label="white-tailed sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="36467" end="36472" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="36478" end="36483" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="36530" end="36536" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q155904" start="36576" end="36584" title="aconitum" label="aconites"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039792" start="36735" end="36750" title="Dogbane" label="dog&amp;#x27;s bane"/>
<link wikidata="Q19116" start="36790" end="36800" title="Opiliones" label="harvestman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3767510" start="36823" end="36832" title="Notonecta" label="Notonecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q875622" start="36864" end="36875" title="Notonectidae" label="backswimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328202" start="36925" end="36933" title="stingray" label="stingray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245191" start="37871" end="37886" title="Sakhalin taimen" label="Japanese huchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q116179552" start="37889" end="37893" title="Big-scaled redfin" label="dace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142516" start="38212" end="38232" title="Japanese lacquerware" label="Japanese lacquerware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374364" start="38645" end="38653" title="Matsumae, Hokkaido" label="Matsumae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061883" start="39909" end="39922" title="Matsumae clan" label="Matsumae clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="40013" end="40025" title="river basins" label="river basins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="40131" end="40137" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="40201" end="40216" title="forced labor" label="forced to labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q693409" start="40597" end="40608" title="cogon" label="cogon grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="40610" end="40622" title="bamboo" label="bamboo grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="40624" end="40628" title="bark (botany)" label="bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="41466" end="41489" title="arranged marriage" label="marriage by arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196585" start="41595" end="41611" title="marriageable age" label="marriageable age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136912" start="43039" end="43048" title="decoction" label="decoction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295298" start="43056" end="43066" title="endodermis" label="endodermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="43073" end="43078" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q830156" start="43096" end="43106" title="butterburs" label="butterburs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130359" start="44051" end="44060" title="loincloth" label="loincloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="44586" end="44593" title="Animism" label="animist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333686" start="45349" end="45357" title="libation" label="libation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="45393" end="45399" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="45733" end="45741" title="Illness" label="sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="45796" end="45804" title="Immortality" label="immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019142" start="45994" end="46006" title="bear worship" label="bear worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q736311" start="46525" end="46533" title="Buddhism in Japan" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="46538" end="46544" title="Shinto" label="Shintō"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="46598" end="46621" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043128" start="46653" end="46661" title="Shikotan" label="Shikotan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="46954" end="46962" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057199" start="47259" end="47278" title="Hokkaido University" label="Hokkaidō University"/>
<link wikidata="Q583794" start="49438" end="49445" title="Iomante" label="Iomante"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697542" start="52561" end="52587" title="Hokkaido Utari Association" label="Hokkaidō Utari Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="52938" end="52950" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="53549" end="53560" title="Sámi people" label="Sámi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700" start="53702" end="53719" title="Lapland (Finland)" label="Lapland (Finland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116872384" start="53804" end="53824" title="National Ainu Museum" label="National Ainu Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11478739" start="53827" end="53854" title="Kawamura Kaneto Ainu Museum" label="Kawamura Kaneto Ainu Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53857" end="53867" title="Ainu Kotan" label="Ainu Kotan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53870" end="53890" title="Ainu Folklore Museum" label="Ainu Folklore Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402956" start="53893" end="53928" title="Hokkaido Museum of Northern Peoples" label="Hokkaido Museum of Northern Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371926" start="53931" end="53959" title="Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum" label="Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17217927" start="53962" end="53984" title="Shinhidaka Ainu Museum" label="Shinhidaka Ainu Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650380" start="54302" end="54312" title="Saru River" label="Saru River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024242" start="54573" end="54581" title="Nibutani" label="Nibutani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024249" start="54739" end="54751" title="Nibutani Dam" label="Nibutani Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650380" start="56636" end="56650" title="Saru River" label="Sarugawa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193226" start="56727" end="56764" title="Cultural Landscapes of Japan" label="Important Cultural Landscape of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116872384" start="58270" end="58290" title="National Ainu Museum" label="National Ainu Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348760" start="58441" end="58448" title="Shiraoi, Hokkaido" label="Shiraoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969" start="58689" end="58702" title="Ainu language" label="Ainu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="58909" end="58915" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="58945" end="58960" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="UNESCO decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138309" start="59351" end="59412" title="United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People" label="United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="59493" end="59501" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="59503" end="59511" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="59517" end="59530" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="59532" end="59541" title="Kamchatka" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q129465" start="59560" end="59573" title="Tōhoku region" label="Tōhoku region"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="59614" end="59622" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="59631" end="59644" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049618" start="59718" end="59729" title="kanjō-bugyō" label="kanjō-bugyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="59752" end="59762" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q179131" start="59867" end="59884" title="Tsugaru Peninsula" label="Tsugaru Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="59944" end="59950" title="Honshu" label="Honshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197271" start="59963" end="59996" title="Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1875)" label="Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1875)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="60024" end="60037" title="Kuril islands" label="Kuril islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="60195" end="60207" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="60235" end="60243" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="60252" end="60265" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197271" start="60433" end="60466" title="Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1875)" label="Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1875)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951" start="60600" end="60624" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky" label="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q208268" start="60776" end="60793" title="Commander Islands" label="Commander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60878" end="60894" title="Yavin, Kamchatka" label="Yavin, Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61056" end="61064" title="Golygino" label="Golygino"/>
<link wikidata="Q766227" start="61223" end="61245" title="Ust-Bolsheretsky District" label="Ust-Bolsheretsky Raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322825" start="61325" end="61334" title="Kamchadals" label="Kamchadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951" start="61770" end="61783" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky" label="Petropavlovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q787182" start="62327" end="62348" title="Russian Census (2010)" label="2010 Census of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="62545" end="62551" title="leadership" label="leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661399" start="62768" end="62840" title="Indigenous small-numbered peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East" label="Indigenous small-numbered peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797" start="62895" end="62910" title="Sakhalin Oblast" label="Sakhalin Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788" start="62915" end="62930" title="Khabarovsk Krai" label="Khabarovsk Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147405" start="63125" end="63132" title="Itelmens" label="Itelmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="63429" end="63442" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058929" start="63518" end="63549" title="Ainu in Russia" label="Ainu community living in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389717" start="63649" end="63671" title="Kuril Islands dispute" label="Southern Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951" start="64204" end="64228" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky" label="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256020" start="64296" end="64340" title="Demographic history of Japan before the Meiji Restoration" label="population of the Ainu during the Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="66055" end="66061" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q586914" start="66230" end="66249" title="Bronisław Piłsudski" label="Bronisław Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697542" start="66570" end="66598" title="Ainu Association of Hokkaido" label="Ainu Association of Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579411" start="66998" end="67006" title="Nakoruru" label="Nakoruru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498489" start="67008" end="67016" title="Rimururu" label="Rimururu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073880" start="67036" end="67039" title="SNK" label="SNK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498489" start="67058" end="67073" title="Samurai Shodown" label="Samurai Shodown"/>
<link wikidata="Q385184" start="67115" end="67120" title="Ōkami" label="Ōkami"/>
<link wikidata="Q19781419" start="67248" end="67260" title="Golden Kamuy" label="Golden Kamuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993801" start="67379" end="67388" title="Fredzilla" label="Fredzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q13091172" start="67400" end="67410" title="Big Hero 6 (film)" label="Big Hero 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q143276" start="67487" end="67503" title="Samurai Champloo" label="Samurai Champloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219610" start="67637" end="67648" title="Shaman King" label="Shaman King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625075" start="67744" end="67765" title="Europa Universalis IV" label="Europa Universalis IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626587" start="67883" end="67907" title="Silver Spoon (manga)" label="&amp;quot;Silver Spoon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902469" start="67939" end="67949" title="Ainu Mosir" label="Ainu Mosir"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="68468" end="68478" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262456" start="68491" end="68510" title="You Only Live Twice (novel)" label="You Only Live Twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q107761" start="68521" end="68525" title="You Only Live Twice (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061777" start="68762" end="68772" title="Unforgiven (2013 film)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q211553" start="68789" end="68801" title="Ken Watanabe" label="Ken Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="68836" end="68850" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q104137" start="68851" end="68880" title="Unforgiven" label="Western film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188884" start="68912" end="68923" title="Yuya Yagira" label="Yuya Yagira"/>
<link wikidata="Q23853" start="68956" end="68964" title="Hokkaido dog" label="Ainu-ken"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282359" start="68967" end="68989" title="Ainu Revolution Theory" label="Ainu Revolution Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q135570" start="68992" end="69005" title="Akira Ifukube" label="Akira Ifukube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774213" start="69008" end="69024" title="Anti-Japaneseism" label="Anti-Japaneseism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903445" start="69027" end="69051" title="Bibliography of the Ainu" label="Bibliography of the Ainu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902578" start="69054" end="69068" title="Bikki Sunazawa" label="Bikki Sunazawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q548787" start="69071" end="69080" title="Burakumin" label="Burakumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q237082" start="69083" end="69104" title="Constitution of Japan" label="Constitution of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q904470" start="69107" end="69129" title="Ethnic issues in Japan" label="Ethnic issues in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69133" end="69154" title="Human rights in Japan#Minorities" label="Human rights in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q904470" start="69158" end="69173" title="Racism in Japan" label="Racism in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371470" start="69176" end="69185" title="Ethnocide" label="Ethnocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533462" start="69188" end="69218" title="Genocide of indigenous peoples" label="Genocide of indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136205" start="69221" end="69240" title="Hiram M. Hiller Jr." label="Hiram M. Hiller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q17050206" start="69243" end="69253" title="Kankō Ainu" label="Kankō Ainu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785976" start="69256" end="69262" title="Matagi" label="Matagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11317879" start="69265" end="69279" title="Mieko Chikappu" label="Mieko Chikappu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11449439" start="69282" end="69294" title="Shizue Ukaji" label="Shizue Ukaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058921" start="69317" end="69326" title="Ainu flag" label="Ainu flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282352" start="69329" end="69348" title="Ainu genre painting" label="Ainu genre painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391537" start="69351" end="69359" title="Ikupasuy" label="Ikupasuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q586914" start="70086" end="70105" title="Bronisław Piłsudski" label="Bronisław Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q34230" start="70439" end="70457" title="Tungusic Languages" label="Tungusic Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208030" start="70827" end="70843" title="Samani, Hokkaido" label="Samani, Hokkaidō"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1536" wikidata="Q131668" url="?curid=1536" title="Acropolis">
<text>An acropolis was the settlement of an upper part of an ancient Greek city, especially a citadel, and frequently a hill with precipitous sides, mainly chosen for purposes of defense. The term is typically used to refer to the Acropolis of Athens, yet every Greek city had an acropolis of its own. Acropoli were used as religious centers and places of worship, forts, and places in which the royal and high-status resided. Acropoli became the nuclei of large cities of classical ancient times, and served as important centers of a community. Some well-known acropoli have become the centers of tourism in present-day, and, especially, the Acropolis of Athens has been a revolutionary center for the studies of ancient Greece since the Mycenaean period. Many of them have become a source of revenue for Greece, and represent some great technology during the period.

== Origin ==
An acropolis is defined by the Greek definition of , ; from () or () meaning “highest; edge; extremity”, and () meaning “city.” The plural of () is , also commonly as and , and in Greek. The term acropolis is also used to describe the central complex of overlapping structures, such as plazas and pyramids, in many Maya cities, including Tikal and Copán. Acropolis is also the term used by archaeologists and historians for the urban Castro culture settlements located in Northwestern Iberian hilltops. 
It is primarily associated with the Greek cities of Athens, Argos (with Larisa), Thebes (with Cadmea), Corinth (with its Acrocorinth), and Rhodes (with its Acropolis of Lindos). It may also be applied generically to all such citadels including Rome, Carthage, Jerusalem, Celtic Bratislava, Asia Minor, or Castle Rock in Edinburgh. An example in Ireland is the Rock of Cashel. In Central Italy, many small rural communes still cluster at the base of a fortified habitation known as of the commune. Other parts of the world have developed other names for the high citadel, or , which often have reinforced a naturally strong site. Because of this, many cultures have included acropolises in their societies, however, do not use the same name for them.

== Differing acropolises ==
The acropolis of a city was used in many ways, with regards to ancient time and through references. Because an acropolis was built at the highest part of a city, it served as a highly functional form of protection, a fortress, and was as well as a home to the royal of a city and a centre for religion through the worshipping of different gods. There have been many classical and ancient acropolises, including the most commonly-known, Acropolis of Athens, as well as the Tepecik Acropolis at Patara, Ankara Acropolis, Acropolis of La Blanca, Acropolis at the Maya Site in Guatemala, and the Acropolis at Halieis.
The most famous example is the Athenian Acropolis, which is a collection of structures featuring a citadel on the highest part of land in ancient (and modern-day) Athens, Greece. Many notable structures at the site were constructed in the 5th century BCE, including the Propylaea, Erechtheion, and the Temple of Athena. The Temple is also commonly known as the Parthenon, which is derived from the divine Athena Parthenos. There were often dances, music and plays held at the acropolis, which it served as a community centre for the city of Athens. It became a prime tourist destination by the 2nd century AD during the Roman Empire and was known as &quot;the Greece of Greece,&quot; as coined by an unknown poet. Although originating in the mainland of Greece, use of the acropolis model quickly spread to Greek colonies such as the Dorian Lato on Crete during the Archaic Period.

The Tepecik Acropolis at Patara served as a harbor to nearby communities and naval forces, such as Antigonos I Monopthalmos and Demetrios Poliorketes, and combined land and sea. Its fortification wall and Bastion date back to the Classical period. The acropolis was constructed in the fourth century BCE by the Hekatomnids that ultimately led to its seizure in 334 BCE by Alexander the Great. The acropolis contributed significantly to the overall development that took place during the Hellenistic empires. This acropolis was the earliest place of settlement, probably dating back to the third millennium BCE. During excavations that took place in 1989, ceramic items, terracotta figurines, coins, bone and stone objects were found that date to the fourth century BCE. The fortification wall and bastion that are built at this acropolis uses a style of masonry, commonly known as the Greek word (meaning &quot;woven&quot;). This style of masonry was likely used for weight-bearing purposes.

The Acropolis at Halieis dates back to the Neolithic and Classical periods. It included a fortified wall, sanctuary of Apollo (two temples, an altar, a race course), and necropolis (cemetery). This acropolis was the highest point of fortification on the south edge at Halieis. There was a small open-air cult space, including an altar and monuments.

The Ankara Acropolis, which was set in modern-day Turkey, is a historically prominent space that has changed over time through the urban development of the country from the Phrygian period. This acropolis was well known as a spot for holy worshipping, and was symbolic of the time. It has also been a place that has historically recognized the legislative changes that Turkey has faced.  

The Acropolis of La Blanca was created in Guatemala as a small ancient Maya settlement and archaeological site that is located adjacent to the Salsipuedes River. This acropolis developed as a place of residence for the city of La Blanca&#x27;s rulers. Its main period of usage was during the Classical period of 600 AD to 850 AD, as the city developed as a commercial place of trade among a number of nearby settlements.

The Mayan Acropolis site in Guatemala included a burial site and vaulted tombs of the highest status royal. This funerary structure was integrated into this sacred landscape, and illustrated the prosperity of power between the royal figures of Pedras Negras in Guatemala.

== Modern-day uses ==

=== Tourism ===
Acropolises today have become the epicenters of tourism and attraction sites in many modern-day Greek cities. The Athenian Acropolis, in particular, is the most famous, and has the best vantage point in Athens, Greece. Today, tourists can purchase tickets to visit the Athenian Acropolis, including walking, sightseeing, and bus tours, as well as a classic Greek dinner.

===Cultural ties===

Because of its classical Hellenistic and Greco-Roman style, the ruins of Mission San Juan Capistrano&#x27;s Great Stone Church in California, United States has been called an American Acropolis. The civilization developed its religious, educational, and cultural aspects of the acropolis, and is used today as a location that holds events, such as operas.

The neighborhood of Morningside Heights in New York City is commonly referred to as the &quot;Academic Acropolis&quot; due to its high elevation and the concentration of educational institutions in the area, including Columbia University and its affiliates, Barnard College, Teachers College, Union Theological Seminary and the Jewish Theological Seminary of America; Manhattan School of Music; Bank Street College of Education; and New York Theological Seminary. The analogy is also aided by the neoclassical architecture of the Columbia University campus, which was designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White in the early 20th century.

=== Excavations ===
Much of the modern-day uses of acropolises have been discovered through excavations that have developed over the course of many years. For example, the Athenian Acropolis includes a Great Temple that holds the Parthenon, a specific space for ancient worship. Through today&#x27;s findings and research, the Parthenon treasury is able to be recognized as the west part of the structure (the Erechtheion), as well as the Parthenon itself. Most excavations have been able to provide archaeologists with samples of pottery, ceramics, and vessels. The excavation of the Acropolis of Halieis produced remains that provided context that dated the Acropolis at Halieis from the Final Neolithic period through the first Early Helladic period.

==See also==
* Acropolis of Rhodes
* Acropolis Palaiokastro
* Idjang
* Tell (archaeology)
* Hillfort

==References==
==External links==
* Acropolis Museum
* Acropolis: description, photo album
* The Acropolis of Athens (Greek Government website)
* The Acropolis Restoration Project (Greek Government website)
* The Acropolis: A Walk Through History
* The Parthenon Frieze (Hellenic Ministry of Culture web site)
* UNESCO World Heritage Centre — Acropolis, Athens</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131668" start="3" end="12" title="Acropolis" label="acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="55" end="68" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="88" end="95" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="225" end="244" title="Acropolis of Athens" label="Acropolis of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="256" end="261" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796750" start="1192" end="1203" title="Maya city" label="Maya cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q181172" start="1215" end="1220" title="Tikal" label="Tikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q214827" start="1225" end="1230" title="Copán" label="Copán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049966" start="1311" end="1325" title="Castro culture" label="Castro culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1433" end="1439" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="1441" end="1446" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012861" start="1453" end="1459" title="Larissa (Argos)" label="Larisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="1462" end="1468" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276854" start="1475" end="1481" title="Cadmea" label="Cadmea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="1484" end="1491" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q420810" start="1502" end="1513" title="Acrocorinth" label="Acrocorinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="1520" end="1526" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1537" end="1556" title="Lindos#Acropolis" label="Acropolis of Lindos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1631" end="1639" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="1641" end="1650" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="1659" end="1669" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1671" end="1681" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8522896" start="1686" end="1697" title="Castle Rock, Edinburgh" label="Castle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="1701" end="1710" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255597" start="1741" end="1755" title="Rock of Cashel" label="Rock of Cashel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127320" start="1760" end="1773" title="Central Italy" label="Central Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="1792" end="1800" title="Comune" label="communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="2596" end="2615" title="Acropolis of Athens" label="Acropolis of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2632" end="2649" title="Patara (Lycia)#Location" label="Tepecik Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q233121" start="2653" end="2659" title="Patara (Lycia)" label="Patara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2679" end="2701" title="La Blanca, Peten#Acropolis" label="Acropolis of La Blanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571046" start="2765" end="2772" title="Halieis" label="Halieis"/>
<link wikidata="Q275136" start="3044" end="3053" title="Propylaea" label="Propylaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q242741" start="3055" end="3066" title="Erechtheion" label="Erechtheion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="3135" end="3144" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="3608" end="3614" title="Dorians" label="Dorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807000" start="3615" end="3619" title="Lato" label="Lato"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="3623" end="3628" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="3640" end="3654" title="Archaic period in Greece" label="Archaic Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q59734" start="3785" end="3806" title="Demetrios Poliorketes" label="Demetrios Poliorketes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="4029" end="4048" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="6543" end="6554" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939057" start="6591" end="6625" title="Mission San Juan Capistrano" label="Mission San Juan Capistrano&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="6648" end="6673" title="California" label="California, United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q748485" start="6895" end="6914" title="Morningside Heights, Manhattan" label="Morningside Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="7093" end="7112" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q167733" start="7133" end="7148" title="Barnard College" label="Barnard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691246" start="7150" end="7166" title="Teachers College, Columbia University" label="Teachers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196251" start="7168" end="7194" title="Union Theological Seminary (New York City)" label="Union Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688743" start="7203" end="7241" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of America" label="Jewish Theological Seminary of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702106" start="7243" end="7268" title="Manhattan School of Music" label="Manhattan School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882628" start="7270" end="7302" title="Bank Street College of Education" label="Bank Street College of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q13428369" start="7308" end="7337" title="New York Theological Seminary" label="New York Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="7372" end="7384" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915267" start="7455" end="7478" title="McKim, Mead &amp;amp; White" label="McKim, Mead &amp;amp; White"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557443" start="8277" end="8296" title="Acropolis of Rhodes" label="Acropolis of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q421067" start="8299" end="8321" title="Acropolis Palaiokastro" label="Acropolis Palaiokastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231177" start="8324" end="8330" title="Idjang" label="Idjang"/>
<link wikidata="Q755017" start="8333" end="8351" title="Tell (archaeology)" label="Tell (archaeology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="8354" end="8362" title="Hillfort" label="Hillfort"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1537" wikidata="Q121713" url="?curid=1537" title="Acupuncture">
<text>Acupuncture is a form of alternative medicine and a component of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) in which thin needles are inserted into the body. Acupuncture is a pseudoscience; the theories and practices of TCM are not based on scientific knowledge, and it has been characterized as quackery.

There is a range of acupuncture technological variants that originated in different philosophies, and techniques vary depending on the country in which it is performed. However, it can be divided into two main foundational philosophical applications and approaches; the first being the modern standardized form called eight principles TCM and the second being an older system that is based on the ancient Daoist &quot;wuxing&quot;, better known as the five elements or phases in the West. Acupuncture is most often used to attempt pain relief, though acupuncturists say that it can also be used for a wide range of other conditions. Acupuncture is typically used in combination with other forms of treatment.

The global acupuncture market was worth US$24.55 billion in 2017. The market was led by Europe with a 32.7% share, followed by Asia-Pacific with a 29.4% share and the Americas with a 25.3% share. It was estimated in 2021 that the industry would reach a market size of US$55 billion by 2023.
The conclusions of trials and systematic reviews of acupuncture generally provide no good evidence of benefits, which suggests that it is not an effective method of healthcare. Acupuncture is generally safe when done by appropriately trained practitioners using clean needle techniques and single-use needles. When properly delivered, it has a low rate of mostly minor adverse effects. When accidents and infections do occur, they are associated with neglect on the part of the practitioner, particularly in the application of sterile techniques. A review conducted in 2013 stated that reports of infection transmission increased significantly in the preceding decade. The most frequently reported adverse events were pneumothorax and infections. Since serious adverse events continue to be reported, it is recommended that acupuncturists be trained sufficiently to reduce the risk.
Scientific investigation has not found any histological or physiological evidence for traditional Chinese concepts such as &quot;qi&quot;, meridians, and acupuncture points, and many modern practitioners no longer support the existence of &quot;qi&quot; or meridians, which was a major part of early belief systems. Acupuncture is believed to have originated around 100 BC in China, around the time &quot;The Inner Classic of Huang Di&quot; (Huangdi Neijing) was published, though some experts suggest it could have been practiced earlier. Over time, conflicting claims and belief systems emerged about the effect of lunar, celestial and earthly cycles, yin and yang energies, and a body&#x27;s &quot;rhythm&quot; on the effectiveness of treatment. Acupuncture fluctuated in popularity in China due to changes in the country&#x27;s political leadership and the preferential use of rationalism or scientific medicine. Acupuncture spread first to Korea in the 6th century AD, then to Japan through medical missionaries, and then to Europe, beginning with France. In the 20th century, as it spread to the United States and Western countries, spiritual elements of acupuncture that conflicted with scientific knowledge were sometimes abandoned in favor of simply tapping needles into acupuncture points.

== Clinical practice ==
Acupuncture is a form of alternative medicine. It is used most commonly for pain relief, though it is also used to treat a wide range of conditions. Acupuncture is generally only used in combination with other forms of treatment. For example, the American Society of Anesthesiologists states it may be considered in the treatment of nonspecific, noninflammatory low back pain only in conjunction with conventional therapy.

Acupuncture is the insertion of thin needles into the skin. According to the Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (Mayo Clinic), a typical session entails lying still while approximately five to twenty needles are inserted; for the majority of cases, the needles will be left in place for ten to twenty minutes. It can be associated with the application of heat, pressure, or laser light. Classically, acupuncture is individualized and based on philosophy and intuition, and not on scientific research. There is also a non-invasive therapy developed in early 20th-century Japan using an elaborate set of instruments other than needles for the treatment of children ( or ).

Clinical practice varies depending on the country. A comparison of the average number of patients treated per hour found significant differences between China (10) and the United States (1.2). Chinese herbs are often used. There is a diverse range of acupuncture approaches, involving different philosophies. Although various different techniques of acupuncture practice have emerged, the method used in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) seems to be the most widely adopted in the US. Traditional acupuncture involves needle insertion, moxibustion, and cupping therapy, and may be accompanied by other procedures such as feeling the pulse and other parts of the body and examining the tongue. Traditional acupuncture involves the belief that a &quot;life force&quot; (&quot;qi&quot;) circulates within the body in lines called meridians. The main methods practiced in the UK are TCM and Western medical acupuncture. The term Western medical acupuncture is used to indicate an adaptation of TCM-based acupuncture which focuses less on TCM. The Western medical acupuncture approach involves using acupuncture after a medical diagnosis. Limited research has compared the contrasting acupuncture systems used in various countries for determining different acupuncture points, and thus there is no defined standard for acupuncture points.

In traditional acupuncture, the acupuncturist decides which points to treat by observing and questioning the patient to make a diagnosis according to the tradition used. In TCM, the four diagnostic methods are: inspection, auscultation and olfaction, inquiring, and palpation. Inspection focuses on the face and particularly on the tongue, including analysis of the tongue size, shape, tension, color and coating, and the absence or presence of teeth marks around the edge. Auscultation and olfaction involve listening for particular sounds, such as wheezing, and observing body odor. Inquiring involves focusing on the &quot;seven inquiries&quot;: chills and fever; perspiration; appetite, thirst and taste; defecation and urination; pain; sleep; and menses and leukorrhea. Palpation is focusing on feeling the body for tender points and feeling the pulse.

=== Needles ===

The most common mechanism of stimulation of acupuncture points employs penetration of the skin by thin metal needles, which are manipulated manually or the needle may be further stimulated by electrical stimulation (electroacupuncture). Acupuncture needles are typically made of stainless steel, making them flexible and preventing them from rusting or breaking. Needles are usually disposed of after each use to prevent contamination. Reusable needles when used should be sterilized between applications. In many areas, only sterile, single-use acupuncture needles are allowed, including the State of California, USA. Needles vary in length between , with shorter needles used near the face and eyes, and longer needles in areas with thicker tissues; needle diameters vary from 0 to 0, with thicker needles used on more robust patients. Thinner needles may be flexible and require tubes for insertion. The tip of the needle should not be made too sharp to prevent breakage, although blunt needles cause more pain.

Apart from the usual filiform needle, other needle types include three-edged needles and the Nine Ancient Needles. Japanese acupuncturists use extremely thin needles that are used superficially, sometimes without penetrating the skin, and surrounded by a guide tube (a 17th-century invention adopted in China and the West). Korean acupuncture uses copper needles and has a greater focus on the hand.

=== Needling technique ===

==== Insertion ====

The skin is sterilized and needles are inserted, frequently with a plastic guide tube. Needles may be manipulated in various ways, including spinning, flicking, or moving up and down relative to the skin. Since most pain is felt in the superficial layers of the skin, a quick insertion of the needle is recommended. Often the needles are stimulated by hand in order to cause a dull, localized, aching sensation that is called &quot;de qi&quot;, as well as &quot;needle grasp,&quot; a tugging feeling felt by the acupuncturist and generated by a mechanical interaction between the needle and skin. Acupuncture can be painful. The acupuncturist&#x27;s skill level may influence the painfulness of the needle insertion; a sufficiently skilled practitioner may be able to insert the needles without causing any pain.

==== &quot;&quot; sensation ====

 (; &quot;arrival of qi&quot;) refers to a claimed sensation of numbness, distension, or electrical tingling at the needling site. If these sensations are not observed then inaccurate location of the acupoint, improper depth of needle insertion, inadequate manual manipulation, are blamed. If is not immediately observed upon needle insertion, various manual manipulation techniques are often applied to promote it (such as &quot;plucking&quot;, &quot;shaking&quot; or &quot;trembling&quot;).

Once &#x27; is observed, techniques might be used which attempt to &quot;influence&quot; the &#x27;; for example, by certain manipulation the &quot;&quot; can allegedly be conducted from the needling site towards more distant sites of the body. Other techniques aim at &quot;tonifying&quot; () or &quot;sedating&quot; () &quot;qi&quot;. The former techniques are used in deficiency patterns, the latter in excess patterns. &quot;De qi&quot; is more important in Chinese acupuncture, while Western and Japanese patients may not consider it a necessary part of the treatment.

=== Related practices ===
* Acupressure, a non-invasive form of bodywork, uses physical pressure applied to acupressure points by the hand or elbow, or with various devices.
* Acupuncture is often accompanied by moxibustion, the burning of cone-shaped preparations of moxa (made from dried mugwort) on or near the skin, often but not always near or on an acupuncture point. Traditionally, acupuncture was used to treat acute conditions while moxibustion was used for chronic diseases. Moxibustion could be direct (the cone was placed directly on the skin and allowed to burn the skin, producing a blister and eventually a scar), or indirect (either a cone of moxa was placed on a slice of garlic, ginger or other vegetable, or a cylinder of moxa was held above the skin, close enough to either warm or burn it).
* Cupping therapy is an ancient Chinese form of alternative medicine in which a local suction is created on the skin; practitioners believe this mobilizes blood flow in order to promote healing.
* Tui na is a TCM method of attempting to stimulate the flow of &quot;qi&quot; by various bare-handed techniques that do not involve needles.
* Electroacupuncture is a form of acupuncture in which acupuncture needles are attached to a device that generates continuous electric pulses (this has been described as &quot;essentially transdermal electrical nerve stimulation TENS] masquerading as acupuncture&quot;).
* Fire needle acupuncture also known as fire needling is a technique which involves quickly inserting a flame-heated needle into areas on the body.
* Sonopuncture is a stimulation of the body similar to acupuncture using sound instead of needles. This may be done using purpose-built transducers to direct a narrow ultrasound beam to a depth of 6–8 centimetres at acupuncture meridian points on the body. Alternatively, tuning forks or other sound emitting devices are used.
* Acupuncture point injection is the injection of various substances (such as drugs, vitamins or herbal extracts) into acupoints. This technique combines traditional acupuncture with injection of what is often an effective dose of an approved pharmaceutical drug, and proponents claim that it may be more effective than either treatment alone, especially for the treatment of some kinds of chronic pain. However, a 2016 review found that most published trials of the technique were of poor value due to methodology issues and larger trials would be needed to draw useful conclusions.
* Auriculotherapy, commonly known as ear acupuncture, auricular acupuncture, or auriculoacupuncture, is considered to date back to ancient China. It involves inserting needles to stimulate points on the outer ear. The modern approach was developed in France during the early 1950s. There is no scientific evidence that it can cure disease; the evidence of effectiveness is negligible.
* Scalp acupuncture, developed in Japan, is based on reflexological considerations regarding the scalp.
* Koryo hand acupuncture, developed in Korea, centers around assumed reflex zones of the hand. Medical acupuncture attempts to integrate reflexological concepts, the trigger point model, and anatomical insights (such as dermatome distribution) into acupuncture practice, and emphasizes a more formulaic approach to acupuncture point location.
* Cosmetic acupuncture is the use of acupuncture in an attempt to reduce wrinkles on the face.
* Bee venom acupuncture is a treatment approach of injecting purified, diluted bee venom into acupoints.
* Veterinary acupuncture is the use of acupuncture on domesticated animals.

== Efficacy ==
, many thousands of papers had been published on the efficacy of acupuncture for the treatment of various adult health conditions, but there was no robust evidence it was beneficial for anything, except shoulder pain and fibromyalgia. For &quot;Science-Based Medicine&quot;, Steven Novella wrote that the overall pattern of evidence was reminiscent of that for homeopathy, compatible with the hypothesis that most, if not all, benefits were due to the placebo effect, and strongly suggestive that acupuncture had no beneficial therapeutic effects at all.

== Research methodology and challenges ==

=== Sham acupuncture and research ===
It is difficult but not impossible to design rigorous research trials for acupuncture. Due to acupuncture&#x27;s invasive nature, one of the major challenges in efficacy research is in the design of an appropriate placebo control group. For efficacy studies to determine whether acupuncture has specific effects, &quot;sham&quot; forms of acupuncture where the patient, practitioner, and analyst are blinded seem the most acceptable approach. Sham acupuncture uses non-penetrating needles or needling at non-acupuncture points, e.g. inserting needles on meridians not related to the specific condition being studied, or in places not associated with meridians. The under-performance of acupuncture in such trials may indicate that therapeutic effects are due entirely to non-specific effects, or that the sham treatments are not inert, or that systematic protocols yield less than optimal treatment.

A 2014 review in &quot;Nature Reviews Cancer&quot; found that &quot;contrary to the claimed mechanism of redirecting the flow of &quot;qi&quot; through meridians, researchers usually find that it generally does not matter where the needles are inserted, how often (that is, no dose-response effect is observed), or even if needles are actually inserted. In other words, &quot;sham&quot; or &quot;placebo&quot; acupuncture generally produces the same effects as &quot;real&quot; acupuncture and, in some cases, does better.&quot; A 2013 meta-analysis found little evidence that the effectiveness of acupuncture on pain (compared to sham) was modified by the location of the needles, the number of needles used, the experience or technique of the practitioner, or by the circumstances of the sessions. The same analysis also suggested that the number of needles and sessions is important, as greater numbers improved the outcomes of acupuncture compared to non-acupuncture controls. There has been little systematic investigation of which components of an acupuncture session may be important for any therapeutic effect, including needle placement and depth, type and intensity of stimulation, and number of needles used. The research seems to suggest that needles do not need to stimulate the traditionally specified acupuncture points or penetrate the skin to attain an anticipated effect (e.g. psychosocial factors).

A response to &quot;sham&quot; acupuncture in osteoarthritis may be used in the elderly, but placebos have usually been regarded as deception and thus unethical. However, some physicians and ethicists have suggested circumstances for applicable uses for placebos such as it might present a theoretical advantage of an inexpensive treatment without adverse reactions or interactions with drugs or other medications. As the evidence for most types of alternative medicine such as acupuncture is far from strong, the use of alternative medicine in regular healthcare can present an ethical question.

Using the principles of evidence-based medicine to research acupuncture is controversial, and has produced different results. Some research suggests acupuncture can alleviate pain but the majority of research suggests that acupuncture&#x27;s effects are mainly due to placebo. Evidence suggests that any benefits of acupuncture are short-lasting. There is insufficient evidence to support use of acupuncture compared to mainstream medical treatments. Acupuncture is not better than mainstream treatment in the long term.

The use of acupuncture has been criticized owing to there being little scientific evidence for explicit effects, or the mechanisms for its supposed effectiveness, for any condition that is discernible from placebo. Acupuncture has been called &quot;theatrical placebo&quot;, and David Gorski argues that when acupuncture proponents advocate &quot;harnessing of placebo effects&quot; or work on developing &quot;meaningful placebos&quot;, they essentially concede it is little more than that.

=== Publication bias ===
Publication bias is cited as a concern in the reviews of randomized controlled trials of acupuncture. A 1998 review of studies on acupuncture found that trials originating in China, Japan, Hong Kong, and Taiwan were uniformly favourable to acupuncture, as were ten out of eleven studies conducted in Russia. A 2011 assessment of the quality of randomized controlled trials on traditional Chinese medicine, including acupuncture, concluded that the methodological quality of most such trials (including randomization, experimental control, and blinding) was generally poor, particularly for trials published in Chinese journals (though the quality of acupuncture trials was better than the trials testing traditional Chinese medicine remedies). The study also found that trials published in non-Chinese journals tended to be of higher quality. Chinese authors use more Chinese studies, which have been demonstrated to be uniformly positive. A 2012 review of 88 systematic reviews of acupuncture published in Chinese journals found that less than half of these reviews reported testing for publication bias, and that the majority of these reviews were published in journals with impact factors of zero. A 2015 study comparing pre-registered records of acupuncture trials with their published results found that it was uncommon for such trials to be registered before the trial began. This study also found that selective reporting of results and changing outcome measures to obtain statistically significant results was common in this literature.

Scientist Steven Salzberg identifies acupuncture and Chinese medicine generally as a focus for &quot;fake medical journals&quot; such as the &quot;Journal of Acupuncture and Meridian Studies&quot; and &quot;Acupuncture in Medicine&quot;.

== Safety ==

=== Adverse events ===
Acupuncture is generally safe when administered by an experienced, appropriately trained practitioner using clean-needle technique and sterile single-use needles. When improperly delivered it can cause adverse effects. Accidents and infections are associated with infractions of sterile technique or neglect on the part of the practitioner. To reduce the risk of serious adverse events after acupuncture, acupuncturists should be trained sufficiently. A 2009 overview of Cochrane reviews found acupuncture is not effective for a wide range of conditions. People with serious spinal disease, such as cancer or infection, are not good candidates for acupuncture. Contraindications to acupuncture (conditions that should not be treated with acupuncture) include coagulopathy disorders (e.g. hemophilia and advanced liver disease), warfarin use, severe psychiatric disorders (e.g. psychosis), and skin infections or skin trauma (e.g. burns). Further, electroacupuncture should be avoided at the spot of implanted electrical devices (such as pacemakers).

A 2011 systematic review of systematic reviews (internationally and without language restrictions) found that serious complications following acupuncture continue to be reported. Between 2000 and 2009, ninety-five cases of serious adverse events, including five deaths, were reported. Many such events are not inherent to acupuncture but are due to malpractice of acupuncturists. This might be why such complications have not been reported in surveys of adequately trained acupuncturists. Most such reports originate from Asia, which may reflect the large number of treatments performed there or a relatively higher number of poorly trained Asian acupuncturists. Many serious adverse events were reported from developed countries. These included Australia, Austria, Canada, Croatia, France, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK, and the US. The number of adverse effects reported from the UK appears particularly unusual, which may indicate less under-reporting in the UK than other countries. Reports included 38 cases of infections and 42 cases of organ trauma. The most frequent adverse events included pneumothorax, and bacterial and viral infections.

A 2013 review found (without restrictions regarding publication date, study type or language) 295 cases of infections; mycobacterium was the pathogen in at least 96%. Likely sources of infection include towels, hot packs or boiling tank water, and reusing reprocessed needles. Possible sources of infection include contaminated needles, reusing personal needles, a person&#x27;s skin containing mycobacterium, and reusing needles at various sites in the same person. Although acupuncture is generally considered a safe procedure, a 2013 review stated that the reports of infection transmission increased significantly in the prior decade, including those of mycobacterium. Although it is recommended that practitioners of acupuncture use disposable needles, the reuse of sterilized needles is still permitted. It is also recommended that thorough control practices for preventing infection be implemented and adapted.

==== English-language ====
A 2013 systematic review of the English-language case reports found that serious adverse events associated with acupuncture are rare, but that acupuncture is not without risk. Between 2000 and 2011 the English-language literature from 25 countries and regions reported 294 adverse events. The majority of the reported adverse events were relatively minor, and the incidences were low. For example, a prospective survey of 34,000 acupuncture treatments found no serious adverse events and 43 minor ones, a rate of 1.3 per 1000 interventions. Another survey found there were 7.1% minor adverse events, of which 5 were serious, amid 97,733 acupuncture patients. The most common adverse effect observed was infection (e.g. mycobacterium), and the majority of infections were bacterial in nature, caused by skin contact at the needling site. Infection has also resulted from skin contact with unsterilized equipment or with dirty towels in an unhygienic clinical setting. Other adverse complications included five reported cases of spinal cord injuries (e.g. migrating broken needles or needling too deeply), four brain injuries, four peripheral nerve injuries, five heart injuries, seven other organ and tissue injuries, bilateral hand edema, epithelioid granuloma, pseudolymphoma, argyria, pustules, pancytopenia, and scarring due to hot-needle technique. Adverse reactions from acupuncture, which are unusual and uncommon in typical acupuncture practice, included syncope, galactorrhoea, bilateral nystagmus, pyoderma gangrenosum, hepatotoxicity, eruptive lichen planus, and spontaneous needle migration.

A 2013 systematic review found 31 cases of vascular injuries caused by acupuncture, three causing death. Two died from pericardial tamponade and one was from an aortoduodenal fistula. The same review found vascular injuries were rare, bleeding and pseudoaneurysm were most prevalent. A 2011 systematic review (without restriction in time or language), aiming to summarize all reported case of cardiac tamponade after acupuncture, found 26 cases resulting in 14 deaths, with little doubt about cause in most fatal instances. The same review concluded that cardiac tamponade was a serious, usually fatal, though theoretically avoidable complication following acupuncture, and urged training to minimize risk.

A 2012 review found that a number of adverse events were reported after acupuncture in the UK&#x27;s National Health Service (NHS), 95% of which were not severe, though miscategorization and under-reporting may alter the total figures. From January 2009 to December 2011, 468 safety incidents were recognized within the NHS organizations. The adverse events recorded included retained needles (31%), dizziness (30%), loss of consciousness/unresponsive (19%), falls (4%), bruising or soreness at needle site (2%), pneumothorax (1%) and other adverse side effects (12%). Acupuncture practitioners should know, and be prepared to be responsible for, any substantial harm from treatments. Some acupuncture proponents argue that the long history of acupuncture suggests it is safe. However, there is an increasing literature on adverse events (e.g. spinal-cord injury).

Acupuncture seems to be safe in people getting anticoagulants, assuming needles are used at the correct location and depth, but studies are required to verify these findings.

==== Chinese, Korean, and Japanese-language ====

A 2010 systematic review of the Chinese-language literature found numerous acupuncture-related adverse events, including pneumothorax, fainting, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and infection as the most frequent, and cardiovascular injuries, subarachnoid hemorrhage, pneumothorax, and recurrent cerebral hemorrhage as the most serious, most of which were due to improper technique. Between 1980 and 2009, the Chinese-language literature reported 479 adverse events. Prospective surveys show that mild, transient acupuncture-associated adverse events ranged from 6.71% to 15%. In a study with 190,924 patients, the prevalence of serious adverse events was roughly 0.024%. Another study showed a rate of adverse events requiring specific treatment of 2.2%, 4,963 incidences among 229,230 patients. Infections, mainly hepatitis, after acupuncture are reported often in English-language research, though are rarely reported in Chinese-language research, making it plausible that acupuncture-associated infections have been underreported in China. Infections were mostly caused by poor sterilization of acupuncture needles. Other adverse events included spinal epidural hematoma (in the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine), chylothorax, injuries of abdominal organs and tissues, injuries in the neck region, injuries to the eyes, including orbital hemorrhage, traumatic cataract, injury of the oculomotor nerve and retinal puncture, hemorrhage to the cheeks and the hypoglottis, peripheral motor-nerve injuries and subsequent motor dysfunction, local allergic reactions to metal needles, stroke, and cerebral hemorrhage after acupuncture.

A causal link between acupuncture and the adverse events cardiac arrest, pyknolepsy, shock, fever, cough, thirst, aphonia, leg numbness, and sexual dysfunction remains uncertain. The same review concluded that acupuncture can be considered inherently safe when practiced by properly trained practitioners, but the review also stated there is a need to find effective strategies to minimize the health risks. Between 1999 and 2010, the Korean-language literature contained reports of 1104 adverse events. Between the 1980s and 2002, the Japanese-language literature contained reports of 150 adverse events.

==== Children and pregnancy ====
Although acupuncture has been practiced for thousands of years in China, its use in pediatrics in the United States did not become common until the early 2000s. In 2007, the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) conducted by the National Center For Health Statistics (NCHS) estimated that approximately 150,000 children had received acupuncture treatment for a variety of conditions.

In 2008, a study determined that the use of acupuncture-needle treatment on children was &quot;questionable&quot; due to the possibility of adverse side-effects and the pain manifestation differences in children versus adults. The study also includes warnings against practicing acupuncture on infants, as well as on children who are over-fatigued, very weak, or have over-eaten.

When used on children, acupuncture is considered safe when administered by well-trained, licensed practitioners using sterile needles; however, a 2011 review found there was limited research to draw definite conclusions about the overall safety of pediatric acupuncture. The same review found 279 adverse events, 25 of them serious. The adverse events were mostly mild in nature (e.g., bruising or bleeding). The prevalence of mild adverse events ranged from 10.1% to 13.5%, an estimated 168 incidences among 1,422 patients. On rare occasions adverse events were serious (e.g. cardiac rupture or hemoptysis); many might have been a result of substandard practice. The incidence of serious adverse events was 5 per one million, which included children and adults.

When used during pregnancy, the majority of adverse events caused by acupuncture were mild and transient, with few serious adverse events. The most frequent mild adverse event was needling or unspecified pain, followed by bleeding. Although two deaths (one stillbirth and one neonatal death) were reported, there was a lack of acupuncture-associated maternal mortality. Limiting the evidence as certain, probable or possible in the causality evaluation, the estimated incidence of adverse events following acupuncture in pregnant women was 131 per 10,000.

Although acupuncture is not contraindicated in pregnant women, some specific acupuncture points are particularly sensitive to needle insertion; these spots, as well as the abdominal region, should be avoided during pregnancy.

==== Moxibustion and cupping ====

Four adverse events associated with moxibustion were bruising, burns and cellulitis, spinal epidural abscess, and large superficial basal cell carcinoma. Ten adverse events were associated with cupping. The minor ones were keloid scarring, burns, and bullae; the serious ones were acquired hemophilia A, stroke following cupping on the back and neck, factitious panniculitis, reversible cardiac hypertrophy, and iron deficiency anemia.

=== Risk of forgoing conventional medical care ===
As with other alternative medicines, unethical or naïve practitioners may induce patients to exhaust financial resources by pursuing ineffective treatment. Professional ethics codes set by accrediting organizations such as the National Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine require practitioners to make &quot;timely referrals to other health care professionals as may be appropriate.&quot; Stephen Barrett states that there is a &quot;risk that an acupuncturist whose approach to diagnosis is not based on scientific concepts will fail to diagnose a dangerous condition&quot;.

== Conceptual basis ==
===Traditional===

Acupuncture is a substantial part of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Early acupuncture beliefs relied on concepts that are common in TCM, such as a life force energy called &quot;qi&quot;. &quot;Qi&quot; was believed to flow from the body&#x27;s primary organs (&quot;zang-fu&quot; organs) to the &quot;superficial&quot; body tissues of the skin, muscles, tendons, bones, and joints, through channels called meridians. Acupuncture points where needles are inserted are mainly (but not always) found at locations along the meridians. Acupuncture points not found along a meridian are called extraordinary points and those with no designated site are called points.

In TCM, disease is generally perceived as a disharmony or imbalance in energies such as yin, yang, &quot;qi&quot;, xuĕ, zàng-fǔ, meridians, and of the interaction between the body and the environment. Therapy is based on which &quot;pattern of disharmony&quot; can be identified. For example, some diseases are believed to be caused by meridians being invaded with an excess of wind, cold, and damp. In order to determine which pattern is at hand, practitioners examine things like the color and shape of the tongue, the relative strength of pulse-points, the smell of the breath, the quality of breathing, or the sound of the voice. TCM and its concept of disease does not strongly differentiate between the cause and effect of symptoms.

===Purported scientific basis===
Many within the scientific community consider acupuncture to be quackery and pseudoscience, having no effect other than as &quot;theatrical placebo&quot;. David Gorski has argued that of all forms of quackery, acupuncture has perhaps gained most acceptance among physicians and institutions. Academics Massimo Pigliucci and Maarten Boudry describe acupuncture as a &quot;borderlands science&quot; lying between science and pseudoscience.

====Rationalizations of traditional medicine====
It is a generally held belief within the acupuncture community that acupuncture points and meridians structures are special conduits for electrical signals, but no research has established any consistent anatomical structure or function for either acupuncture points or meridians. Human tests to determine whether electrical continuity was significantly different near meridians than other places in the body have been inconclusive. Scientific research has not supported the existence of &quot;qi&quot;, meridians, or yin and yang. A &quot;Nature&quot; editorial described TCM as &quot;fraught with pseudoscience&quot;, with the majority of its treatments having no logical mechanism of action. Quackwatch states that &quot;TCM theory and practice are not based upon the body of knowledge related to health, disease, and health care that has been widely accepted by the scientific community. TCM practitioners disagree among themselves about how to diagnose patients and which treatments should go with which diagnoses. Even if they could agree, the TCM theories are so nebulous that no amount of scientific study will enable TCM to offer rational care.&quot; Academic discussions of acupuncture still make reference to pseudoscientific concepts such as &quot;qi&quot; and meridians despite the lack of scientific evidence.

====Release of endorphins or adenosine====
Some modern practitioners support the use of acupuncture to treat pain, but have abandoned the use of &quot;qi&quot;, meridians, &quot;yin&quot;, &quot;yang&quot; and other mystical energies as an explanatory frameworks. The use of &quot;qi&quot; as an explanatory framework has been decreasing in China, even as it becomes more prominent during discussions of acupuncture in the US.

Many acupuncturists attribute pain relief to the release of endorphins when needles penetrate, but no longer support the idea that acupuncture can affect a disease. Some studies suggest acupuncture causes a series of events within the central nervous system, and that it is possible to inhibit acupuncture&#x27;s analgesic effects with the opioid antagonist naloxone. Mechanical deformation of the skin by acupuncture needles appears to result in the release of adenosine. The anti-nociceptive effect of acupuncture may be mediated by the adenosine A1 receptor. A 2014 review in &quot;Nature Reviews Cancer&quot; analyzed mouse studies that suggested acupuncture relieves pain via the local release of adenosine, which then triggered nearby A1 receptors. The review found that in those studies, because acupuncture &quot;caused more tissue damage and inflammation relative to the size of the animal in mice than in humans, such studies unnecessarily muddled a finding that local inflammation can result in the local release of adenosine with analgesic effect.&quot;

== History ==

=== Origins ===
Acupuncture, along with moxibustion, is one of the oldest practices of traditional Chinese medicine. Most historians believe the practice began in China, though there are some conflicting narratives on when it originated. Academics David Ramey and Paul Buell said the exact date acupuncture was founded depends on the extent to which dating of ancient texts can be trusted and the interpretation of what constitutes acupuncture.

Acupressure therapy was prevalent in India. Once Buddhism spread to China, the acupressure therapy was also integrated into common medical practice in China and it came to be known as acupuncture. The major points of Indian acupressure and Chinese acupuncture are similar to each other.

According to an article in &quot;Rheumatology&quot;, the first documentation of an &quot;organized system of diagnosis and treatment&quot; for acupuncture was in &quot;Inner Classic of Huang Di&quot; (Huangdi Neijing) from about 100 BC. Gold and silver needles found in the tomb of Liu Sheng from around 100 BC are believed to be the earliest archaeological evidence of acupuncture, though it is unclear if that was their purpose. According to Plinio Prioreschi, the earliest known historical record of acupuncture is the Shiji (&quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot;), written by a historian around 100 BC. It is believed that this text was documenting what was established practice at that time.

====Alternative theories====

The 5,000-year-old mummified body of Ötzi the Iceman was found with 15 groups of tattoos, many of which were located at points on the body where acupuncture needles are used for abdominal or lower back problems. Evidence from the body suggests Ötzi had these conditions. This has been cited as evidence that practices similar to acupuncture may have been practised elsewhere in Eurasia during the early Bronze Age; however, &quot;The Oxford Handbook of the History of Medicine&quot; calls this theory &quot;speculative&quot;. It is considered unlikely that acupuncture was practised before 2000 BC.

Acupuncture may have been practised during the Neolithic era, near the end of the Stone Age, using sharpened stones called Bian shi. Many Chinese texts from later eras refer to sharp stones called &quot;plen&quot;, which means &quot;stone probe&quot;, that may have been used for acupuncture purposes. The ancient Chinese medical text, Huangdi Neijing, indicates that sharp stones were believed at-the-time to cure illnesses at or near the body&#x27;s surface, perhaps because of the short depth a stone could penetrate. However, it is more likely that stones were used for other medical purposes, such as puncturing a growth to drain its pus. The &quot;Mawangdui&quot; texts, which are believed to be from the 2nd century BC, mention the use of pointed stones to open abscesses, and moxibustion, but not for acupuncture. It is also speculated that these stones may have been used for bloodletting, due to the ancient Chinese belief that illnesses were caused by demons within the body that could be killed or released. It is likely bloodletting was an antecedent to acupuncture.

According to historians Lu Gwei-djen and Joseph Needham, there is substantial evidence that acupuncture may have begun around 600 BC. Some hieroglyphs and pictographs from that era suggests acupuncture and moxibustion were practised. However, historians Lu and Needham said it was unlikely a needle could be made out of the materials available in China during this time period. It is possible that bronze was used for early acupuncture needles. Tin, copper, gold and silver are also possibilities, though they are considered less likely, or to have been used in fewer cases. If acupuncture was practised during the Shang dynasty (1766 to 1122 BC), organic materials like thorns, sharpened bones, or bamboo may have been used. Once methods for producing steel were discovered, it would replace all other materials, since it could be used to create a very fine, but sturdy needle. Lu and Needham noted that all the ancient materials that could have been used for acupuncture and which often produce archaeological evidence, such as sharpened bones, bamboo or stones, were also used for other purposes. An article in &quot;Rheumatology&quot; said that the absence of any mention of acupuncture in documents found in the tomb of Mawangdui from 198 BC suggest that acupuncture was not practised by that time.

====Belief systems====
Several different and sometimes conflicting belief systems emerged regarding acupuncture. This may have been the result of competing schools of thought. Some ancient texts referred to using acupuncture to cause bleeding, while others mixed the ideas of blood-letting and spiritual ch&#x27;i energy. Over time, the focus shifted from blood to the concept of puncturing specific points on the body, and eventually to balancing Yin and Yang energies as well. According to David Ramey, no single &quot;method or theory&quot; was ever predominantly adopted as the standard. At the time, scientific knowledge of medicine was not yet developed, especially because in China dissection of the deceased was forbidden, preventing the development of basic anatomical knowledge.

It is not certain when specific acupuncture points were introduced, but the autobiography of Bian Que from around 400–500 BC references inserting needles at designated areas. Bian Que believed there was a single acupuncture point at the top of one&#x27;s skull that he called the point &quot;of the hundred meetings.&quot; Texts dated to be from 156 to 186 BC document early beliefs in channels of life force energy called meridians that would later be an element in early acupuncture beliefs.

Ramey and Buell said the &quot;practice and theoretical underpinnings&quot; of modern acupuncture were introduced in &quot;The Yellow Emperor&#x27;s Classic&quot; (Huangdi Neijing) around 100 BC. It introduced the concept of using acupuncture to manipulate the flow of life energy (&quot;qi&quot;) in a network of meridian (channels) in the body. The network concept was made up of acu-tracts, such as a line down the arms, where it said acupoints were located. Some of the sites acupuncturists use needles at today still have the same names as those given to them by the &quot;Yellow Emperor&#x27;s Classic&quot;. Numerous additional documents were published over the centuries introducing new acupoints. By the 4th century AD, most of the acupuncture sites in use today had been named and identified.

===Early development in China===

====Establishment and growth====
In the first half of the 1st century AD, acupuncturists began promoting the belief that acupuncture&#x27;s effectiveness was influenced by the time of day or night, the lunar cycle, and the season. The &#x27;science of the yin-yang cycles&#x27; ( ) was a set of beliefs that curing diseases relied on the alignment of both heavenly () and earthly () forces that were attuned to cycles like that of the sun and moon. There were several different belief systems that relied on a number of celestial and earthly bodies or elements that rotated and only became aligned at certain times. According to Needham and Lu, these &quot;arbitrary predictions&quot; were depicted by acupuncturists in complex charts and through a set of special terminology.

Acupuncture needles during this period were much thicker than most modern ones and often resulted in infection. Infection is caused by a lack of sterilization, but at that time it was believed to be caused by use of the wrong needle, or needling in the wrong place, or at the wrong time. Later, many needles were heated in boiling water, or in a flame. Sometimes needles were used while they were still hot, creating a cauterizing effect at the injection site. Nine needles were recommended in the &quot;Great Compendium of Acupuncture and Moxibustion&quot; from 1601, which may have been because of an ancient Chinese belief that nine was a magic number.

Other belief systems were based on the idea that the human body operated on a rhythm and acupuncture had to be applied at the right point in the rhythm to be effective. In some cases a lack of balance between Yin and Yang were believed to be the cause of disease.

In the 1st century AD, many of the first books about acupuncture were published and recognized acupuncturist experts began to emerge. The &quot;Zhen Jiu Jia Yi Jing&quot;, which was published in the mid-3rd century, became the oldest acupuncture book that is still in existence in the modern era. Other books like the &quot;Yu Gui Zhen Jing&quot;, written by the Director of Medical Services for China, were also influential during this period, but were not preserved. In the mid 7th century, Sun Simiao published acupuncture-related diagrams and charts that established standardized methods for finding acupuncture sites on people of different sizes and categorized acupuncture sites in a set of modules.

Acupuncture became more established in China as improvements in paper led to the publication of more acupuncture books. The Imperial Medical Service and the Imperial Medical College, which both supported acupuncture, became more established and created medical colleges in every province. The public was also exposed to stories about royal figures being cured of their diseases by prominent acupuncturists. By time the &quot;Great Compendium of Acupuncture and Moxibustion&quot; was published during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644 AD), most of the acupuncture practices used in the modern era had been established.

====Decline====
By the end of the Song dynasty (1279 AD), acupuncture had lost much of its status in China. It became rarer in the following centuries, and was associated with less prestigious professions like alchemy, shamanism, midwifery and moxibustion. Additionally, by the 18th century, scientific rationality was becoming more popular than traditional superstitious beliefs. By 1757 a book documenting the history of Chinese medicine called acupuncture a &quot;lost art&quot;. Its decline was attributed in part to the popularity of prescriptions and medications, as well as its association with the lower classes.

In 1822, the Chinese Emperor signed a decree excluding the practice of acupuncture from the Imperial Medical Institute. He said it was unfit for practice by gentlemen-scholars. In China acupuncture was increasingly associated with lower-class, illiterate practitioners. It was restored for a time, but banned again in 1929 in favor of science-based medicine. Although acupuncture declined in China during this time period, it was also growing in popularity in other countries.

===International expansion===
Korea is believed to be the first country in Asia that acupuncture spread to outside of China. Within Korea there is a legend that acupuncture was developed by emperor Dangun, though it is more likely to have been brought into Korea from a Chinese colonial prefecture in 514 AD. Acupuncture use was commonplace in Korea by the 6th century. It spread to Vietnam in the 8th and 9th centuries. As Vietnam began trading with Japan and China around the 9th century, it was influenced by their acupuncture practices as well. China and Korea sent &quot;medical missionaries&quot; that spread traditional Chinese medicine to Japan, starting around 219 AD. In 553, several Korean and Chinese citizens were appointed to re-organize medical education in Japan and they incorporated acupuncture as part of that system. Japan later sent students back to China and established acupuncture as one of five divisions of the Chinese State Medical Administration System.

Acupuncture began to spread to Europe in the second half of the 17th century. Around this time the surgeon-general of the Dutch East India Company met Japanese and Chinese acupuncture practitioners and later encouraged Europeans to further investigate it. He published the first in-depth description of acupuncture for the European audience and created the term &quot;acupuncture&quot; in his 1683 work &quot;De Acupunctura&quot;. France was an early adopter among the West due to the influence of Jesuit missionaries, who brought the practice to French clinics in the 16th century. The French doctor Louis Berlioz (the father of the composer Hector Berlioz) is usually credited with being the first to experiment with the procedure in Europe in 1810, before publishing his findings in 1816.

By the 19th century, acupuncture had become commonplace in many areas of the world. Americans and Britons began showing interest in acupuncture in the early 19th century, although interest waned by mid-century. Western practitioners abandoned acupuncture&#x27;s traditional beliefs in spiritual energy, pulse diagnosis, and the cycles of the moon, sun or the body&#x27;s rhythm. Diagrams of the flow of spiritual energy, for example, conflicted with the West&#x27;s own anatomical diagrams. It adopted a new set of ideas for acupuncture based on tapping needles into nerves. In Europe it was speculated that acupuncture may allow or prevent the flow of electricity in the body, as electrical pulses were found to make a frog&#x27;s leg twitch after death.

The West eventually created a belief system based on Travell trigger points that were believed to inhibit pain. They were in the same locations as China&#x27;s spiritually identified acupuncture points, but under a different nomenclature. The first elaborate Western treatise on acupuncture was published in 1683 by Willem ten Rhijne.

==== Modern era ====

In China, the popularity of acupuncture rebounded in 1949 when Mao Zedong took power and sought to unite China behind traditional cultural values. It was also during this time that many Eastern medical practices were consolidated under the name traditional Chinese medicine (TCM).

New practices were adopted in the 20th century, such as using a cluster of needles, electrified needles, or leaving needles inserted for up to a week. A lot of emphasis developed on using acupuncture on the ear. Acupuncture research organizations such as the International Society of Acupuncture were founded in the 1940s and 1950s and acupuncture services became available in modern hospitals. China, where acupuncture was believed to have originated, was increasingly influenced by Western medicine. Meanwhile, acupuncture grew in popularity in the US. The US Congress created the Office of Alternative Medicine in 1992 and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) declared support for acupuncture for some conditions in November 1997. In 1999, the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine was created within the NIH. Acupuncture became the most popular alternative medicine in the US.

Politicians from the Chinese Communist Party said acupuncture was superstitious and conflicted with the party&#x27;s commitment to science. Communist Party Chairman Mao Zedong later reversed this position, arguing that the practice was based on scientific principles. During the Cultural Revolution, disbelief in acupuncture anesthesia was subjected to ruthless political repression.

In 1971, &quot;New York Times&quot; reporter James Reston published an article on his acupuncture experiences in China, which led to more investigation of and support for acupuncture. The US President Richard Nixon visited China in 1972. During one part of the visit, the delegation was shown a patient undergoing major surgery while fully awake, ostensibly receiving acupuncture rather than anesthesia. Later it was found that the patients selected for the surgery had both a high pain tolerance and received heavy indoctrination before the operation; these demonstration cases were also frequently receiving morphine surreptitiously through an intravenous drip that observers were told contained only fluids and nutrients. One patient receiving open heart surgery while awake was ultimately found to have received a combination of three powerful sedatives as well as large injections of a local anesthetic into the wound. After the National Institute of Health expressed support for acupuncture for a limited number of conditions, adoption in the US grew further. In 1972 the first legal acupuncture center in the US was established in Washington DC and in 1973 the American Internal Revenue Service allowed acupuncture to be deducted as a medical expense.

In 2006, a BBC documentary &quot;Alternative Medicine&quot; filmed a patient undergoing open heart surgery allegedly under acupuncture-induced anesthesia. It was later revealed that the patient had been given a cocktail of anesthetics.

In 2010, UNESCO inscribed &quot;acupuncture and moxibustion of traditional Chinese medicine&quot; on the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List following China&#x27;s nomination.

== Adoption ==
Acupuncture is most heavily practiced in China and is popular in the US, Australia, and Europe. In Switzerland, acupuncture has become the most frequently used alternative medicine since 2004. In the United Kingdom, a total of 4 million acupuncture treatments were administered in 2009. Acupuncture is used in most pain clinics and hospices in the UK. An estimated 1 in 10 adults in Australia used acupuncture in 2004. In Japan, it is estimated that 25 percent of the population will try acupuncture at some point, though in most cases it is not covered by public health insurance. Users of acupuncture in Japan are more likely to be elderly and to have a limited education. Approximately half of users surveyed indicated a likelihood to seek such remedies in the future, while 37% did not. Less than one percent of the US population reported having used acupuncture in the early 1990s. By the early 2010s, more than 14 million Americans reported having used acupuncture as part of their health care.

In the US, acupuncture is increasingly () used at academic medical centers, and is usually offered through CAM centers or anesthesia and pain management services. Examples include those at Harvard University, Stanford University, Johns Hopkins University, and UCLA. CDC clinical practice guidelines from 2022 list acupuncture among the types of complementary and alternative medicines physicians should consider in preference to opioid prescription for certain kinds of pain.

The use of acupuncture in Germany increased by 20% in 2007, after the German acupuncture trials supported its efficacy for certain uses. In 2011, there were more than one million users, and insurance companies have estimated that two-thirds of German users are women. As a result of the trials, German public health insurers began to cover acupuncture for chronic low back pain and osteoarthritis of the knee, but not tension headache or migraine. This decision was based in part on socio-political reasons. Some insurers in Germany chose to stop reimbursement of acupuncture because of the trials. For other conditions, insurers in Germany were not convinced that acupuncture had adequate benefits over usual care or sham treatments. Highlighting the results of the placebo group, researchers refused to accept a placebo therapy as efficient.

==Regulation==

There are various government and trade association regulatory bodies for acupuncture in the United Kingdom, the United States, Saudi Arabia, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Canada, and in European countries and elsewhere. The World Health Organization recommends that an acupuncturist receive 200 hours of specialized training if they are a physician and 2,500 hours for non-physicians before being licensed or certified; many governments have adopted similar standards.

In Hong Kong, the practice of acupuncture is regulated by the Chinese Medicine Council, which was formed in 1999 by the Legislative Council. It includes a licensing exam, registration, and degree courses approved by the board. Canada has acupuncture licensing programs in the provinces of British Columbia, Ontario, Alberta and Quebec; standards set by the Chinese Medicine and Acupuncture Association of Canada are used in provinces without government regulation. Regulation in the US began in the 1970s in California, which was eventually followed by every state but Wyoming and Idaho. Licensing requirements vary greatly from state to state. The needles used in acupuncture are regulated in the US by the Food and Drug Administration. In some states acupuncture is regulated by a board of medical examiners, while in others by the board of licensing, health or education.

In Japan, acupuncturists are licensed by the Minister of Health, Labour and Welfare after passing an examination and graduating from a technical school or university. In Australia, the Chinese Medicine Board of Australia regulates acupuncture, among other Chinese medical traditions, and restricts the use of titles like &#x27;acupuncturist&#x27; to registered practitioners only. The practice of Acupuncture in New Zealand in 1990 acupuncture was included into the Governmental Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) Act. This inclusion granted qualified and professionally registered acupuncturists the ability to provide subsidised care and treatment to citizens, residents, and temporary visitors for work- or sports-related injuries that occurred within the country of New Zealand. The two bodies for the regulation of acupuncture and attainment of ACC treatment provider status in New Zealand are Acupuncture NZ, and The New Zealand Acupuncture Standards Authority. At least 28 countries in Europe have professional associations for acupuncturists. In France, the Académie Nationale de Médecine (National Academy of Medicine) has regulated acupuncture since 1955.

== See also ==


== Notes ==

== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* FRONTLINE: The Alternative Fix - &quot;What is acupuncture?&quot; (4 November 2003). PBS Video.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q121713" start="0" end="11" title="Acupuncture" label="Acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="25" end="45" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="65" end="93" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="167" end="180" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="233" end="253" title="Science" label="scientific knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="288" end="296" title="quackery" label="quackery"/>
<link wikidata="Q799826" start="617" end="633" title="eight principles" label="eight principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="704" end="710" title="Daoist" label="Daoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="717" end="723" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)" label="wuxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="1330" end="1347" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047938" start="1669" end="1684" title="adverse effects" label="adverse effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q723758" start="1827" end="1845" title="Asepsis" label="sterile techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="2018" end="2030" title="pneumothorax" label="pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="2226" end="2238" title="histology" label="histological"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="2242" end="2255" title="physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="2312" end="2314" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413962" start="2322" end="2331" title="meridian (Chinese medicine)" label="meridians"/>
<link wikidata="Q428448" start="2625" end="2640" title="Huangdi Neijing" label="Huangdi Neijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="2837" end="2849" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q466833" start="3755" end="3792" title="American Society of Anesthesiologists" label="American Society of Anesthesiologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130172" start="4009" end="4059" title="Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research" label="Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="4322" end="4333" title="laser light" label="laser light"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4465" end="4477" title="invasiveness of surgical procedures#Non-invasive procedure" label="non-invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q261503" start="4813" end="4826" title="Chinese herbs" label="Chinese herbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q937737" start="5157" end="5168" title="moxibustion" label="moxibustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q461707" start="5174" end="5189" title="cupping therapy" label="cupping therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q662857" start="5254" end="5259" title="Radial pulse" label="pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="5395" end="5397" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12171" start="6708" end="6714" title="menses" label="menses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144334" start="6719" end="6729" title="leukorrhea" label="leukorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q121713" start="9346" end="9354" title="acupoint" label="acupoint"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10011" end="10021" title="Traditional Chinese medicine#Eight principles of diagnosis" label="deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033223" start="10243" end="10254" title="Acupressure" label="Acupressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q937737" start="10427" end="10438" title="moxibustion" label="moxibustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15114159" start="10505" end="10512" title="mugwort" label="mugwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q557429" start="10634" end="10650" title="acute (medicine)" label="acute conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="10682" end="10698" title="Chronic (medicine)" label="chronic diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q461707" start="11029" end="11044" title="Cupping therapy" label="Cupping therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="11075" end="11095" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399328" start="11224" end="11230" title="Tui na" label="Tui na"/>
<link wikidata="Q11784952" start="11366" end="11384" title="Electroacupuncture" label="Electroacupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11593" end="11597" title="[Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation" label="TENS"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230616" start="11637" end="11660" title="Fire needle acupuncture" label="Fire needle acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="11950" end="11960" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q201898" start="12055" end="12066" title="tuning fork" label="tuning fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="12195" end="12202" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259977" start="12207" end="12221" title="herbal extract" label="herbal extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157619" start="12696" end="12711" title="Auriculotherapy" label="Auriculotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q609753" start="12897" end="12906" title="outer ear" label="outer ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q9622" start="13176" end="13181" title="scalp" label="scalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287082" start="13185" end="13207" title="Koryo hand acupuncture" label="Koryo hand acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q741032" start="13349" end="13362" title="trigger point" label="trigger point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334793" start="13403" end="13412" title="Dermatome (anatomy)" label="dermatome"/>
<link wikidata="Q423888" start="13700" end="13709" title="bee venom" label="bee venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923714" start="13728" end="13750" title="Veterinary acupuncture" label="Veterinary acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q540571" start="14039" end="14051" title="fibromyalgia" label="fibromyalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12355007" start="14063" end="14085" title="Science-Based Medicine" label="Science-Based Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761731" start="14093" end="14107" title="Steven Novella" label="Steven Novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="14179" end="14189" title="homeopathy" label="homeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="14270" end="14284" title="placebo effect" label="placebo effect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14616" end="14624" title="Efficacy#Medicine" label="efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836899" start="14677" end="14690" title="control group" label="control group"/>
<link wikidata="Q608510" start="14855" end="14862" title="Blind experiment" label="blinded"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318358" start="15363" end="15369" title="review article" label="review"/>
<link wikidata="Q641657" start="15379" end="15400" title="Nature Reviews Cancer" label="Nature Reviews Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q62736" start="16821" end="16835" title="osteoarthritis" label="osteoarthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="17397" end="17420" title="evidence-based medicine" label="evidence-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="17793" end="17822" title="medicine" label="mainstream medical treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729388" start="18174" end="18186" title="David Gorski" label="David Gorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q919364" start="18413" end="18429" title="Publication bias" label="Publication bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436668" start="18470" end="18497" title="randomized controlled trial" label="randomized controlled trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330" start="19590" end="19603" title="impact factor" label="impact factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248791" start="19969" end="19984" title="Steven Salzberg" label="Steven Salzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15752439" start="20106" end="20149" title="Journal of Acupuncture and Meridian Studies" label="Journal of Acupuncture and Meridian Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677886" start="20166" end="20189" title="Acupuncture in Medicine" label="Acupuncture in Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="20706" end="20722" title="Cochrane Collaboration" label="Cochrane reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848900" start="20896" end="20912" title="Contraindication" label="Contraindication"/>
<link wikidata="Q446142" start="21509" end="21530" title="serious adverse event" label="serious adverse event"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="21548" end="21554" title="deaths" label="deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565355" start="21635" end="21646" title="Medical malpractice" label="malpractice"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="22438" end="22450" title="pneumothorax" label="pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q804517" start="22456" end="22465" title="bacterial infection" label="bacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928978" start="22470" end="22485" title="viral infection" label="viral infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q194309" start="22608" end="22621" title="mycobacterium" label="mycobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="22630" end="22638" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415275" start="24462" end="24482" title="spinal cord injuries" label="spinal cord injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="24597" end="24602" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="24667" end="24672" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129338" start="24674" end="24695" title="granuloma" label="epithelioid granuloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592207" start="24697" end="24711" title="pseudolymphoma" label="pseudolymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q648982" start="24713" end="24720" title="argyria" label="argyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757427" start="24732" end="24744" title="pancytopenia" label="pancytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q929313" start="25432" end="25449" title="cardiac tamponade" label="cardiac tamponade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251481" start="25848" end="25871" title="National Health Service (England)" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="26660" end="26673" title="anticoagulant" label="anticoagulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q693442" start="26984" end="27007" title="subarachnoid hemorrhage" label="subarachnoid hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27298" end="27316" title="Prospective survey" label="Prospective survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q217690" start="27593" end="27603" title="Incidence (epidemiology)" label="incidences"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="27647" end="27656" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="29192" end="29202" title="pediatrics" label="pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973004" start="29282" end="29314" title="National Health Interview Survey" label="National Health Interview Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336854" start="29339" end="29376" title="National Center for Health Statistics" label="National Center For Health Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388752" start="30453" end="30468" title="cardiac rupture" label="cardiac rupture"/>
<link wikidata="Q647099" start="30472" end="30482" title="hemoptysis" label="hemoptysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9597" start="31369" end="31385" title="abdomen" label="abdominal region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131260" start="31682" end="31688" title="keloid" label="keloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q949302" start="31710" end="31716" title="bulla (dermatology)" label="bullae"/>
<link wikidata="Q780629" start="31821" end="31833" title="panniculitis" label="panniculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q954674" start="31871" end="31893" title="iron deficiency anemia" label="iron deficiency anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486852" start="32363" end="32378" title="Stephen Barrett" label="Stephen Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="32630" end="32658" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137055" start="32865" end="32872" title="zang-fu" label="zang-fu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33350" end="33359" title="Traditional Chinese medicine#Yin and yang" label="yin, yang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33361" end="33400" title="Traditional Chinese medicine#Model of the body" label="&amp;quot;qi&amp;quot;, xuĕ, zàng-fǔ, meridians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33690" end="33697" title="Traditional chinese medicine#Patterns" label="pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q240305" start="34051" end="34071" title="scientific community" label="scientific community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="34099" end="34107" title="quackery" label="quackery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729388" start="34190" end="34202" title="David Gorski" label="David Gorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361585" start="34337" end="34354" title="Massimo Pigliucci" label="Massimo Pigliucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489491" start="34359" end="34373" title="Maarten Boudry" label="Maarten Boudry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="35063" end="35069" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271540" start="35197" end="35216" title="mechanism of action" label="mechanism of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q496639" start="35218" end="35228" title="Quackwatch" label="Quackwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q190528" start="36336" end="36346" title="endorphins" label="endorphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="36511" end="36533" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q282902" start="36634" end="36642" title="naloxone" label="naloxone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190012" start="36738" end="36747" title="adenosine" label="adenosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734305" start="36753" end="36769" title="Nociception" label="anti-nociceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14888579" start="36815" end="36836" title="adenosine A1 receptor" label="adenosine A1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q937737" start="37398" end="37409" title="moxibustion" label="moxibustion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37853" end="37877" title="Chinese Buddhism#Han Dynasty (206 BCE–220 CE)" label="Buddhism spread to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q428448" start="38293" end="38308" title="Huangdi Neijing" label="Huangdi Neijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q712382" start="38374" end="38383" title="Liu Sheng, Prince of Zhongshan" label="Liu Sheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="38614" end="38619" title="Shiji" label="Shiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q171291" start="38862" end="38877" title="Ötzi the Iceman" label="Ötzi the Iceman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="39203" end="39210" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="39228" end="39238" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="39472" end="39481" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="39507" end="39516" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902472" start="39548" end="39556" title="Bian Stones" label="Bian shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829829" start="40064" end="40067" title="pus" label="pus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196056" start="40079" end="40088" title="Mawangdui" label="Mawangdui"/>
<link wikidata="Q164655" start="40194" end="40201" title="abscess" label="abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q844013" start="40530" end="40542" title="Lu Gwei-djen" label="Lu Gwei-djen"/>
<link wikidata="Q318054" start="40547" end="40561" title="Joseph Needham" label="Joseph Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="40661" end="40672" title="Pictogram" label="pictographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="40904" end="40910" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="41121" end="41134" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196056" start="41731" end="41740" title="Mawangdui" label="Mawangdui"/>
<link wikidata="Q855326" start="42694" end="42702" title="Bian Que" label="Bian Que"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136347" start="45131" end="45142" title="cauterizing" label="cauterizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q981193" start="46127" end="46137" title="Sun Simiao" label="Sun Simiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="46845" end="46857" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="47164" end="47171" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="47173" end="47182" title="shamanism" label="shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20862341" start="47184" end="47193" title="midwifery" label="midwifery"/>
<link wikidata="Q549567" start="48252" end="48258" title="Dangun" label="Dangun"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="49159" end="49183" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="49680" end="49694" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q644889" start="50133" end="50148" title="pulse diagnosis" label="pulse diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q972307" start="50903" end="50920" title="Willem ten Rhijne" label="Willem ten Rhijne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="51008" end="51018" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157619" start="51415" end="51437" title="Auriculotherapy" label="acupuncture on the ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053458" start="51486" end="51522" title="International Society of Acupuncture" label="International Society of Acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="51857" end="51886" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278030" start="51977" end="52035" title="National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health" label="National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="52154" end="52177" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="52412" end="52431" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="52495" end="52515" title="political repression" label="political repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363899" start="52563" end="52575" title="James Reston" label="James Reston"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="52719" end="52754" title="1972 Nixon visit to China" label="Richard Nixon visited China in 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="52910" end="52920" title="anesthesia" label="anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124847" start="53000" end="53014" title="pain tolerance" label="pain tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="53128" end="53136" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="53164" end="53180" title="intravenous therapy" label="intravenous drip"/>
<link wikidata="Q235007" start="53265" end="53283" title="open heart surgery" label="open heart surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868462" start="53409" end="53425" title="local anesthetic" label="local anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="53452" end="53480" title="National Institute of Health" label="National Institute of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="53695" end="53719" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="53789" end="53792" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="54024" end="54030" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q937737" start="54063" end="54074" title="moxibustion" label="moxibustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="54120" end="54160" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511133" start="54769" end="54792" title="Health care system in Japan" label="public health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671274" start="55264" end="55288" title="academic medical centers" label="academic medical centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="55403" end="55421" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="55423" end="55442" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="55444" end="55468" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="55474" end="55478" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="55480" end="55483" title="CDC" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q878041" start="55484" end="55511" title="clinical practice guideline" label="clinical practice guideline"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="55643" end="55649" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264838" start="55761" end="55786" title="German acupuncture trials" label="German acupuncture trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q294308" start="55993" end="56015" title="Publicly funded health care" label="public health insurers"/>
<link wikidata="Q745692" start="56174" end="56189" title="socio-political" label="socio-political"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="56777" end="56802" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="57731" end="57759" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191238" start="57944" end="57982" title="Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare" label="Minister of Health, Labour and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672556" start="58378" end="58411" title="Accident Compensation Corporation" label="Accident Compensation Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q337555" start="58970" end="59000" title="Académie Nationale de Médecine" label="Académie Nationale de Médecine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1538" wikidata="Q4681045" url="?curid=1538" title="Adder (disambiguation)">
<text>Vipera berus, the common European adder, is a snake found in Europe and northern Asia.

Adder may also refer to:

* AA-12 Adder, a Russian air-to-air missile
* Adder (electronics), an electronic circuit designed to do addition
* Adder Technology, a manufacturing company
* Armstrong Siddeley Adder, a late 1940s British turbojet engine
* &quot;Blackadder&quot;, a series of BBC sitcoms
* &quot;Golden Axe: The Revenge of Death Adder&quot;, a video game
* HMS &quot;Adder&quot;, any of seven ships of the Royal Navy
* Any of several groups of venomous snakes
* USS &quot;Adder&quot;, a US submarine

== See also ==
* Addition, a mathematical operation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192056" start="0" end="12" title="Vipera berus" label="Vipera berus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681045" start="88" end="93" title="Adder (disambiguation)" label="Adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q828225" start="116" end="127" title="AA-12 Adder" label="AA-12 Adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q376953" start="160" end="179" title="Adder (electronics)" label="Adder (electronics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033383" start="229" end="245" title="Adder Technology" label="Adder Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793966" start="273" end="297" title="Armstrong Siddeley Adder" label="Armstrong Siddeley Adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q49019" start="344" end="354" title="Blackadder" label="Blackadder"/>
<link wikidata="" start="394" end="432" title="Golden Axe: The Revenge of Death Adder" label="Golden Axe: The Revenge of Death Adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631208" start="455" end="476" title="HMS Adder" label="HMS &amp;quot;Adder&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="551" end="557" title="List of snakes by common_name#A" label="snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364733" start="560" end="581" title="USS Adder (SS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Adder&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="616" end="624" title="Addition" label="Addition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1540" wikidata="Q82732" url="?curid=1540" title="Aeneas">
<text>In Greco-Roman mythology, Aeneas ( , ; from ) was a Trojan hero, the son of the Trojan prince Anchises and the Greek goddess Aphrodite (equivalent to the Roman Venus). His father was a first cousin of King Priam of Troy (both being grandsons of Ilus, founder of Troy), making Aeneas a second cousin to Priam&#x27;s children (such as Hector and Paris). He is a minor character in Greek mythology and is mentioned in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot;. Aeneas receives full treatment in Roman mythology, most extensively in Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, where he is cast as an ancestor of Romulus and Remus. He became the first true hero of Rome. Snorri Sturluson identifies him with the Norse god Víðarr of the Æsir.

== Etymology ==

Aeneas is the Romanization of the hero&#x27;s original Greek name (&quot;Aineías&quot;). Aineías is first introduced in the &quot;Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite&quot; when Aphrodite gives him his name from the adjective 
&quot;terrible&quot;), for the &quot;terrible grief&quot; () he has caused her by being born a mortal who will age and die. It is a popular etymology for the name, apparently exploited by Homer in the &quot;Iliad&quot;. Later in the Medieval period there were writers who held that, because the &quot;Aeneid&quot; was written by a philosopher, it is meant to be read philosophically. As such, in the &quot;natural order&quot;, the meaning of Aeneas&#x27; name combines Greek (&quot;dweller&quot;) with (&quot;body&quot;), which becomes or &quot;in-dweller&quot;—i.e. as a god inhabiting a mortal body. However, there is no certainty regarding the origin of his name.

===Epithets===
In imitation of the &quot;Iliad&quot;, Virgil borrows epithets of Homer, including: Anchisiades, &quot;magnanimum&quot;, &quot;magnus&quot;, &quot;heros&quot;, and &quot;bonus&quot;. Though he borrows many, Virgil gives Aeneas two epithets of his own, in the &quot;Aeneid:&quot; &quot;pater&quot; and &quot;pius&quot;. The epithets applied by Virgil are an example of an attitude different from that of Homer, for whilst Odysseus is (&quot;wily&quot;), Aeneas is described as (&quot;pious&quot;), which conveys a strong moral tone. The purpose of these epithets seems to enforce the notion of Aeneas&#x27; divine hand as father and founder of the Roman race, and their use seems circumstantial: when Aeneas is praying he refers to himself as &quot;pius&quot;, and is referred to as such by the author only when the character is acting on behalf of the gods to fulfill his divine mission. Likewise, Aeneas is called &quot;pater&quot; when acting in the interest of his men.

==Greek myth and epos==

===Homeric &quot;Hymn to Aphrodite&quot;===
The story of the birth of Aeneas is told in the &quot;Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite&quot;, one of the major Homeric Hymns. Aphrodite has caused Zeus the king of the Gods to fall in love with mortal women. In retaliation, Zeus decided to put a desire over her heart for the mortal Prince Anchises, who is tending his cattle among the hills near Mount Ida. When Aphrodite saw him, she was immediately smitten. She adorns herself as if for a wedding among the gods and appears before him. He is overcome by her beauty, believing that she is a goddess, but Aphrodite identifies herself as a Phrygian princess. After they make love, Aphrodite reveals her true identity to him and Anchises fears what might happen to him as a result of their liaison. Aphrodite assures him that he will be protected and tells him that she will bear him a son to be called Aeneas. However, she warns him that he must never tell anyone that he has lain with a goddess. When Aeneas is born, Aphrodite takes him to the nymphs of Mount Ida, instructing them to raise the child to age five, then take him to Anchises. According to other sources, Anchises later brags about his encounter with Aphrodite, and as a result is struck in the foot with a thunderbolt by Zeus. Thereafter he is lame in that foot, so that Aeneas has to carry him from the flames of Troy.

===Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot;===

Aeneas is a minor character in the &quot;Iliad&quot;, where he is twice saved from death by the gods as if for an as-yet-unknown destiny but is an honorable warrior in his own right. Having held back from the fighting, aggrieved with Priam because in spite of his brave deeds he was not given his due share of honor, he leads an attack against Idomeneus to recover the body of his brother-in-law Alcathous at the urging of Deiphobus. He is the leader of the Trojans&#x27; Dardanian allies, as well as a second cousin and principal lieutenant of Hector, son and heir of the Trojan king Priam.

Aeneas&#x27;s mother Aphrodite frequently comes to his aid on the battlefield, and he is a favorite of the Sun God Apollo. Aphrodite and Apollo would frequently rescue Aeneas from combat with Diomedes of Argos, who nearly kills him, and carry him away to Pergamos for healing. Even the Sea God Poseidon, who usually favors the Greeks, comes to Aeneas&#x27;s rescue after he falls under the assault of Achilles, noting that Aeneas, though from a junior branch of the royal family, is destined to become king of the Trojan people.

Bruce Louden presents Aeneas as an archetype: The sole virtuous individual (or family) spared from general destruction, following the mytheme of Utnapishtim, Baucis and Philemon, Noah, and Lot. Pseudo-Apollodorus in his &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; explains that &quot;... the Greeks [spared] him alone, on account of his piety.&quot;

===Other sources===
The Roman mythographer Gaius Julius Hyginus ( – CE 17) in his &quot;Fabulae&quot; credits Aeneas with killing 28 enemies in the Trojan War. Aeneas also appears in the Trojan narratives attributed to Dares Phrygius and Dictys of Crete.

==Roman myth and literature==

The history of Aeneas was continued by Roman authors. One influential source was the account of Rome&#x27;s founding in Cato the Elder&#x27;s &quot;Origines&quot;. The Aeneas legend was well known in Virgil&#x27;s day and appeared in various historical works, including the &quot;Roman Antiquities&quot; of the Greek historian Dionysius of Halicarnassus (relying on Marcus Terentius Varro), &quot;Ab Urbe Condita&quot; by Livy (probably dependent on Quintus Fabius Pictor, fl. 200 BCE), and Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus (now extant only in an epitome by Justin).

===Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;===

The &quot;Aeneid&quot; which is 12 books of the legendary foundation of Lavinium which explains that Aeneas is one of the few Trojans who were not killed or enslaved when Troy fell. Aeneas, after being commanded by the gods to flee, gathered a group, collectively known as the Aeneads, who then traveled to Italy and became progenitors of the Romans. The Aeneads included Aeneas&#x27;s trumpeter Misenus, his father Anchises, his friends Achates, Sergestus, and Acmon, the healer Iapyx, the helmsman Palinurus, and his son Ascanius (also known as Iulus, Julus, or Ascanius Julius). He carried with him the Lares and Penates, the statues of the household gods of Troy, and transplanted them to Italy.

Several attempts to find a new home failed; one such stop was on Sicily, where in Drepanum, on the island&#x27;s western coast, his father, Anchises, died peacefully.
After a brief but fierce storm sent up against the group at Juno&#x27;s request, Aeneas and his fleet made landfall at Carthage after six years of wanderings. Aeneas had a year-long affair with the Carthaginian queen Dido (also known as Elissa), who proposed that the Trojans settle in her land and that she and Aeneas reign jointly over their peoples. A marriage of sorts was arranged between Dido and Aeneas at the instigation of Juno, who was told that her favorite city would eventually be defeated by the Trojans&#x27; descendants. Aeneas&#x27;s mother Venus (the Roman adaptation of Aphrodite) realized that her son and his company needed a temporary respite to reinforce themselves for the journey to come. However, the messenger god Mercury (the adaptation of Hermes) was sent by Jupiter (who was Zeus in this version) and Venus to remind Aeneas of his journey and his purpose, compelling him to leave secretly. When Dido learned of this, she uttered a curse that would forever pit Carthage against Rome, an enmity that would culminate in the Punic Wars. She then committed suicide by stabbing herself with the same sword she gave Aeneas when they first met.

After the sojourn in Carthage, the Trojans returned to Sicily where Aeneas organized funeral games to honor his father, who had died a year before. The company traveled on and landed on the western coast of Italy. Aeneas descended into the underworld where he met Dido (who turned away from him to return to her husband) and his father, who showed him the future of his descendants and thus the history of Rome.

Latinus, king of the Latins, welcomed Aeneas&#x27;s army of exiled Trojans and let them reorganize their lives in Latium. His daughter Lavinia had been promised to Turnus, king of the Rutuli, but Latinus received a prophecy that Lavinia would be betrothed to one from another land – namely, Aeneas. Latinus heeded the prophecy, and Turnus consequently declared war on Aeneas at the urging of Juno, who was aligned with King Mezentius of the Etruscans and Queen Amata of the Latins. Aeneas&#x27;s forces prevailed. Turnus was killed, and Virgil&#x27;s account ends abruptly.

===Other sources===

The rest of Aeneas&#x27;s biography is gleaned from other ancient sources, including Livy and Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;. According to Livy, Aeneas was victorious, but Latinus died in the war. Aeneas founded the city of Lavinium, named after his wife. He later welcomed Dido&#x27;s sister, Anna Perenna, who then committed suicide after learning of Lavinia&#x27;s jealousy. After Aeneas&#x27;s death, Venus asked Jupiter to make her son immortal. Jupiter agreed. The river god Numicus cleansed Aeneas of all his mortal parts and Venus anointed him with ambrosia and nectar, making him a god. Aeneas was recognized as the god Jupiter Indiges. It&#x27;s also been stated that Prince Aeneas is the ancestor to the founders of Rome, the twin brothers Romulus and Remus; the two orphan boys who are seen suckling from a she-wolf.

== English mythology ==


The Brut Chronicle tells the story of Britain&#x27;s settling by Brutus of Troy, son of Aeneas. Belief in this story was once widespread, but by the time of the Renaissance had begun to fade.

=== Further reading ===
* One surviving version of the Brut Chronicle is a late Middle Ages manuscript, known as the St Albans Chronicle.

==Medieval accounts==
Snorri Sturlason, in the Prologue of the Prose Edda, tells of the world as parted in three continents: Africa, Asia and the third part called Europe or Enea. Snorri also tells of a Trojan named Munon (or Mennon), who marries the daughter of the High King (Yfirkonungr) Priam called Troan and travels to distant lands, marries the Sybil and got a son, Tror, who, as Snorri tells, is identical to Thor. This tale resembles some episodes of the Aeneid.
Continuations of Trojan matter in the Middle Ages had their effects on the character of Aeneas as well. The 12th-century French &quot;Roman d&#x27;Enéas&quot; addresses Aeneas&#x27;s sexuality. Though Virgil appears to deflect all homoeroticism onto Nisus and Euryalus, making his Aeneas a purely heterosexual character, in the Middle Ages there was at least a suspicion of homoeroticism in Aeneas. The &quot;Roman d&#x27;Enéas&quot; addresses that charge, when Queen Amata opposes Aeneas&#x27;s marrying Lavinia.

Medieval interpretations of Aeneas were greatly influenced by both Virgil and other Latin sources. Specifically, the accounts by Dares and Dictys, which were reworked by the 13th-century Italian writer Guido delle Colonne (in &quot;Historia destructionis Troiae&quot;), colored many later readings. From Guido, for instance, the Pearl Poet and other English writers get the suggestion that Aeneas&#x27;s safe departure from Troy with his possessions and family was a reward for treason, for which he was chastised by Hecuba. In &quot;Sir Gawain and the Green Knight&quot; (late 14th century) the Pearl Poet, like many other English writers, employed Aeneas to establish a genealogy for the foundation of Britain, and explains that Aeneas was &quot;impeached for his perfidy, proven most true&quot; (line 4).

==Family and legendary descendants==
Aeneas had an extensive family tree. His wet-nurse was Caieta, and he is the father of Ascanius with Creusa, and of Silvius with Lavinia. Ascanius, also known as Iulus (or Julius), founded Alba Longa and was the first in a long series of kings. According to the mythology used by Virgil in the &quot;Aeneid,&quot; Romulus and Remus were both descendants of Aeneas through their mother Rhea Silvia, making Aeneas the progenitor of the Roman people. Some early sources call him their father or grandfather, but once the dates of the fall of Troy (1184 BCE) and the founding of Rome (753 BCE) became accepted, authors added generations between them. The Julian family of Rome, most notably Julius Cæsar and Augustus, traced their lineage to Ascanius and Aeneas, thus to the goddess Venus. Through the Julians, the Palemonids make this claim. The legendary kings of Britain – including King Arthur – trace their family through a grandson of Aeneas, Brutus.

==Character and appearance==

Aeneas&#x27;s consistent epithet in Virgil and other Latin authors is &quot;pius&quot;, a term that connotes reverence toward the gods and familial dutifulness. There is significant scholarly debate, however, over the degree to which this epithet is genuine within the poem, and to what extent its deployment by Virgil is sarcastic.

In the &quot;Aeneid&quot;, Aeneas is described as strong and handsome, but neither his hair colour nor complexion are described. In late antiquity however sources add further physical descriptions. The &quot;De excidio Troiae&quot; of Dares Phrygius describes Aeneas as &quot;auburn-haired, stocky, eloquent, courteous, prudent, pious, and charming. His eyes were black and twinkling&quot;. There is also a brief physical description found in the 6th-century John Malalas&#x27; &quot;Chronographia&quot;: &quot;Aeneas: short, fat, with a good chest, powerful, with a ruddy complexion, a broad face, a good nose, fair skin, bald on the forehead, a good beard, grey eyes.&quot;

==Modern portrayals==

===Literature===
Aeneas appears as a character in William Shakespeare&#x27;s play &quot;Troilus and Cressida&quot;, set during the Trojan War.

Aeneas and Dido are the main characters of a 17th-century broadside ballad called &quot;The Wandering Prince of Troy&quot;. The ballad ultimately alters Aeneas&#x27;s fate from traveling on years after Dido&#x27;s death to joining her as a spirit soon after her suicide.

In modern literature, Aeneas is the speaker in two poems by Allen Tate, &quot;Aeneas at Washington&quot; and &quot;Aeneas at New York&quot;. He is a main character in Ursula K. Le Guin&#x27;s &quot;Lavinia&quot;, a re-telling of the last six books of the &quot;Aeneid&quot; told from the point of view of Lavinia, daughter of King Latinus of Latium.

Aeneas appears in David Gemmell&#x27;s &quot;Troy&quot; series as a main heroic character who goes by the name Helikaon.

In Rick Riordan&#x27;s book series &quot;The Heroes of Olympus&quot;, Aeneas is regarded as the first Roman demigod, son of Venus rather than Aphrodite.

Will Adams&#x27; novel &quot;City of the Lost&quot; assumes that much of the information provided by Virgil is mistaken, and that the true Aeneas and Dido did not meet and love in Carthage but in a Phoenician colony at Cyprus, on the site of the modern Famagusta. Their tale is interspersed with that of modern activists who, while striving to stop an ambitious Turkish Army general trying to stage a coup, accidentally discover the hidden ruins of Dido&#x27;s palace.

===Opera, film and other media===

Aeneas is a title character in Henry Purcell&#x27;s opera &quot;Dido and Aeneas&quot; (), and Jakob Greber&#x27;s (&quot;Aeneas in Carthage&quot;) (1711), and one of the principal roles in Hector Berlioz&#x27; opera &quot;Les Troyens&quot; (), as well as in Metastasio&#x27;s immensely popular opera libretto Didone abbandonata. Canadian composer James Rolfe composed his opera &quot;Aeneas and Dido&quot; (2007; to a libretto by André Alexis) as a companion piece to Purcell&#x27;s opera.

Despite its many dramatic elements, Aeneas&#x27;s story has generated little interest from the film industry. Ronald Lewis portrayed Aeneas in &quot;Helen of Troy&quot;, directed by Robert Wise, as a supporting character, who is a member of the Trojan Royal family, and a close and loyal friend to Paris, and escapes at the end of the film. Portrayed by Steve Reeves, he was the main character in the 1961 sword and sandal film &quot;Guerra di Troia&quot; (&quot;The Trojan War&quot;). Reeves reprised the role the following year in the film &quot;The Avenger&quot;, about Aeneas&#x27;s arrival in Latium and his conflicts with local tribes as he tries to settle his fellow Trojan refugees there.

Giulio Brogi, portrayed as Aeneas in the 1971 Italian TV miniseries series called &quot;Eneide&quot;, which gives the whole story of the Aeneid, from Aeneas escape from to Troy, to his meeting of Dido, his arrival in Italy, and his duel with Turnus.

The most recent cinematic portrayal of Aeneas was in the film &quot;Troy&quot;, in which he appears as a youth charged by Paris to protect the Trojan refugees, and to continue the ideals of the city and its people. Paris gives Aeneas Priam&#x27;s sword, in order to give legitimacy and continuity to the royal line of Troy – and lay the foundations of Roman culture. In this film, he is not a member of the royal family and does not appear to fight in the war.

In the role-playing game &quot;&quot; by White Wolf Game Studios, Aeneas figures as one of the mythical founders of the Ventrue Clan.

in the action game &quot;&quot;, Aeneas is a playable character. The game ends with him and the Aeneans fleeing Troy&#x27;s destruction and, spurned by the words of a prophetess thought crazed, goes to a new country (Italy) where he will start an empire greater than Greece and Troy combined that shall rule the world for 1000 years, never to be outdone in the tale of men (the Roman Empire).

In the 2018 TV miniseries &quot;&quot;, Aeneas is portrayed by Alfred Enoch. He also featured as an Epic Fighter of the Dardania faction in the &quot;Total War Saga: Troy&quot; in 2020.

==Depictions in art==
Scenes depicting Aeneas, especially from the &quot;Aeneid&quot;, have been the focus of study for centuries. They have been the frequent subject of art and literature since their debut in the 1st century.

===Villa Valmarana===
The artist Giovanni Battista Tiepolo was commissioned by Gaetano Valmarana in 1757 to fresco several rooms in the Villa Valmarana, the family villa situated outside Vicenza. Tiepolo decorated the &quot;palazzina&quot; with scenes from epics such as Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; and Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;.
===Aeneas flees Troy===
===Aeneas with Dido===
==Family tree==
==See also==
* Cumaean Sibyl
* Lacrimae rerum
* The Golden Bough
* Latin kings of Alba Longa

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* Homer, &quot;Iliad&quot; II. 819–21; V. 217–575; XIII. 455–544; XX. 75–352.
* Apollodorus, &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; III. xii. 2; &quot;Epitome&quot; III. 32–IV. 2; V. 21.
* Virgil, &quot;Aeneid&quot;.
* Ovid, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; XIII. 623–715; XIV. 75–153; 581–608.
* Ovid, &quot;Heroides,&quot; VII.
* Livy, Book 1.1–2.
* Dictys Cretensis.
* Dares Phrygius.

==Further reading==
* Cramer, D. &quot;The Wrath of Aeneas: &quot;Iliad&quot; 13.455–67 and 20.75–352.&quot; Syllecta Classica, vol. 11, 2000, pp. 16–33. .
* de Vasconcellos, P.S. &quot;A Sound Play on Aeneas&#x27; Name in the &quot;Aeneid&quot;: A Brief Note on VII.69.&quot; Vergilius (1959–), vol. 61, 2015, pp. 125–29. .
* Farron, S. &quot;The Aeneas–Dido Episode as an Attack on Aeneas&#x27; Mission and Rome.&quot; Greece &amp; Rome, vol. 27, no. 1, 1980, pp. 34–47. . .
* Gowers, E. &quot;Trees and Family Trees in the &quot;Aeneid&quot;.&quot; Classical Antiquity, vol. 30, no. 1, 2011, pp. 87–118. . .
* Grillo, L. &quot;Leaving Troy and Creusa: Reflections on Aeneas&#x27; Flight.&quot; The Classical Journal, vol. 106, no. 1, 2010, pp. 43–68. . .
* Noonan, J. &quot;Sum Pius Aeneas: Aeneas and the Leader as Conservator/Σωτήρ&quot; The Classical Bulletin. vol. 83, no. 1, 2007, pp. 65–91.
* Putnam, M.C.J. &quot;The Humanness of Heroes: Studies in the Conclusion of Virgil&#x27;s Aeneid&quot;. The Amsterdam Vergil lectures, 1. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2011.
* Starr, R.J. &quot;Aeneas the Rhetorician: &#x27;Aeneid IV&#x27;, 279–95.&quot; Latomus, vol. 62, no. 1, 2003, pp. 36–46. .
* Scafoglio, G. &quot;The Betrayal of Aeneas.&quot; Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies, vol. 53 no. 1, 2013, pp. 1–14.
* Schauer, M. &quot;Aeneas dux in Vergils Aeneis. Eine literarische Fiktion in augusteischer Zeit&quot;. Zetemata vol. 128. Munich: C.H. Beck, 2007.

==External links==

* Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (about 900 images related to the Aeneid)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1367434" start="3" end="24" title="Greco-Roman mythology" label="Greco-Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="26" end="32" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="52" end="58" title="Troy" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211953" start="94" end="102" title="Anchises" label="Anchises"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="125" end="134" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="160" end="165" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23009870" start="191" end="197" title="cousin" label="cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="206" end="211" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495743" start="245" end="249" title="Ilus (son of Tros)" label="Ilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="262" end="266" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744763" start="315" end="323" title="List of children of Priam" label="children"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="333" end="339" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="344" end="349" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="379" end="394" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="415" end="420" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="434" end="439" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="481" end="496" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="518" end="524" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="538" end="544" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197" start="587" end="604" title="Romulus and Remus" label="Romulus and Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="645" end="661" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q372614" start="696" end="702" title="Víðarr" label="Víðarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="710" end="714" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q466126" start="748" end="760" title="Romanization of Greek" label="Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="789" end="794" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="864" end="876" title="Homeric Hymn" label="Homeric Hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="880" end="889" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1157" end="1162" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="1672" end="1678" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="1687" end="1694" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="1898" end="1904" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="2780" end="2793" title="Homeric Hymns" label="Homeric Hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="2816" end="2820" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127771" start="3016" end="3025" title="Mount Ida (Turkey)" label="Mount Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="3259" end="3266" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3557" end="3575" title="Taboo#In religion and mythology" label="he must never tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="3664" end="3669" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="4085" end="4090" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q736813" start="4467" end="4476" title="Deiphobus" label="Deiphobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165756" start="4516" end="4525" title="Dardanians (Trojan)" label="Dardanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="4589" end="4595" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="4629" end="4634" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="4658" end="4667" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="4752" end="4758" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208256" start="4829" end="4837" title="Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="4841" end="4846" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q629564" start="4892" end="4900" title="Pergamos" label="Pergamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="4931" end="4939" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="5038" end="5046" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q253855" start="5301" end="5308" title="mytheme" label="mytheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q767983" start="5312" end="5323" title="Utnapishtim" label="Utnapishtim"/>
<link wikidata="Q637209" start="5325" end="5344" title="Baucis and Philemon" label="Baucis and Philemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="5346" end="5350" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q40574" start="5356" end="5359" title="Lot (biblical person)" label="Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="5393" end="5404" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="5541" end="5561" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="5586" end="5593" title="Fabulae" label="Fabulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="5717" end="5731" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares Phrygius"/>
<link wikidata="Q475001" start="5736" end="5751" title="Dictys of Crete" label="Dictys of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q180081" start="5905" end="5919" title="Cato the Elder" label="Cato the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q204058" start="5933" end="5941" title="Origines" label="Origines"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="6112" end="6138" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="6151" end="6173" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Marcus Terentius Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155892" start="6182" end="6197" title="Ab Urbe Condita (book)" label="Ab Urbe Condita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="6207" end="6211" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313500" start="6235" end="6256" title="Quintus Fabius Pictor" label="Quintus Fabius Pictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q316119" start="6276" end="6298" title="Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus" label="Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210853" start="6333" end="6339" title="Justin (historian)" label="Justin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="6393" end="6399" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352586" start="6455" end="6463" title="Lavinium" label="Lavinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687764" start="6660" end="6667" title="Aeneads" label="Aeneads"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="6690" end="6695" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="6726" end="6732" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777717" start="6779" end="6786" title="Misenus" label="Misenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q211953" start="6799" end="6807" title="Anchises" label="Anchises"/>
<link wikidata="Q30096870" start="6821" end="6828" title="Achates" label="Achates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526637" start="6830" end="6839" title="Sergestus" label="Sergestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687764" start="6845" end="6850" title="Acmon, the Aenead" label="Acmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180888" start="6863" end="6868" title="Iapyx" label="Iapyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q679636" start="6883" end="6892" title="Palinurus" label="Palinurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q655566" start="6906" end="6914" title="Ascanius" label="Ascanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q504377" start="6989" end="6994" title="Lares" label="Lares"/>
<link wikidata="Q918202" start="6999" end="7006" title="Penates" label="Penates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="7149" end="7155" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q13664" start="7166" end="7174" title="Trapani" label="Drepanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="7311" end="7315" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="7370" end="7378" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q905162" start="7468" end="7472" title="Dido (Queen of Carthage)" label="Dido"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="7809" end="7814" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="7992" end="7999" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="8039" end="8046" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988" start="8302" end="8312" title="Punic Wars" label="Punic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509124" start="8504" end="8517" title="funeral games (antiquity)" label="funeral games"/>
<link wikidata="Q779406" start="8832" end="8839" title="Latinus" label="Latinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="8946" end="8952" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137364" start="8967" end="8974" title="Lavinia" label="Lavinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q633549" start="8996" end="9002" title="Turnus" label="Turnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q579014" start="9016" end="9022" title="Rutuli" label="Rutuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q717546" start="9256" end="9265" title="Mezentius" label="Mezentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="9269" end="9282" title="Etruscan civilization" label="the Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q455503" start="9293" end="9298" title="Amata" label="Amata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="9522" end="9526" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="9540" end="9553" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352586" start="9659" end="9667" title="Lavinium" label="Lavinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q539796" start="9729" end="9741" title="Anna Perenna" label="Anna Perenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346299" start="9916" end="9923" title="Numicus" label="Numicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131409" start="9992" end="10000" title="ambrosia" label="ambrosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200777" start="10064" end="10079" title="Jupiter Indiges" label="Jupiter Indiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693243" start="10295" end="10309" title="Brut Chronicle" label="Brut Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q994929" start="10356" end="10370" title="Brutus of Troy" label="Brutus of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="10452" end="10463" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693243" start="10539" end="10553" title="Brut Chronicle" label="Brut Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="10645" end="10661" title="Snorri Sturlason" label="Snorri Sturlason"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="10686" end="10696" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="10736" end="10746" title="continents" label="continents"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="10748" end="10754" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="10756" end="10760" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="10787" end="10793" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854705" start="10839" end="10844" title="Menon (mythology)" label="Munon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383923" start="10890" end="10899" title="High King" label="High King"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="10914" end="10919" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844796" start="10927" end="10932" title="Troan" label="Troan"/>
<link wikidata="Q273320" start="10975" end="10980" title="Sibyl" label="Sybil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="11040" end="11044" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778801" start="11229" end="11247" title="Roman d&amp;#x27;Enéas" label="Roman d&amp;#x27;Enéas"/>
<link wikidata="Q775418" start="11345" end="11363" title="Nisus and Euryalus" label="Nisus and Euryalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q455503" start="11557" end="11568" title="Amata" label="Queen Amata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137364" start="11600" end="11607" title="Lavinia" label="Lavinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248842" start="11812" end="11831" title="Guido delle Colonne" label="Guido delle Colonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241142" start="11842" end="11871" title="Historia destructionis Troiae" label="Historia destructionis Troiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792099" start="11939" end="11949" title="Pearl Poet" label="Pearl Poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193433" start="12127" end="12133" title="Hecuba" label="Hecuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q756715" start="12144" end="12175" title="Sir Gawain and the Green Knight" label="Sir Gawain and the Green Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="12497" end="12506" title="wet-nurse" label="wet-nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649829" start="12511" end="12517" title="Caieta" label="Caieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q655566" start="12543" end="12551" title="Ascanius" label="Ascanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q375174" start="12557" end="12563" title="Creusa (wife of Aeneas)" label="Creusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q209398" start="12572" end="12579" title="Silvius (mythology)" label="Silvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137364" start="12585" end="12592" title="Lavinia" label="Lavinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q655566" start="12618" end="12623" title="Iulus" label="Iulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q335070" start="12645" end="12655" title="Alba Longa" label="Alba Longa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878519" start="12679" end="12699" title="Latin kings of Alba Longa" label="long series of kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="13031" end="13035" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q510193" start="13107" end="13120" title="Gens Julia" label="Julian family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="13143" end="13155" title="Julius Cæsar" label="Julius Cæsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="13160" end="13168" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352399" start="13267" end="13277" title="Palemonids" label="Palemonids"/>
<link wikidata="Q849909" start="13309" end="13325" title="List of legendary kings of Britain" label="kings of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="13338" end="13349" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q994929" start="13401" end="13407" title="Brutus of Britain" label="Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="14009" end="14023" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares Phrygius"/>
<link wikidata="Q312491" start="14233" end="14245" title="John Malalas" label="John Malalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="14524" end="14543" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q183304" start="14562" end="14582" title="Troilus and Cressida" label="Troilus and Cressida"/>
<link wikidata="Q905162" start="14629" end="14633" title="Dido" label="Dido"/>
<link wikidata="Q849965" start="14676" end="14685" title="Broadside (music)" label="broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="14686" end="14692" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209979" start="14706" end="14734" title="The Wandering Prince of Troy" label="The Wandering Prince of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q975706" start="14950" end="14960" title="Allen Tate" label="Allen Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="15057" end="15074" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811112" start="15088" end="15095" title="Lavinia (novel)" label="Lavinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="15151" end="15157" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137364" start="15195" end="15202" title="Lavinia" label="Lavinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779406" start="15221" end="15228" title="Latinus" label="Latinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="15232" end="15238" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q220450" start="15259" end="15272" title="David Gemmell" label="David Gemmell"/>
<link wikidata="Q220450" start="15352" end="15360" title="Helikaon" label="Helikaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212727" start="15366" end="15378" title="Rick Riordan" label="Rick Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276821" start="15404" end="15425" title="The Heroes of Olympus" label="The Heroes of Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="15487" end="15492" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193190" start="15770" end="15779" title="Famagusta" label="Famagusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="16053" end="16066" title="Henry Purcell" label="Henry Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q746646" start="16086" end="16101" title="Dido and Aeneas" label="Dido and Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661672" start="16116" end="16128" title="Jakob Greber" label="Jakob Greber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="16211" end="16225" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q472325" start="16244" end="16255" title="Les Troyens" label="Les Troyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q29473" start="16280" end="16290" title="Metastasio" label="Metastasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027260" start="16331" end="16349" title="Didone abbandonata" label="Didone abbandonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142381" start="16369" end="16380" title="James Rolfe (composer)" label="James Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759811" start="16452" end="16464" title="André Alexis" label="André Alexis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365062" start="16623" end="16635" title="Ronald Lewis (actor)" label="Ronald Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q938924" start="16662" end="16675" title="Helen of Troy (1956 film)" label="Helen of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q358193" start="16867" end="16879" title="Steve Reeves" label="Steve Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="16919" end="16935" title="sword and sandal" label="sword and sandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q886189" start="16947" end="16962" title="Guerra di Troia" label="Guerra di Troia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365764" start="17061" end="17072" title="The Avenger (1962 film)" label="The Avenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="17111" end="17117" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769510" start="17211" end="17223" title="Giulio Brogi" label="Giulio Brogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725208" start="17299" end="17305" title="Eneide (TV serial)" label="Eneide"/>
<link wikidata="Q186587" start="17530" end="17534" title="Troy (film)" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="17584" end="17589" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q338023" start="18044" end="18056" title="Ventrue Clan" label="Ventrue Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q250250" start="18516" end="18528" title="Alfred Enoch" label="Alfred Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18603" end="18623" title="Total War Saga: Troy" label="Total War Saga: Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186202" start="18901" end="18926" title="Giovanni Battista Tiepolo" label="Giovanni Battista Tiepolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="19055" end="19062" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q762835" start="19286" end="19299" title="Cumaean Sibyl" label="Cumaean Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825273" start="19302" end="19316" title="Lacrimae rerum" label="Lacrimae rerum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737006" start="19319" end="19335" title="The Golden Bough (mythology)" label="The Golden Bough"/>
<link wikidata="Q878519" start="19338" end="19363" title="Latin kings of Alba Longa" label="Latin kings of Alba Longa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="19404" end="19409" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="19417" end="19422" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="19501" end="19512" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="19576" end="19582" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="19590" end="19596" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="19606" end="19610" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="19618" end="19631" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="19677" end="19681" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236672" start="19689" end="19697" title="Heroides" label="Heroides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="19712" end="19716" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q475001" start="19732" end="19748" title="Dictys Cretensis" label="Dictys Cretensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="19752" end="19766" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares Phrygius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1541" wikidata="Q2498" url="?curid=1541" title="April 13">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*1111 – Henry V is crowned Holy Roman Emperor.
*1204 – Constantinople falls to the Crusaders of the Fourth Crusade, temporarily ending the Byzantine Empire.
*1455 – Thirteen Years&#x27; War: the beginning of the Battle for Kneiphof.
===1601–1900===
*1612 – Samurai Miyamoto Musashi defeats Sasaki Kojirō in a duel at Funajima island.
*1613 – Samuel Argall, having captured Pocahontas in Passapatanzy, Virginia, sets off with her to Jamestown with the intention of exchanging her for English prisoners held by her father.
*1699 – The Sikh religion is formalised as the Khalsa – the brotherhood of Warrior-Saintsby Guru Gobind Singh in northern India, in accordance with the Nanakshahi calendar.
*1742 – George Frideric Handel&#x27;s oratorio &quot;Messiah&quot; makes its world premiere in Dublin, Ireland.
*1777 – American Revolutionary War: American forces are ambushed and defeated in the Battle of Bound Brook, New Jersey.
*1829 – The Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 gives Roman Catholics in the United Kingdom the right to vote and to sit in Parliament.
*1849 – Lajos Kossuth presents the Hungarian Declaration of Independence in a closed session of the National Assembly.
*1861 – American Civil War: Union forces surrender Fort Sumter to Confederate forces.
*1865 – American Civil War: Raleigh, North Carolina is occupied by Union forces.
*1870 – The New York City Metropolitan Museum of Art is founded.
*1873 – The Colfax massacre: More than 60 to 150 black men are murdered in Colfax, Louisiana, while surrendering to a mob of former Confederate soldiers and members of the Ku Klux Klan.

===1901–present===
*1909 – The 31 March Incident leads to the overthrow of Sultan Abdul Hamid II.
*1919 – Jallianwala Bagh massacre: British Indian Army troops led by Brigadier-General Reginald Dyer kill approximately 379–1,000 unarmed demonstrators including men and women in Amritsar, India; and approximately 1,500 injured.
*1941 – A pact of neutrality between the USSR and Japan is signed.
*1943 – World War II: The discovery of mass graves of Polish prisoners of war killed by Soviet forces in the Katyń Forest Massacre is announced, causing a diplomatic rift between the Polish government-in-exile in London and the Soviet Union, which denies responsibility.
* 1943 – The Jefferson Memorial is dedicated in Washington, D.C., on the 200th anniversary of President Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s birth.
*1945 – World War II: German troops kill more than 1,000 political and military prisoners in Gardelegen, Germany.
* 1945 – World War II: Soviet and Bulgarian forces capture Vienna.
*1948 – In an ambush, 78 Jewish doctors, nurses and medical students from Hadassah Hospital, and a British soldier, are massacred by Arabs in Sheikh Jarrah. This event came to be known as the Hadassah medical convoy massacre. 
*1953 – CIA director Allen Dulles launches the mind-control program Project MKUltra.
*1960 – The United States launches Transit 1-B, the world&#x27;s first satellite navigation system.
*1964 – At the Academy Awards, Sidney Poitier becomes the first African-American man to win the Best Actor award for the 1963 film &quot;Lilies of the Field&quot;.
*1970 – An oxygen tank aboard the Apollo 13 Service Module explodes, putting the crew in great danger and causing major damage to the Apollo command and service module (codenamed &quot;Odyssey&quot;) while en route to the Moon.
*1972 – The Universal Postal Union decides to recognize the People&#x27;s Republic of China as the only legitimate Chinese representative, effectively expelling the Republic of China administering Taiwan.
* 1972 – Vietnam War: The Battle of An Lộc begins.
*1975 – An attack by the Phalangist resistance kills 26 militia members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, marking the start of the 15-year Lebanese Civil War.
*1976 – The United States Treasury Department reintroduces the two-dollar bill as a Federal Reserve Note on Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s 233rd birthday as part of the United States Bicentennial celebration.
* 1976 – Forty workers die in an explosion at the Lapua ammunition factory, the deadliest accidental disaster in modern history in Finland.
*1996 – Two women and four children are killed after Israeli helicopter fired rockets at an ambulance in Mansouri, Lebanon.
*1997 – Tiger Woods becomes the youngest golfer to win the Masters Tournament.
*2023 – The house of Jack Teixeira is raided in an investigation into leaked Pentagon documents; he is arrested on the same day.
*2024 – Six people and the perpetrator are killed and twelve others injured in a mass stabbing at Westfield Bondi Junction shopping centre in Sydney, Australia.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*1229 – Louis II, Duke of Bavaria (d. 1294)
*1350 – Margaret III, Countess of Flanders (d. 1405)
*1506 – Peter Faber, French priest and theologian, co-founded the Society of Jesus (d. 1546)
*1519 – Catherine de&#x27; Medici, Italian-French wife of Henry II of France (d. 1589)
*1570 – Guy Fawkes, English soldier, member of the Gunpowder Plot (probable; d. 1606)
*1573 – Christina of Holstein-Gottorp (d. 1625)
*1593 – Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford, English soldier and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (d. 1641)
===1601–1900===
*1618 – Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy, French author (d. 1693)
*1636 – Hendrik van Rheede, Dutch botanist (d. 1691)
*1648 – Jeanne Marie Bouvier de la Motte Guyon, French mystic (d. 1717)
*1713 – Pierre Jélyotte, French tenor (d. 1797)
*1729 – Thomas Percy, Irish bishop and poet (d. 1811)
*1732 – Frederick North, Lord North, English politician, Prime Minister of Great Britain (d. 1792)
*1735 – Isaac Low, American merchant and politician, founded the New York Chamber of Commerce (d. 1791)
*1743 – Thomas Jefferson, American lawyer and politician, 3rd President of the United States (d. 1826)
*1747 – Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans (d. 1793)
*1764 – Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr, French general and politician, French Minister of War (d. 1830)
*1769 – Thomas Lawrence, English painter and educator (d. 1830)
*1771 – Richard Trevithick, Cornish-English engineer and explorer (d. 1833)
*1780 – Alexander Mitchell, Irish engineer, invented the Screw-pile lighthouse (d. 1868)
*1784 – Friedrich Graf von Wrangel, Prussian field marshal (d. 1877)
*1787 – John Robertson, American lawyer and politician (d. 1873)
*1794 – Jean Pierre Flourens, French physiologist and academic (d. 1867)
*1802 – Leopold Fitzinger, Austrian zoologist and herpetologist (d. 1884)
*1808 – Antonio Meucci, Italian-American engineer (d. 1889)
*1810 – Félicien David, French composer (d. 1876)
*1824 – William Alexander, Irish archbishop, poet, and theologian (d. 1911)
*1825 – Thomas D&#x27;Arcy McGee, Irish-Canadian journalist and politician (d. 1868)
*1828 – Josephine Butler, English feminist and social reformer (d. 1906)
* 1828 – Joseph Lightfoot, English bishop and theologian (d. 1889)
*1832 – Juan Montalvo, Ecuadorian author and diplomat (d. 1889)
*1841 – Louis-Ernest Barrias, French sculptor and academic (d. 1905)
*1850 – Arthur Matthew Weld Downing, Irish astronomer (d. 1917)
*1851 – Robert Abbe, American surgeon and radiologist (d. 1928)
* 1851 – William Quan Judge, Irish occultist and theosophist (d. 1896)
*1852 – Frank Winfield Woolworth, American businessman, founded the F. W. Woolworth Company (d. 1919)
*1854 – Lucy Craft Laney, American founder of the Haines Normal and Industrial School, Augusta, Georgia (d. 1933)
*1860 – James Ensor, English-Belgian painter, an important influence on expressionism and surrealism (d. 1949)
*1866 – Butch Cassidy, American criminal (d. 1908)
*1872 – John Cameron, Scottish international footballer and manager (d. 1935)
* 1872 – Alexander Roda Roda, Austrian-Croatian journalist and author (d. 1945)
*1873 – John W. Davis, American lawyer and politician, 14th United States Solicitor General (d. 1955)
*1875 – Ray Lyman Wilbur, American physician, academic, and politician, 31st United States Secretary of the Interior (d. 1949)
*1879 – Edward Bruce, American lawyer and painter (d. 1943)
* 1879 – Oswald Bruce Cooper, American type designer, lettering artist, graphic designer, and educator (d. 1940)
*1880 – Charles Christie, Canadian-American businessman, co-founded the Christie Film Company (d. 1955)
*1885 – Vean Gregg, American baseball player (d. 1964)
* 1885 – Juhan Kukk, Estonian politician, Head of State of Estonia (d. 1942)
* 1885 – György Lukács, Hungarian philosopher and critic (d. 1971)
* 1885 – Pieter Sjoerds Gerbrandy, Dutch politician (d. 1961)
*1887 – Gordon S. Fahrni, Canadian physician and golfer (d. 1995)
*1889 – Herbert Yardley, American cryptologist and author (d. 1958)
*1890 – Frank Murphy, American jurist and politician, 56th United States Attorney General (d. 1949)
* 1890 – Dadasaheb Torne, Indian director and producer (d. 1960)
*1891 – Maurice Buckley, Australian sergeant, Victoria Cross recipient (d. 1921)
* 1891 – Nella Larsen, Danish/African-American nurse, librarian, and author (d. 1964)
* 1891 – Robert Scholl, German accountant and politician (d. 1973)
*1892 – Sir Arthur Harris, 1st Baronet, English air marshal (d. 1984)
* 1892 – Robert Watson-Watt, Scottish engineer, invented Radar (d. 1973)
*1894 – Arthur Fadden, Australian accountant and politician, 13th Prime Minister of Australia (d. 1973)
* 1894 – May Brodney, Australian labour activist (d. 1973)
*1896 – Fred Barnett, English footballer (d. 1982)
*1897 – Werner Voss, German lieutenant and pilot (d. 1917)
*1899 – Alfred Mosher Butts, American architect and game designer, created Scrabble (d. 1993)
* 1899 – Harold Osborn, American high jumper and decathlete (d. 1975)
*1900 – Sorcha Boru, American potter and ceramic sculptor (d. 2006)
* 1900 – Pierre Molinier, French painter and photographer (d. 1976)

===1901–present===
*1901 – Jacques Lacan, French psychiatrist and psychoanalyst (d. 1981)
* 1901 – Alan Watt, Australian public servant and diplomat, Australian Ambassador to Japan (d. 1988)
*1902 – Philippe de Rothschild, French Grand Prix driver, playwright, and producer (d. 1988)
* 1902 – Marguerite Henry, American author (d. 1997)
*1904 – David Robinson, English businessman and philanthropist (d. 1987)
*1905 – Rae Johnstone, Australian jockey (d. 1964)
*1906 – Samuel Beckett, Irish novelist, poet, and playwright, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1989)
* 1906 – Bud Freeman, American saxophonist, composer, and bandleader (d. 1991)
*1907 – Harold Stassen, American lawyer and politician, 25th Governor of Minnesota (d. 2001)
*1909 – Eudora Welty, American short story writer and novelist (d. 2001)
*1911 – Ico Hitrec, Croatian footballer and manager (d. 1946)
* 1911 – Jean-Louis Lévesque, Canadian businessman and philanthropist (d. 1994)
* 1911 – Nino Sanzogno, Italian conductor and composer (d. 1983)
*1913 – Dave Albritton, American high jumper and coach (d. 1994)
* 1913 – Kermit Tyler, American lieutenant and pilot (d. 2010)
*1914 – Orhan Veli Kanık, Turkish poet and author (d. 1950)
*1916 – Phyllis Fraser, Welsh-American actress, journalist, and publisher, co-founded Beginner Books (d. 2006)
*1917 – Robert Orville Anderson, American businessman, founded Atlantic Richfield Oil Co. (d. 2007)
* 1917 – Bill Clements, American soldier, engineer, and politician, 15th United States Deputy Secretary of Defense (d. 2011)
*1919 – Roland Gaucher, French journalist and politician (d. 2007)
* 1919 – Howard Keel, American actor and singer (d. 2004)
* 1919 – Madalyn Murray O&#x27;Hair, American activist, founded American Atheists (d. 1995)
*1920 – Roberto Calvi, Italian banker (d. 1982)
* 1920 – Claude Cheysson, French lieutenant and politician, French Minister of Foreign Affairs (d. 2012)
* 1920 – Liam Cosgrave, Irish lawyer and politician, 6th Taoiseach of Ireland (d. 2017)
* 1920 – Theodore L. Thomas, American chemical engineer, Patent attorney and writer (d. 2005)
*1922 – Heinz Baas, German footballer and manager (d. 1994)
* 1922 – John Braine, English librarian and author (d. 1986)
* 1922 – Julius Nyerere, Tanzanian politician and teacher, 1st President of Tanzania (d. 1999)
* 1922 – Valve Pormeister, Estonian architect (d. 2002)
*1923 – Don Adams, American actor and director (d. 2005)
* 1923 – A. H. Halsey, English sociologist and academic (d. 2014)
*1924 – John T. Biggers, American painter (d. 2001)
* 1924 – Jack T. Chick, American author, illustrator, and publisher (d. 2016)
* 1924 – Stanley Donen, American film director and choreographer (d. 2019)
*1926 – Ellie Lambeti, Greek actress (d. 1983)
* 1926 – John Spencer-Churchill, 11th Duke of Marlborough, English businessman (d. 2014)
*1927 – Rosemary Haughton, English philosopher, theologian, and author
* 1927 – Maurice Ronet, French actor and director (d. 1983)
*1928 – Alan Clark, English historian and politician, Minister of State for Trade (d. 1999)
* 1928 – Gianni Marzotto, Italian racing driver and businessman (d. 2012)
*1929 – Marilynn Smith, American golfer (d. 2019)
*1931 – Anita Cerquetti, Italian soprano (d. 2014)
* 1931 – Robert Enrico, French director and screenwriter (d. 2001)
* 1931 – Dan Gurney, American race car driver and engineer (d. 2018)
* 1931 – Jon Stone, American composer, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1997)
*1932 – Orlando Letelier, Chilean-American economist and politician, Chilean Minister of National Defense (d. 1976)
*1934 – John Muckler, Canadian ice hockey player, coach, and manager (d. 2021)
*1937 – Col Joye, Australian singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1937 – Edward Fox, English actor
* 1937 – Lanford Wilson, American playwright, co-founded the Circle Repertory Company (d. 2011)
*1938 – Klaus Lehnertz, German pole vaulter
*1939 – Seamus Heaney, Irish poet and playwright, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2013)
* 1939 – Paul Sorvino, American actor and singer (d. 2022)
*1940 – Mike Beuttler, Egyptian-English racing driver (d. 1988)
* 1940 – J. M. G. Le Clézio, Breton French-Mauritian author and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
* 1940 – Vladimir Cosma, French composer, conductor and violinist
* 1940 – Jim McNab, Scottish footballer (d. 2006)
* 1940 – Max Mosley, English racing driver and engineer, co-founded March Engineering, former president of the FIA (d. 2021)
* 1940 – Ruby Puryear Hearn, African-American biophysicist
*1941 – Michael Stuart Brown, American geneticist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
* 1941 – Jean-Marc Reiser, French author and illustrator (d. 1983)
*1942 – Bill Conti, American composer and conductor
*1943 – Alan Jones, Australian rugby coach and radio host
* 1943 – Tim Krabbé, Dutch journalist and author
*1944 – Susan Davis, Russian-American social worker and politician
*1945 – Judy Nunn, Australian actress and author
*1946 – Al Green, American singer-songwriter, producer, and pastor
*1947 – Rae Armantrout, American poet and academic
* 1947 – Mike Chapman, Australian-English songwriter and producer
* 1947 – Jean-Jacques Laffont, French economist and academic (d. 2004)
* 1947 – Thanos Mikroutsikos, Greek composer and politician (d. 2019)
*1948 – Nam Hae-il, South Korean admiral
* 1948 – Drago Jančar, Slovenian author and playwright
* 1948 – Mikhail Shufutinsky, Soviet and Russian singer, actor, TV presenter
*1949 – Len Cook, New Zealand-English mathematician and statistician
* 1949 – Frank Doran, Scottish lawyer and politician (d. 2017)
* 1949 – Christopher Hitchens, English-American essayist, literary critic, and journalist (d. 2011)
*1950 – Ron Perlman, American actor 
* 1950 – Tommy Raudonikis, Australian rugby league player and coach (d. 2021)
* 1950 – William Sadler, American actor
*1951 – Leszek Borysiewicz, Welsh immunologist and academic
* 1951 – Peabo Bryson, American singer
* 1951 – Peter Davison, English actor
* 1951 – Max Weinberg, American musician and bandleader
*1952 – Gabrielle Gourdeau, Canadian writer (d. 2006)
* 1952 – Jonjo O&#x27;Neill, Irish jockey and trainer
*1955 – Steve Camp, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1955 – Muwenda Mutebi II, current King of Buganda Kingdom
*1956 – César, Brazilian footballer (d. 2024)
*1959 – John Middendorf, American mountain climber (d. 2024)
*1960 – Rudi Völler, German footballer and manager
*1963 – Garry Kasparov, Russian chess player and author
*1964 – Davis Love III, American golfer and sportscaster
*1965 – Patricio Pouchulu, Argentinian architect and educator
*1967 – Dana Barros, American basketball player and coach
* 1967 – Michael Eisen, American biologist and academic
* 1967 – Olga Tañón, Puerto Rican singer-songwriter
*1970 – Ricky Schroder, American actor
*1971 – Franck Esposito, French swimmer
* 1971 – Danie Mellor, Australian painter and sculptor
* 1971 – Bo Outlaw, American basketball player
*1972 – Aaron Lewis, American singer-songwriter and guitarist 
*1973 – Bokeem Woodbine, American actor
*1975 – Lou Bega, German singer
*1976 – Jonathan Brandis, American actor (d. 2003)
* 1976 – Dan Campbell, American football player and coach
* 1976 – Glenn Howerton, American actor
*1977 – Margus Tsahkna, Estonian lawyer and politician
*1978 – Carles Puyol, Spanish footballer
*1979 – Baron Davis, American basketball player
*1980 – Quentin Richardson, American basketball player
*1982 – Nellie McKay, British-American singer-songwriter, musician, and actress
* 1982 – Ty Dolla Sign, American singer, songwriter, and musician
*1983 – Hunter Pence, American baseball player
*1986 – Lorenzo Cain, American baseball player
*1987 – Steven De Vuyst, Belgian politician
* 1987 – John-Allison Weiss, American singer-songwriter
*1988 – Allison Williams, American actress and singer
*1989 – Josh Reynolds, Australian rugby league player
*1991 – Josh Gordon, American football player
*1992 – Jordan Silk, Australian cricketer
*1993 – Melvin Gordon, American football player
* 1993 – Darrun Hilliard, American basketball player
*1994 – Kahraba, Egyptian footballer
*2000 – Rasmus Dahlin, Swedish ice hockey player
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 548 – Lý Nam Đế, Vietnamese emperor (b. 503)
* 585 – Hermenegild, Visigothic prince and saint
* 799 – Paul the Deacon, Italian monk and historian (b. 720)
* 814 – Krum, khan of the Bulgarian Khanate
* 862 – Donald I, king of the Picts (b. 812)
* 989 – Bardas Phokas, Byzantine general
*1035 – Herbert I, Count of Maine
*1093 – Vsevolod I of Kiev (b. 1030)
*1113 – Ida of Lorraine, saint and noblewoman (b. c. 1040)
*1138 – Simon I, Duke of Lorraine (b. 1076)
*1213 – Guy of Thouars, regent of Brittany
*1275 – Eleanor of England (b. 1215)
*1367 – John Tiptoft, 2nd Baron Tibetot (b. 1313)
*1592 – Bartolomeo Ammannati, Italian architect and sculptor (b. 1511)
===1601–1900===
*1605 – Boris Godunov, Tsar of Russia (b. 1551)
*1612 – Sasaki Kojirō, Japanese samurai (b. 1585)
*1635 – Fakhr-al-Din II, Ottoman prince (b. 1572)
*1638 – Henri, Duke of Rohan (b. 1579)
*1641 – Richard Montagu, English bishop (b. 1577)
*1695 – Jean de La Fontaine, French author and poet (b. 1621)
*1716 – Arthur Herbert, 1st Earl of Torrington, English admiral and politician (b. 1648)
*1722 – Charles Leslie, Irish priest and theologian (b. 1650)
*1793 – Pierre Gaspard Chaumette, French botanist, lawyer, and politician (b. 1763)
*1794 – Nicolas Chamfort, French playwright and poet (b. 1741)
*1826 – Franz Danzi, German cellist, composer, and conductor (b. 1763)
*1853 – Leopold Gmelin, German chemist and academic (b. 1788)
* 1853 – James Iredell, Jr., American lawyer and politician, 23rd Governor of North Carolina (b. 1788)
*1855 – Henry De la Beche, English geologist and palaeontologist (b. 1796)
*1868 – Tewodros II of Ethiopia (b. 1818)
*1880 – Robert Fortune, Scottish botanist and author (b. 1813)
*1882 – Bruno Bauer, German historian and philosopher (b. 1809)
*1886 – John Humphrey Noyes, American religious leader, founded the Oneida Community (b. 1811)
*1890 – Samuel J. Randall, American captain, lawyer, and politician, 33rd Speaker of the United States House of Representatives (b. 1828)
===1901–present===
*1909 – Whitley Stokes, Anglo-Irish lawyer and scholar (b. 1830)
*1910 – William Quiller Orchardson, Scottish-English painter and educator (b. 1835)
*1911 – John McLane, Scottish-American politician, 50th Governor of New Hampshire (b. 1852)
* 1911 – George Washington Glick, American lawyer and politician, 9th Governor of Kansas (b. 1827)
*1912 – Takuboku Ishikawa, Japanese poet and author (b. 1886)
*1917 – Diamond Jim Brady, American businessman and philanthropist (b. 1856)
*1918 – Lavr Kornilov, Russian general (b. 1870)
*1927 – Georg Voigt, German politician, Mayor of Frankfurt (b. 1866)
*1936 – Konstantinos Demertzis, Greek politician 129th Prime Minister of Greece (b. 1876)
*1938 – Grey Owl, English-Canadian environmentalist and author (b. 1888)
*1941 – Annie Jump Cannon, American astronomer and academic (b. 1863)
* 1941 – William Twaits, Canadian soccer player (b. 1879)
*1942 – Henk Sneevliet, Dutch politician (b. 1883)
* 1942 – Anton Uesson, Estonian engineer and politician, 17th Mayor of Tallinn (b. 1879)
*1944 – Cécile Chaminade, French pianist and composer (b. 1857)
*1945 – Ernst Cassirer, Polish-American philosopher and academic (b. 1874)
*1954 – Samuel Jones, American high jumper (b. 1880)
* 1954 – Angus Lewis Macdonald, Canadian lawyer and politician, 12th Premier of Nova Scotia (b. 1890)
*1956 – Emil Nolde, Danish-German painter and educator (b. 1867)
*1959 – Eduard van Beinum, Dutch pianist, violinist, and conductor (b. 1901)
*1961 – John A. Bennett, American soldier (b. 1936)
*1962 – Culbert Olson, American lawyer and politician, 29th Governor of California (b. 1876)
*1964 – Kristian Krefting, Norwegian footballer and chemical engineer (b. 1891)
*1966 – Abdul Salam Arif, Iraqi colonel and politician, 2nd President of Iraq (b. 1921)
* 1966 – Carlo Carrà, Italian painter (b. 1881)
* 1966 – Georges Duhamel, French soldier and author (b. 1884)
*1967 – Nicole Berger, French actress (b. 1934)
*1969 – Ambrogio Gianotti, Italian partigiano and priest (b. 1901)
* 1969 – Alfred Karindi, Estonian pianist and composer (b. 1901)
*1971 – Michel Brière, Canadian ice hockey player (b. 1949)
* 1971 – Juhan Smuul, Estonian author, poet, and screenwriter (b. 1921)
*1975 – Larry Parks, American actor and singer (b. 1914)
* 1975 – François Tombalbaye, Chadian soldier, academic, and politician, 1st President of Chad (b. 1918)
*1978 – Jack Chambers, Canadian painter and director (b. 1931)
* 1978 – Funmilayo Ransome-Kuti, Nigerian educator and women&#x27;s rights activist (b. 1900)
*1980 – Markus Höttinger, Austrian racing driver (b. 1956)
*1983 – Gerry Hitchens, English footballer (b. 1934)
* 1983 – Theodore Stephanides, Greek physician, author, and poet (b. 1896)
*1984 – Ralph Kirkpatrick, American harpsichordist and musicologist (b. 1911)
*1988 – Jean Gascon, Canadian actor and director (b. 1920)
*1992 – Maurice Sauvé, Canadian economist and politician (b. 1923)
* 1992 – Feza Gürsey, Turkish mathematician and physicist (b. 1921)
* 1992 – Daniel Pollock, Australian actor (b. 1968)
*1993 – Wallace Stegner, American novelist, short story writer, and essayist (b. 1909)
*1996 – Leila Mackinlay, English author and educator (b. 1910)
*1997 – Bryant Bowles, American soldier and white supremacist, founded the National Association for the Advancement of White People (b. 1920)
* 1997 – Alan Cooley, Australian public servant (b. 1920)
* 1997 – Dorothy Frooks, American author and actress (b. 1896)
* 1997 – Voldemar Väli, Estonian wrestler (b. 1903) 
*1998 – Patrick de Gayardon, French skydiver and base jumper (b. 1960)
*1999 – Ortvin Sarapu, Estonian-New Zealand chess player and author (b. 1924)
* 1999 – Willi Stoph, German engineer and politician, 2nd Prime Minister of East Germany (b. 1914)
*2000 – Giorgio Bassani, Italian author and poet (b. 1916)
* 2000 – Frenchy Bordagaray, American baseball player and manager (b. 1910)
*2004 – Caron Keating, Northern Irish television host (b. 1962)
*2005 – Johnnie Johnson, American pianist and songwriter (b. 1924)
* 2005 – Phillip Pavia, American painter and sculptor (b. 1912)
*2006 – Muriel Spark, Scottish novelist, poet, and critic (b. 1918)
*2008 – John Archibald Wheeler, American physicist and academic (b. 1911)
*2012 – Cecil Chaudhry, Pakistani pilot, academic, and activist (b. 1941)
* 2012 – Shūichi Higurashi, Japanese illustrator (b. 1936)
*2013 – Stephen Dodgson, English composer and educator (b. 1924)
*2014 – Ernesto Laclau, Argentinian-Spanish philosopher and theorist (b. 1935)
* 2014 – Michael Ruppert, American journalist and author (b. 1951)
*2015 – Eduardo Galeano, Uruguayan journalist and author (b. 1940)
* 2015 – Günter Grass, German novelist, poet, playwright, and illustrator, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1927)
* 2015 – Herb Trimpe, American author and illustrator (b. 1939)
*2017 – Dan Rooney, American football executive and former United States Ambassador to Ireland (b. 1932)
*2022 – Michel Bouquet, French stage and film actor (b. 1925)
* 2022 – Gloria Parker, American musician and bandleader (b. 1921)
* 2024 – Faith Ringgold, American artist and author (b. 1930)
==Holidays and observances==
* Christian feast day:
** Ida of Louvain
** Margaret of Castello
* April 13 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
* Songkran
** Songkran (Thailand)
** Water-Sprinkling Festival
* Vaisakhi (between 1902 and 2011)

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on April 13</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19522" start="27" end="31" title="1111" label="1111"/>
<link wikidata="Q151707" start="34" end="41" title="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="53" end="71" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228" start="74" end="78" title="1204" label="1204"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="81" end="95" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750892" start="96" end="118" title="Sack of Constantinople" label="falls to the Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="126" end="140" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="165" end="181" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480" start="184" end="188" title="1455" label="1455"/>
<link wikidata="Q315921" start="191" end="215" title="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–1466)" label="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48719808" start="238" end="257" title="Battle for Kneiphof" label="Battle for Kneiphof"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771" start="276" end="280" title="1612" label="1612"/>
<link wikidata="Q193344" start="291" end="307" title="Miyamoto Musashi" label="Miyamoto Musashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q549737" start="316" end="329" title="Sasaki Kojirō" label="Sasaki Kojirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q909675" start="343" end="358" title="Ganryū-jima" label="Funajima island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776" start="361" end="365" title="1613" label="1613"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640499" start="368" end="381" title="Samuel Argall" label="Samuel Argall"/>
<link wikidata="Q193406" start="399" end="409" title="Pocahontas" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056649" start="413" end="435" title="Passapatanzy, Virginia" label="Passapatanzy, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q578878" start="535" end="545" title="Powhatan (Native American leader)" label="her father"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710" start="548" end="552" title="1699" label="1699"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="559" end="563" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004192" start="594" end="600" title="Khalsa" label="Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q312967" start="639" end="656" title="Guru Gobind Singh" label="Guru Gobind Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293261" start="699" end="718" title="Nanakshahi calendar" label="Nanakshahi calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575" start="721" end="725" title="1742" label="1742"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="728" end="750" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="758" end="766" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q207732" start="773" end="780" title="Messiah (Handel)" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="815" end="821" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709" start="833" end="837" title="1777" label="1777"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="840" end="866" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271228" start="917" end="938" title="Battle of Bound Brook" label="Battle of Bound Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="940" end="950" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572" start="953" end="957" title="1829" label="1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602689" start="964" end="994" title="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829" label="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316589" start="1001" end="1016" title="Roman Catholicism in the United Kingdom" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650" start="1084" end="1088" title="1849" label="1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q157040" start="1091" end="1104" title="Lajos Kossuth" label="Lajos Kossuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006312" start="1118" end="1155" title="Hungarian Declaration of Independence" label="Hungarian Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693" start="1203" end="1207" title="1861" label="1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1210" end="1228" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q737517" start="1253" end="1264" title="Fort Sumter" label="Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="1289" end="1293" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="1316" end="1339" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="1370" end="1374" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="1395" end="1421" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="1435" end="1439" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144758" start="1446" end="1461" title="Colfax massacre" label="Colfax massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108246" start="1509" end="1526" title="Colfax, Louisiana" label="Colfax, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="1606" end="1618" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="1641" end="1645" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073490" start="1652" end="1669" title="31 March incident" label="31 March Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="1703" end="1717" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdul Hamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="1720" end="1724" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="1727" end="1752" title="Jallianwala Bagh massacre" label="Jallianwala Bagh massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="1754" end="1773" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q560470" start="1806" end="1819" title="Reginald Dyer" label="Reginald Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="1898" end="1906" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="1949" end="1953" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q696256" start="1958" end="1976" title="Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact" label="pact of neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1989" end="1993" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="2016" end="2020" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2023" end="2035" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q734271" start="2054" end="2064" title="mass grave" label="mass grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="2076" end="2092" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2093" end="2099" title="mass execution" label="killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q134301" start="2124" end="2145" title="Katyn massacre" label="Katyń Forest Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="2198" end="2224" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2243" end="2255" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q326183" start="2299" end="2317" title="Jefferson Memorial" label="Jefferson Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="2390" end="2406" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="2422" end="2426" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2443" end="2449" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885006" start="2457" end="2461" title="Gardelegen massacre" label="kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q492374" start="2514" end="2524" title="Gardelegen" label="Gardelegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2558" end="2564" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="2569" end="2578" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q162546" start="2586" end="2600" title="Vienna Offensive" label="capture Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="2603" end="2607" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331605" start="2676" end="2693" title="Hadassah Hospital" label="Hadassah Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026801" start="2744" end="2757" title="Sheikh Jarrah" label="Sheikh Jarrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929123" start="2794" end="2826" title="Hadassah medical convoy massacre" label="Hadassah medical convoy massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="2830" end="2834" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="2837" end="2840" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="2850" end="2862" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="2876" end="2888" title="Brainwashing" label="mind-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q815614" start="2897" end="2912" title="Project MKUltra" label="Project MKUltra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="2915" end="2919" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q651136" start="2949" end="2960" title="Transit (satellite)" label="Transit 1-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="2985" end="3005" title="satellite navigation" label="satellite navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="3015" end="3019" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q917143" start="3029" end="3043" title="36th Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="3045" end="3059" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3078" end="3094" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="3110" end="3120" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q334735" start="3151" end="3170" title="Lilies of the Field (1963 film)" label="Lilies of the Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="3179" end="3183" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="3189" end="3195" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="3212" end="3221" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="3312" end="3345" title="Apollo command and service module" label="Apollo command and service module"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="3400" end="3404" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="3407" end="3411" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="3418" end="3440" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3466" end="3497" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="3571" end="3588" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="3603" end="3609" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3620" end="3631" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q715416" start="3637" end="3653" title="Battle of An Lộc" label="Battle of An Lộc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="3663" end="3667" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166560" start="3673" end="3679" title="Bus massacre" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="3687" end="3697" title="Kataeb Party" label="Phalangist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212884" start="3741" end="3786" title="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine" label="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="3821" end="3839" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="3842" end="3846" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="3853" end="3886" title="United States Treasury Department" label="United States Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189454" start="3904" end="3919" title="United States two-dollar bill" label="two-dollar bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747582" start="3925" end="3945" title="Federal Reserve Note" label="Federal Reserve Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3949" end="3965" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="4003" end="4029" title="United States Bicentennial" label="United States Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493470" start="4073" end="4085" title="Lapua Cartridge Factory explosion" label="an explosion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4093" end="4117" title="Lapua#Lapua State Cartridge Factory" label="Lapua ammunition factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="4174" end="4181" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="4184" end="4188" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q106679021" start="4255" end="4284" title="Mansouri massacre" label="fired rockets at an ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193904" start="4288" end="4296" title="Mansouri, Lebanon" label="Mansouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="4308" end="4312" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="4315" end="4326" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="4348" end="4352" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q280275" start="4366" end="4384" title="Masters Tournament" label="Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="4387" end="4391" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q117679982" start="4407" end="4420" title="Jack Teixeira" label="Jack Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467367" start="4456" end="4481" title="2022–2023 Pentagon document leaks" label="leaked Pentagon documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="4516" end="4520" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q125457538" start="4594" end="4609" title="2024 Bondi Junction stabbings" label="a mass stabbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988648" start="4613" end="4637" title="Westfield Bondi Junction" label="Westfield Bondi Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="4657" end="4663" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411" start="4704" end="4708" title="1229" label="1229"/>
<link wikidata="Q61467" start="4711" end="4736" title="Louis II, Duke of Bavaria" label="Louis II, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094" start="4748" end="4752" title="1350" label="1350"/>
<link wikidata="Q466252" start="4755" end="4789" title="Margaret III, Countess of Flanders" label="Margaret III, Countess of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154" start="4801" end="4805" title="1506" label="1506"/>
<link wikidata="Q454814" start="4808" end="4819" title="Peter Faber" label="Peter Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="4866" end="4882" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6278" start="4894" end="4898" title="1519" label="1519"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="4901" end="4926" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="4951" end="4969" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659" start="4981" end="4985" title="1570" label="1570"/>
<link wikidata="Q13898" start="4988" end="4998" title="Guy Fawkes" label="Guy Fawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="5031" end="5045" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678" start="5067" end="5071" title="1573" label="1573"/>
<link wikidata="Q233496" start="5074" end="5103" title="Christina of Holstein-Gottorp" label="Christina of Holstein-Gottorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772" start="5115" end="5119" title="1593" label="1593"/>
<link wikidata="Q336091" start="5122" end="5161" title="Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford" label="Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="5195" end="5221" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801" start="5249" end="5253" title="1618" label="1618"/>
<link wikidata="Q733246" start="5256" end="5288" title="Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy" label="Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885" start="5315" end="5319" title="1636" label="1636"/>
<link wikidata="Q741104" start="5322" end="5340" title="Hendrik van Rheede" label="Hendrik van Rheede"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941" start="5368" end="5372" title="1648" label="1648"/>
<link wikidata="Q235098" start="5375" end="5413" title="Jeanne Marie Bouvier de la Motte Guyon" label="Jeanne Marie Bouvier de la Motte Guyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873" start="5440" end="5444" title="1713" label="1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305575" start="5447" end="5462" title="Pierre Jélyotte" label="Pierre Jélyotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952" start="5488" end="5492" title="1729" label="1729"/>
<link wikidata="Q712930" start="5495" end="5507" title="Thomas Percy (bishop of Dromore)" label="Thomas Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966" start="5542" end="5546" title="1732" label="1732"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="5549" end="5576" title="Frederick North, Lord North" label="Frederick North, Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="5598" end="5629" title="Prime Minister of Great Britain" label="Prime Minister of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984" start="5641" end="5645" title="1735" label="1735"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076712" start="5648" end="5657" title="Isaac Low" label="Isaac Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069535" start="5705" end="5733" title="New York Chamber of Commerce" label="New York Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580" start="5745" end="5749" title="1743" label="1743"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="5752" end="5768" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="5806" end="5836" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596" start="5848" end="5852" title="1747" label="1747"/>
<link wikidata="Q311637" start="5855" end="5889" title="Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659" start="5901" end="5905" title="1764" label="1764"/>
<link wikidata="Q347652" start="5908" end="5936" title="Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr" label="Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215099" start="5969" end="5991" title="Minister of Defence (France)" label="French Minister of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679" start="6003" end="6007" title="1769" label="1769"/>
<link wikidata="Q312096" start="6010" end="6025" title="Thomas Lawrence" label="Thomas Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686" start="6067" end="6071" title="1771" label="1771"/>
<link wikidata="Q217157" start="6074" end="6092" title="Richard Trevithick" label="Richard Trevithick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716" start="6143" end="6147" title="1780" label="1780"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642683" start="6150" end="6168" title="Alexander Mitchell (engineer)" label="Alexander Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439086" start="6199" end="6220" title="Screw-pile lighthouse" label="Screw-pile lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752" start="6232" end="6236" title="1784" label="1784"/>
<link wikidata="Q62191" start="6239" end="6265" title="Friedrich Graf von Wrangel" label="Friedrich Graf von Wrangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763" start="6301" end="6305" title="1787" label="1787"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339917" start="6308" end="6322" title="John Robertson (congressman)" label="John Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811" start="6366" end="6370" title="1794" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q964160" start="6373" end="6393" title="Jean Pierre Flourens" label="Jean Pierre Flourens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883" start="6439" end="6443" title="1802" label="1802"/>
<link wikidata="Q93568" start="6446" end="6463" title="Leopold Fitzinger" label="Leopold Fitzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914" start="6513" end="6517" title="1808" label="1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q273314" start="6520" end="6534" title="Antonio Meucci" label="Antonio Meucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922" start="6573" end="6577" title="1810" label="1810"/>
<link wikidata="Q951933" start="6580" end="6594" title="Félicien David" label="Félicien David"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994" start="6623" end="6627" title="1824" label="1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004248" start="6630" end="6647" title="William Alexander (bishop)" label="William Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6997" start="6699" end="6703" title="1825" label="1825"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119451" start="6706" end="6730" title="Thomas D&amp;#x27;Arcy McGee" label="Thomas D&amp;#x27;Arcy McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570" start="6784" end="6788" title="1828" label="1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q225863" start="6791" end="6807" title="Josephine Butler" label="Josephine Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="6817" end="6825" title="Feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323572" start="6830" end="6843" title="social reform" label="social reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706574" start="6865" end="6881" title="Joseph Lightfoot" label="Joseph Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="6924" end="6928" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394572" start="6931" end="6944" title="Juan Montalvo" label="Juan Montalvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622" start="6988" end="6992" title="1841" label="1841"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289500" start="6995" end="7015" title="Louis-Ernest Barrias" label="Louis-Ernest Barrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653" start="7057" end="7061" title="1850" label="1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799671" start="7064" end="7091" title="Arthur Matthew Weld Downing" label="Arthur Matthew Weld Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656" start="7121" end="7125" title="1851" label="1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356448" start="7128" end="7139" title="Robert Abbe" label="Robert Abbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q548776" start="7193" end="7211" title="William Quan Judge" label="William Quan Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="7256" end="7260" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142312" start="7263" end="7287" title="Frank Winfield Woolworth" label="Frank Winfield Woolworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q642212" start="7323" end="7346" title="F. W. Woolworth Company" label="F. W. Woolworth Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670" start="7358" end="7362" title="1854" label="1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698253" start="7365" end="7381" title="Lucy Craft Laney" label="Lucy Craft Laney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="7472" end="7476" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q158840" start="7479" end="7490" title="James Ensor" label="James Ensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="7543" end="7556" title="expressionism" label="expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="7561" end="7571" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712" start="7583" end="7587" title="1866" label="1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q313574" start="7590" end="7603" title="Butch Cassidy" label="Butch Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753" start="7634" end="7638" title="1872" label="1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386815" start="7641" end="7653" title="John Cameron (footballer, born 1872)" label="John Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q84888" start="7720" end="7739" title="Alexander Roda Roda" label="Alexander Roda Roda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="7792" end="7796" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332779" start="7799" end="7812" title="John W. Davis" label="John W. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298067" start="7851" end="7882" title="United States Solicitor General" label="United States Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="7894" end="7898" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133926" start="7901" end="7917" title="Ray Lyman Wilbur" label="Ray Lyman Wilbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="7970" end="8009" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="United States Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783" start="8021" end="8025" title="1879" label="1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342042" start="8028" end="8040" title="Edward Bruce (New Deal)" label="Edward Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819316" start="8089" end="8108" title="Oswald Bruce Cooper" label="Oswald Bruce Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="8194" end="8198" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q115450193" start="8201" end="8217" title="Charles Christie" label="Charles Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110670" start="8265" end="8286" title="Christie Film Company" label="Christie Film Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="8298" end="8302" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917695" start="8305" end="8315" title="Vean Gregg" label="Vean Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q887260" start="8361" end="8371" title="Juhan Kukk" label="Juhan Kukk"/>
<link wikidata="Q493018" start="8394" end="8418" title="Head of State of Estonia" label="Head of State of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151523" start="8438" end="8451" title="György Lukács" label="György Lukács"/>
<link wikidata="Q951705" start="8505" end="8529" title="Pieter Sjoerds Gerbrandy" label="Pieter Sjoerds Gerbrandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826" start="8559" end="8563" title="1887" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585770" start="8566" end="8582" title="Gordon S. Fahrni" label="Gordon S. Fahrni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="8625" end="8629" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269275" start="8632" end="8647" title="Herbert Yardley" label="Herbert Yardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="8693" end="8697" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q887724" start="8700" end="8712" title="Frank Murphy" label="Frank Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="8751" end="8781" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207929" start="8801" end="8816" title="Dadasaheb Torne" label="Dadasaheb Torne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="8858" end="8862" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792922" start="8865" end="8880" title="Maurice Buckley" label="Maurice Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="8903" end="8917" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q453665" start="8947" end="8959" title="Nella Larsen" label="Nella Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q70898" start="9033" end="9046" title="Robert Scholl" label="Robert Scholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="9092" end="9096" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="9099" end="9129" title="Arthur Harris" label="Sir Arthur Harris, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q342591" start="9170" end="9188" title="Robert Watson-Watt" label="Robert Watson-Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="9218" end="9223" title="Radar" label="Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="9235" end="9239" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q23369" start="9242" end="9255" title="Arthur Fadden" label="Arthur Fadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="9300" end="9327" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="9340" end="9344" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q21536497" start="9347" end="9358" title="May Brodney" label="May Brodney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="9398" end="9402" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q10466053" start="9405" end="9417" title="Fred Barnett (English footballer)" label="Fred Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="9449" end="9453" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q66099" start="9456" end="9467" title="Werner Voss" label="Werner Voss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="9508" end="9512" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q922223" start="9515" end="9534" title="Alfred Mosher Butts" label="Alfred Mosher Butts"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="9582" end="9590" title="Scrabble" label="Scrabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q558701" start="9610" end="9623" title="Harold Osborn" label="Harold Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="9672" end="9676" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563373" start="9679" end="9690" title="Sorcha Boru" label="Sorcha Boru"/>
<link wikidata="Q679299" start="9748" end="9763" title="Pierre Molinier" label="Pierre Molinier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="9828" end="9832" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="9835" end="9848" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636872" start="9907" end="9916" title="Alan Watt (diplomat)" label="Alan Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870057" start="9958" end="9988" title="List of Australian Ambassadors to Japan" label="Australian Ambassador to Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="10000" end="10004" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q557930" start="10007" end="10029" title="Philippe de Rothschild" label="Philippe de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="10038" end="10048" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760787" start="10101" end="10117" title="Marguerite Henry" label="Marguerite Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="10146" end="10150" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239137" start="10153" end="10167" title="David Robinson (philanthropist)" label="David Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="10219" end="10223" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q46827220" start="10226" end="10239" title="Rae Johnstone" label="Rae Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="10270" end="10274" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="10277" end="10291" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="10331" end="10342" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q711163" start="10371" end="10382" title="Bud Freeman" label="Bud Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="10442" end="10446" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q887520" start="10449" end="10463" title="Harold Stassen" label="Harold Stassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589682" start="10502" end="10523" title="Governor of Minnesota" label="Governor of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="10535" end="10539" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q259364" start="10542" end="10554" title="Eudora Welty" label="Eudora Welty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="10608" end="10612" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502622" start="10615" end="10625" title="Ico Hitrec" label="Ico Hitrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166874" start="10678" end="10697" title="Jean-Louis Lévesque" label="Jean-Louis Lévesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341007" start="10758" end="10771" title="Nino Sanzogno" label="Nino Sanzogno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="10815" end="10819" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173084" start="10822" end="10836" title="Dave Albritton" label="Dave Albritton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394084" start="10888" end="10900" title="Kermit Tyler" label="Kermit Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="10943" end="10947" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q982848" start="10950" end="10966" title="Orhan Veli Kanık" label="Orhan Veli Kanık"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="11003" end="11007" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188553" start="11010" end="11024" title="Phyllis Fraser" label="Phyllis Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880491" start="11088" end="11102" title="Beginner Books" label="Beginner Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="11114" end="11118" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348168" start="11121" end="11144" title="Robert Orville Anderson" label="Robert Orville Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q304769" start="11176" end="11202" title="ARCO" label="Atlantic Richfield Oil Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q545307" start="11222" end="11235" title="Bill Clements" label="Bill Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297543" start="11286" end="11327" title="United States Deputy Secretary of Defense" label="United States Deputy Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="11339" end="11343" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440068" start="11346" end="11360" title="Roland Gaucher" label="Roland Gaucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q325427" start="11414" end="11425" title="Howard Keel" label="Howard Keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q461980" start="11472" end="11498" title="Madalyn Murray O&amp;#x27;Hair" label="Madalyn Murray O&amp;#x27;Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q463426" start="11527" end="11544" title="American Atheists" label="American Atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="11556" end="11560" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q714310" start="11563" end="11576" title="Roberto Calvi" label="Roberto Calvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q521696" start="11612" end="11627" title="Claude Cheysson" label="Claude Cheysson"/>
<link wikidata="Q789848" start="11663" end="11697" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development (France)" label="French Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q381661" start="11717" end="11730" title="Liam Cosgrave" label="Liam Cosgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="11765" end="11785" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990238" start="11805" end="11823" title="Theodore L. Thomas" label="Theodore L. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888586" start="11834" end="11851" title="chemical engineer" label="chemical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144892" start="11853" end="11868" title="Patent attorney" label="Patent attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="11891" end="11895" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600007" start="11898" end="11908" title="Heinz Baas" label="Heinz Baas"/>
<link wikidata="Q725344" start="11959" end="11970" title="John Braine" label="John Braine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186525" start="12020" end="12034" title="Julius Nyerere" label="Julius Nyerere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241291" start="12074" end="12095" title="President of Tanzania" label="President of Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q544537" start="12115" end="12131" title="Valve Pormeister" label="Valve Pormeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="12163" end="12167" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q464367" start="12170" end="12179" title="Don Adams" label="Don Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q278696" start="12228" end="12240" title="A. H. Halsey" label="A. H. Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="12286" end="12290" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516987" start="12293" end="12308" title="John T. Biggers" label="John T. Biggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107336" start="12346" end="12359" title="Jack T. Chick" label="Jack T. Chick"/>
<link wikidata="Q48765" start="12424" end="12437" title="Stanley Donen" label="Stanley Donen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="12491" end="12495" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566368" start="12498" end="12511" title="Ellie Lambeti" label="Ellie Lambeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q335796" start="12546" end="12594" title="John Spencer-Churchill, 11th Duke of Marlborough" label="John Spencer-Churchill, 11th Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="12627" end="12631" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368373" start="12634" end="12651" title="Rosemary Haughton" label="Rosemary Haughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q965584" start="12706" end="12719" title="Maurice Ronet" label="Maurice Ronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="12758" end="12762" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894842" start="12765" end="12775" title="Alan Clark" label="Alan Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q108574731" start="12811" end="12838" title="Minister of State for Trade" label="Minister of State for Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146467" start="12858" end="12873" title="Gianni Marzotto" label="Gianni Marzotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="12924" end="12928" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293104" start="12931" end="12945" title="Marilynn Smith" label="Marilynn Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="12974" end="12978" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q442572" start="12981" end="12996" title="Anita Cerquetti" label="Anita Cerquetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387339" start="13033" end="13046" title="Robert Enrico" label="Robert Enrico"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="13100" end="13110" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183242" start="13169" end="13178" title="Jon Stone" label="Jon Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="13237" end="13241" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q443777" start="13244" end="13260" title="Orlando Letelier" label="Orlando Letelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294482" start="13305" end="13341" title="Ministry of National Defense (Chile)" label="Chilean Minister of National Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="13353" end="13357" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701155" start="13360" end="13372" title="John Muckler" label="John Muckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="13432" end="13436" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141820" start="13439" end="13447" title="Col Joye" label="Col Joye"/>
<link wikidata="Q309980" start="13501" end="13511" title="Edward Fox (actor)" label="Edward Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q503635" start="13536" end="13550" title="Lanford Wilson" label="Lanford Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121424" start="13588" end="13612" title="Circle Repertory Company" label="Circle Repertory Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="13624" end="13628" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q461110" start="13631" end="13645" title="Klaus Lehnertz" label="Klaus Lehnertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="13668" end="13672" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="13675" end="13688" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="13717" end="13728" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q447892" start="13757" end="13769" title="Paul Sorvino" label="Paul Sorvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="13808" end="13812" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q171734" start="13815" end="13828" title="Mike Beuttler" label="Mike Beuttler"/>
<link wikidata="Q42037" start="13880" end="13898" title="J. M. G. Le Clézio" label="J. M. G. Le Clézio"/>
<link wikidata="Q309197" start="13900" end="13906" title="Bretons" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273828" start="13914" end="13923" title="Mauritian" label="Mauritian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="13945" end="13956" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q507940" start="13975" end="13989" title="Vladimir Cosma" label="Vladimir Cosma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196894" start="14041" end="14050" title="Jim McNab" label="Jim McNab"/>
<link wikidata="Q173246" start="14091" end="14101" title="Max Mosley" label="Max Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q173177" start="14150" end="14167" title="March Engineering" label="March Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="14193" end="14196" title="FIA" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28037390" start="14216" end="14234" title="Ruby Puryear Hearn" label="Ruby Puryear Hearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="14267" end="14271" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q295684" start="14274" end="14294" title="Michael Stuart Brown" label="Michael Stuart Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="14330" end="14341" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q707328" start="14360" end="14376" title="Jean-Marc Reiser" label="Jean-Marc Reiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="14419" end="14423" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q367084" start="14426" end="14436" title="Bill Conti" label="Bill Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="14471" end="14475" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830529" start="14478" end="14488" title="Alan Jones (talkback host)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q352975" start="14537" end="14547" title="Tim Krabbé" label="Tim Krabbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="14578" end="14582" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q460675" start="14585" end="14596" title="Susan Davis (politician)" label="Susan Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="14645" end="14649" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491691" start="14652" end="14661" title="Judy Nunn" label="Judy Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="14694" end="14698" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q313260" start="14701" end="14709" title="Al Green" label="Al Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="14761" end="14765" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281906" start="14768" end="14782" title="Rae Armantrout" label="Rae Armantrout"/>
<link wikidata="Q254385" start="14820" end="14832" title="Mike Chapman" label="Mike Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005479" start="14886" end="14906" title="Jean-Jacques Laffont" label="Jean-Jacques Laffont"/>
<link wikidata="Q729115" start="14957" end="14976" title="Thanos Mikroutsikos" label="Thanos Mikroutsikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="15019" end="15023" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961085" start="15026" end="15036" title="Nam Hae-il" label="Nam Hae-il"/>
<link wikidata="Q384991" start="15068" end="15080" title="Drago Jančar" label="Drago Jančar"/>
<link wikidata="Q541833" start="15123" end="15142" title="Mikhail Shufutinsky" label="Mikhail Shufutinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="15192" end="15196" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521727" start="15199" end="15207" title="Len Cook" label="Len Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q300334" start="15269" end="15280" title="Frank Doran (British politician)" label="Frank Doran"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="15332" end="15352" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="15424" end="15428" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q220698" start="15431" end="15442" title="Ron Perlman" label="Ron Perlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819796" start="15469" end="15485" title="Tommy Raudonikis" label="Tommy Raudonikis"/>
<link wikidata="Q152542" start="15547" end="15561" title="William Sadler (actor)" label="William Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="15579" end="15583" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532137" start="15586" end="15604" title="Leszek Borysiewicz" label="Leszek Borysiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q379548" start="15647" end="15659" title="Peabo Bryson" label="Peabo Bryson"/>
<link wikidata="Q358427" start="15686" end="15699" title="Peter Davison" label="Peter Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q553264" start="15724" end="15736" title="Max Weinberg" label="Max Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="15772" end="15776" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094127" start="15779" end="15797" title="Gabrielle Gourdeau" label="Gabrielle Gourdeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275600" start="15834" end="15852" title="Jonjo O&amp;#x27;Neill (jockey)" label="Jonjo O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="15880" end="15884" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912197" start="15887" end="15897" title="Steve Camp" label="Steve Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q630274" start="15949" end="15966" title="Muwenda Mutebi II of Buganda" label="Muwenda Mutebi II"/>
<link wikidata="Q473748" start="15984" end="15999" title="Buganda" label="Buganda Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="16001" end="16005" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448606" start="16008" end="16013" title="César (footballer, born 1956)" label="César"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="16047" end="16051" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248695" start="16054" end="16069" title="John Middendorf" label="John Middendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="16108" end="16112" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q44464" start="16115" end="16126" title="Rudi Völler" label="Rudi Völler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="16159" end="16163" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="16166" end="16180" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="16215" end="16219" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178161" start="16222" end="16236" title="Davis Love III" label="Davis Love III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="16272" end="16276" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145969" start="16279" end="16296" title="Patricio Pouchulu" label="Patricio Pouchulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="16334" end="16338" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q385436" start="16341" end="16352" title="Dana Barros" label="Dana Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308179" start="16400" end="16413" title="Michael Eisen" label="Michael Eisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q270758" start="16456" end="16466" title="Olga Tañón" label="Olga Tañón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="16500" end="16504" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q303751" start="16507" end="16521" title="Ricky Schroder" label="Ricky Schroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="16539" end="16543" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442443" start="16546" end="16561" title="Franck Esposito" label="Franck Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216292" start="16587" end="16599" title="Danie Mellor" label="Danie Mellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664263" start="16642" end="16651" title="Bo Outlaw" label="Bo Outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="16681" end="16685" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="16688" end="16699" title="Aaron Lewis (musician)" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="16744" end="16748" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139685" start="16751" end="16766" title="Bokeem Woodbine" label="Bokeem Woodbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="16784" end="16788" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q60268" start="16791" end="16799" title="Lou Bega" label="Lou Bega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="16816" end="16820" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q317539" start="16823" end="16839" title="Jonathan Brandis" label="Jonathan Brandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213225" start="16875" end="16887" title="Dan Campbell" label="Dan Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q981651" start="16933" end="16947" title="Glenn Howerton" label="Glenn Howerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="16965" end="16969" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q11716283" start="16972" end="16986" title="Margus Tsahkna" label="Margus Tsahkna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="17020" end="17024" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q17158" start="17027" end="17039" title="Carles Puyol" label="Carles Puyol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="17061" end="17065" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q313486" start="17068" end="17079" title="Baron Davis" label="Baron Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="17109" end="17113" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q504336" start="17116" end="17134" title="Quentin Richardson" label="Quentin Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="17164" end="17168" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q454975" start="17171" end="17183" title="Nellie McKay" label="Nellie McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859785" start="17252" end="17265" title="Ty Dolla Sign" label="Ty Dolla Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="17310" end="17314" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421765" start="17317" end="17329" title="Hunter Pence" label="Hunter Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="17357" end="17361" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259459" start="17364" end="17376" title="Lorenzo Cain" label="Lorenzo Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="17404" end="17408" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q64210679" start="17411" end="17426" title="Steven De Vuyst" label="Steven De Vuyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732847" start="17456" end="17474" title="John-Allison Weiss" label="John-Allison Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="17504" end="17508" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455554" start="17511" end="17527" title="Allison Williams (actress)" label="Allison Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="17558" end="17562" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289290" start="17565" end="17578" title="Josh Reynolds (rugby league)" label="Josh Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="17612" end="17616" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204" start="17619" end="17630" title="Josh Gordon" label="Josh Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="17658" end="17662" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225508" start="17665" end="17676" title="Jordan Silk" label="Jordan Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="17700" end="17704" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950297" start="17707" end="17720" title="Melvin Gordon" label="Melvin Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19281949" start="17756" end="17771" title="Darrun Hilliard" label="Darrun Hilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="17801" end="17805" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q10557534" start="17808" end="17815" title="Kahraba (footballer)" label="Kahraba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="17838" end="17842" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q27839454" start="17845" end="17858" title="Rasmus Dahlin" label="Rasmus Dahlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30904" start="17914" end="17917" title="548" label="548"/>
<link wikidata="Q708341" start="17920" end="17929" title="Lý Nam Đế" label="Lý Nam Đế"/>
<link wikidata="Q32201" start="17961" end="17964" title="585" label="585"/>
<link wikidata="Q346578" start="17967" end="17978" title="Hermenegild" label="Hermenegild"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="17980" end="17990" title="Visigoths" label="Visigothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33488" start="18010" end="18013" title="799" label="799"/>
<link wikidata="Q160424" start="18016" end="18031" title="Paul the Deacon" label="Paul the Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23447" start="18071" end="18074" title="814" label="814"/>
<link wikidata="Q192104" start="18077" end="18081" title="Krum" label="Krum"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="18095" end="18112" title="Bulgarian Khanate" label="Bulgarian Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993" start="18115" end="18118" title="862" label="862"/>
<link wikidata="Q312589" start="18121" end="18129" title="Domnall mac Ailpín" label="Donald I"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="18143" end="18148" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702" start="18160" end="18163" title="989" label="989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347035" start="18166" end="18179" title="Bardas Phokas the Younger" label="Bardas Phokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325" start="18200" end="18204" title="1035" label="1035"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608524" start="18207" end="18232" title="Herbert I, Count of Maine" label="Herbert I, Count of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19474" start="18234" end="18238" title="1093" label="1093"/>
<link wikidata="Q318434" start="18241" end="18259" title="Vsevolod I of Kiev" label="Vsevolod I of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q19531" start="18271" end="18275" title="1113" label="1113"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072769" start="18278" end="18293" title="Ida of Lorraine" label="Ida of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19342" start="18323" end="18327" title="1040" label="1040"/>
<link wikidata="Q19606" start="18330" end="18334" title="1138" label="1138"/>
<link wikidata="Q252024" start="18337" end="18362" title="Simon I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261" start="18374" end="18378" title="1213" label="1213"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335873" start="18381" end="18395" title="Guy of Thouars" label="Guy of Thouars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="18417" end="18421" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q271382" start="18424" end="18442" title="Eleanor of Leicester" label="Eleanor of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202" start="18454" end="18458" title="1367" label="1367"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260912" start="18461" end="18492" title="John Tiptoft, 2nd Baron Tibetot" label="John Tiptoft, 2nd Baron Tibetot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769" start="18504" end="18508" title="1592" label="1592"/>
<link wikidata="Q312366" start="18511" end="18531" title="Bartolomeo Ammannati" label="Bartolomeo Ammannati"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741" start="18591" end="18595" title="1605" label="1605"/>
<link wikidata="Q170172" start="18598" end="18611" title="Boris Godunov" label="Boris Godunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370489" start="18613" end="18627" title="Tsar of Russia" label="Tsar of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771" start="18639" end="18643" title="1612" label="1612"/>
<link wikidata="Q549737" start="18646" end="18659" title="Sasaki Kojirō" label="Sasaki Kojirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879" start="18689" end="18693" title="1635" label="1635"/>
<link wikidata="Q579354" start="18696" end="18711" title="Fakhr-al-Din II" label="Fakhr-al-Din II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6893" start="18739" end="18743" title="1638" label="1638"/>
<link wikidata="Q701048" start="18746" end="18766" title="Henri, Duke of Rohan" label="Henri, Duke of Rohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907" start="18778" end="18782" title="1641" label="1641"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327864" start="18785" end="18800" title="Richard Montagu" label="Richard Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696" start="18828" end="18832" title="1695" label="1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q49496" start="18835" end="18854" title="Jean de La Fontaine" label="Jean de La Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6892" start="18890" end="18894" title="1716" label="1716"/>
<link wikidata="Q336660" start="18897" end="18935" title="Arthur Herbert, 1st Earl of Torrington" label="Arthur Herbert, 1st Earl of Torrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918" start="18979" end="18983" title="1722" label="1722"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080208" start="18986" end="19000" title="Charles Leslie (nonjuror)" label="Charles Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807" start="19041" end="19045" title="1793" label="1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q541643" start="19048" end="19072" title="Pierre Gaspard Chaumette" label="Pierre Gaspard Chaumette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811" start="19125" end="19129" title="1794" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q347891" start="19132" end="19148" title="Nicolas Chamfort" label="Nicolas Chamfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004" start="19188" end="19192" title="1826" label="1826"/>
<link wikidata="Q311409" start="19195" end="19206" title="Franz Danzi" label="Franz Danzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7666" start="19259" end="19263" title="1853" label="1853"/>
<link wikidata="Q60639" start="19266" end="19280" title="Leopold Gmelin" label="Leopold Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q883217" start="19329" end="19347" title="James Iredell, Jr." label="James Iredell, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q16202700" start="19386" end="19412" title="Governor of North Carolina" label="Governor of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673" start="19424" end="19428" title="1855" label="1855"/>
<link wikidata="Q302176" start="19431" end="19448" title="Henry De la Beche" label="Henry De la Beche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717" start="19499" end="19503" title="1868" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q262589" start="19506" end="19517" title="Tewodros II" label="Tewodros II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="19541" end="19545" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q200666" start="19548" end="19562" title="Robert Fortune" label="Robert Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="19604" end="19608" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q76878" start="19611" end="19622" title="Bruno Bauer" label="Bruno Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822" start="19668" end="19672" title="1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q544632" start="19675" end="19694" title="John Humphrey Noyes" label="John Humphrey Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896863" start="19735" end="19751" title="Oneida Community" label="Oneida Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="19763" end="19767" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q942678" start="19770" end="19787" title="Samuel J. Randall" label="Samuel J. Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="19836" end="19889" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="19920" end="19924" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279134" start="19927" end="19941" title="Whitley Stokes (Celtic scholar)" label="Whitley Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="19985" end="19989" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017160" start="19992" end="20018" title="William Quiller Orchardson" label="William Quiller Orchardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="20069" end="20073" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q119303" start="20076" end="20087" title="John McLane" label="John McLane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589687" start="20124" end="20149" title="Governor of New Hampshire" label="Governor of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q885924" start="20169" end="20192" title="George Washington Glick" label="George Washington Glick"/>
<link wikidata="Q878628" start="20230" end="20248" title="Governor of Kansas" label="Governor of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="20260" end="20264" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q467747" start="20267" end="20284" title="Takuboku Ishikawa" label="Takuboku Ishikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="20322" end="20326" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680077" start="20329" end="20346" title="Diamond Jim Brady" label="Diamond Jim Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="20399" end="20403" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q276193" start="20406" end="20419" title="Lavr Kornilov" label="Lavr Kornilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="20448" end="20452" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q99842" start="20455" end="20466" title="Georg Voigt (politician)" label="Georg Voigt"/>
<link wikidata="Q316441" start="20487" end="20505" title="List of mayors of Frankfurt" label="Mayor of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="20517" end="20521" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q708377" start="20524" end="20546" title="Konstantinos Demertzis" label="Konstantinos Demertzis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377230" start="20571" end="20595" title="Prime Minister of Greece" label="Prime Minister of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="20607" end="20611" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377706" start="20614" end="20622" title="Grey Owl" label="Grey Owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="20680" end="20684" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q230650" start="20687" end="20704" title="Annie Jump Cannon" label="Annie Jump Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4464780" start="20758" end="20772" title="William Twaits (soccer)" label="William Twaits"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="20808" end="20812" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q663465" start="20815" end="20829" title="Henk Sneevliet" label="Henk Sneevliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776043" start="20867" end="20879" title="Anton Uesson" label="Anton Uesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q33124296" start="20920" end="20936" title="List of mayors of Tallinn" label="Mayor of Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="20948" end="20952" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q236438" start="20955" end="20971" title="Cécile Chaminade" label="Cécile Chaminade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="21012" end="21016" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q57188" start="21019" end="21033" title="Ernst Cassirer" label="Ernst Cassirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="21087" end="21091" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q462912" start="21094" end="21106" title="Samuel Jones (athlete)" label="Samuel Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849816" start="21148" end="21169" title="Angus Lewis Macdonald" label="Angus Lewis Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240360" start="21208" end="21230" title="Premier of Nova Scotia" label="Premier of Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="21242" end="21246" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q152788" start="21249" end="21259" title="Emil Nolde" label="Emil Nolde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="21307" end="21311" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q508916" start="21314" end="21331" title="Eduard van Beinum" label="Eduard van Beinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="21384" end="21388" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q361271" start="21391" end="21406" title="John A. Bennett" label="John A. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="21436" end="21440" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q880802" start="21443" end="21456" title="Culbert Olson" label="Culbert Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="21495" end="21517" title="Governor of California" label="Governor of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="21529" end="21533" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435162" start="21536" end="21553" title="Kristian Krefting" label="Kristian Krefting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="21609" end="21613" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q307494" start="21616" end="21632" title="Abdul Salam Arif" label="Abdul Salam Arif"/>
<link wikidata="Q889817" start="21668" end="21685" title="President of Iraq" label="President of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q168496" start="21705" end="21716" title="Carlo Carrà" label="Carlo Carrà"/>
<link wikidata="Q20733" start="21753" end="21768" title="Georges Duhamel" label="Georges Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="21807" end="21811" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q461473" start="21814" end="21827" title="Nicole Berger" label="Nicole Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="21855" end="21859" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613834" start="21862" end="21879" title="Ambrogio Gianotti" label="Ambrogio Gianotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470208" start="21930" end="21944" title="Alfred Karindi" label="Alfred Karindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="21987" end="21991" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q126433" start="21994" end="22007" title="Michel Brière" label="Michel Brière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711542" start="22055" end="22066" title="Juhan Smuul" label="Juhan Smuul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="22119" end="22123" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q577680" start="22126" end="22137" title="Larry Parks" label="Larry Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q297812" start="22184" end="22203" title="François Tombalbaye" label="François Tombalbaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q865070" start="22252" end="22269" title="President of Chad" label="President of Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="22281" end="22285" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q552981" start="22288" end="22301" title="Jack Chambers (artist)" label="Jack Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q226122" start="22352" end="22374" title="Funmilayo Ransome-Kuti" label="Funmilayo Ransome-Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="22438" end="22442" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q87165" start="22445" end="22461" title="Markus Höttinger" label="Markus Höttinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="22497" end="22501" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q977844" start="22504" end="22518" title="Gerry Hitchens" label="Gerry Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739046" start="22558" end="22578" title="Theodore Stephanides" label="Theodore Stephanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="22625" end="22629" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q597101" start="22632" end="22649" title="Ralph Kirkpatrick" label="Ralph Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="22703" end="22707" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172235" start="22710" end="22721" title="Jean Gascon" label="Jean Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="22762" end="22766" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911426" start="22769" end="22782" title="Maurice Sauvé" label="Maurice Sauvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136035" start="22837" end="22848" title="Feza Gürsey" label="Feza Gürsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162158" start="22905" end="22919" title="Daniel Pollock" label="Daniel Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="22949" end="22953" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q203460" start="22956" end="22971" title="Wallace Stegner" label="Wallace Stegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="23036" end="23040" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519891" start="23043" end="23058" title="Leila Mackinlay" label="Leila Mackinlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="23099" end="23103" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980551" start="23106" end="23119" title="Bryant Bowles" label="Bryant Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q108822168" start="23173" end="23229" title="National Association for the Advancement of White People (1953–1955)" label="National Association for the Advancement of White People"/>
<link wikidata="Q16750326" start="23249" end="23260" title="Alan Cooley" label="Alan Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298419" start="23307" end="23321" title="Dorothy Frooks" label="Dorothy Frooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168860" start="23370" end="23383" title="Voldemar Väli" label="Voldemar Väli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="23415" end="23419" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949651" start="23422" end="23441" title="Patrick de Gayardon" label="Patrick de Gayardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="23486" end="23490" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q249824" start="23493" end="23506" title="Ortvin Sarapu" label="Ortvin Sarapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610" start="23572" end="23583" title="Willi Stoph" label="Willi Stoph"/>
<link wikidata="Q709293" start="23621" end="23651" title="Leadership of East Germany" label="Prime Minister of East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="23663" end="23667" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q318309" start="23670" end="23685" title="Giorgio Bassani" label="Giorgio Bassani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502762" start="23730" end="23748" title="Frenchy Bordagaray" label="Frenchy Bordagaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="23798" end="23802" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222464" start="23805" end="23818" title="Caron Keating" label="Caron Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="23862" end="23866" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q658508" start="23869" end="23884" title="Johnnie Johnson (musician)" label="Johnnie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17184026" start="23937" end="23950" title="Phillip Pavia" label="Phillip Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="23993" end="23997" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q233956" start="24000" end="24012" title="Muriel Spark" label="Muriel Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="24061" end="24065" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q202631" start="24068" end="24090" title="John Archibald Wheeler" label="John Archibald Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="24135" end="24139" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694757" start="24142" end="24156" title="Cecil Chaudhry" label="Cecil Chaudhry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506269" start="24217" end="24234" title="Shūichi Higurashi" label="Shūichi Higurashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="24268" end="24272" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609077" start="24275" end="24290" title="Stephen Dodgson" label="Stephen Dodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="24333" end="24337" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q454802" start="24340" end="24354" title="Ernesto Laclau" label="Ernesto Laclau"/>
<link wikidata="Q328084" start="24420" end="24435" title="Michael Ruppert" label="Michael Ruppert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="24479" end="24483" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q44575" start="24486" end="24501" title="Eduardo Galeano" label="Eduardo Galeano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538" start="24554" end="24566" title="Günter Grass" label="Günter Grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="24620" end="24631" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q569239" start="24660" end="24671" title="Herb Trimpe" label="Herb Trimpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="24716" end="24720" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214310" start="24723" end="24733" title="Dan Rooney" label="Dan Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="24821" end="24825" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q981315" start="24828" end="24842" title="Michel Bouquet" label="Michel Bouquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571440" start="24891" end="24904" title="Gloria Parker" label="Gloria Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="24951" end="24955" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431220" start="24958" end="24972" title="Faith Ringgold" label="Faith Ringgold"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="25052" end="25061" title="calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q84607942" start="25066" end="25080" title="Ida of Louvain" label="Ida of Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290785" start="25084" end="25104" title="Margaret of Castello" label="Margaret of Castello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781848" start="25107" end="25144" title="April 13 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="April 13 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417678" start="25147" end="25155" title="Songkran" label="Songkran"/>
<link wikidata="Q215014" start="25159" end="25178" title="Songkran (Thailand)" label="Songkran (Thailand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973217" start="25182" end="25207" title="Water-Sprinkling Festival" label="Water-Sprinkling Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461213" start="25210" end="25218" title="Vaisakhi" label="Vaisakhi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1542" wikidata="Q156344" url="?curid=1542" title="Amaranth">
<text>Amaranthus is a cosmopolitan group of more than 50 species which make up the genus of annual or short-lived perennial plants collectively known as amaranths. Some of the better known names include &quot;prostrate pigweed&quot; and &quot;love lies bleeding&quot;. Some amaranth species are cultivated as leaf vegetables, pseudocereals, and ornamental plants.

Catkin-like cymes of densely-packed flowers grow in summer or fall. Amaranth varies in flower, leaf, and stem color with a range of striking pigments from the spectrum of maroon to crimson and can grow longitudinally from tall with a cylindrical, succulent, fibrous stem that is hollow with grooves and bracteoles when mature.
There are approximately 75 species in the genus, 10 of which are dioecious and native to North America, and the remaining 65 are monoecious species that are endemic to every continent (except Antarctica) from tropical lowlands to the Himalayas. Members of this genus share many characteristics and uses with members of the closely related genus &quot;Celosia&quot;. Amaranth grain is collected from the genus. The leaves of some species are also eaten.

== Names and etymology ==
&quot;Amaranthus&quot; comes from the name of this plant in Ancient Greek, , &quot;amaranth, immortal&quot;, noun formed from the privative prefix , &quot;without&quot;, and the verb , &quot;to consume, to exhaust&quot;. Indeed, the amaranth has a reputation for not withering, with in particular its calice which remains persistent, and for this reason, represents a symbol of immortality. Some species are used in dry bouquets.

The form (with H), comes from an erroneous association with the Greek etymon (lat. ) meaning , found in the name of many plants (agapanthus, for example).

Its denominations in the languages of the peoples cultivating it since ancient times in America are in Nahuatl, , in Quechua, or in Maya, &quot;ahparie&quot; in Purépecha, in Huichol, and &quot;guegui&quot; in Tarahumara.

== Description ==
Amaranth is a herbaceous plant or shrub that is either annual or perennial across the genus. Flowers vary interspecifically from the presence of 3 or 5 tepals and stamens, whereas a 7-porate pollen grain structure remains consistent across the family. Species across the genus contain concentric rings of vascular bundles, and fix carbon efficiently with a C4 photosynthetic pathway. Leaves are approximately and of oval or elliptical shape that are either opposite or alternate across species, although most leaves are whole and simple with entire margins.

Amaranth has a primary root with deeper spreading secondary fibrous root structures. Inflorescences are in the form a large panicle that varies from terminal to axial, color, and sex. The tassel of fluorescence is either erect or bent and varies in width and length between species. Flowers are radially symmetric and either bisexual or unisexual with very small, bristly perianth and pointy bracts. Species in this genus are either monecious (e.g. &quot;A. hybridus,&quot;) or dioecious (e.g. &quot;A. palmeri&quot;). Fruits are in the form of capsules referred to as a &quot;unilocular pixdio&quot; that opens at maturity. The top (operculum) of the unilocular pixdio releases the urn that contains the seed. Seeds are circular form from 1 to 1.5 millimeters in diameter and range in color with a shiny, smooth seed coat. The panicle is harvested 200 days after cultivation with approximately 1,000 to 3,000 seeds harvested per gram.

===Chemistry===
Amaranth grain contains phytochemicals that are not defined as nutrients and may be antinutrient factors, such as polyphenols, saponins, tannins, and oxalates. These compounds are reduced in content and antinutrient effect by cooking.

== Taxonomy ==
&quot;Amaranthus&quot; shows a wide variety of morphological diversity among and even within certain species. &quot;Amaranthus&quot; is part of the Amaranthaceae that is part of the larger grouping of the Carophyllales. Although the family (Amaranthaceae) is distinctive, the genus has few distinguishing characters among the 75 species present across six continents. This complicates taxonomy and &quot;Amaranthus&quot; has generally been considered among systematists as a &quot;difficult&quot; genus and to hybridize often.

In 1955, Sauer classified the genus into two subgenera, differentiating only between monoecious and dioecious species: &quot;Acnida&quot; (L.) Aellen ex K.R. Robertson and &quot;Amaranthus&quot;. Although this classification was widely accepted, further infrageneric classification was (and still is) needed to differentiate this widely diverse group. Mosyakin and Robertson 1996 later divided into three subgenera: Acnida, Amaranthus, and Albersia. The support for the addition of the subdivision Albersia because of its indehiscent fruits coupled with three elliptic to linear tepals to be exclusive characters to members of this subgenus. The classification of these groups are further supported with a combination of floral characters, reproductive strategies, geographic distribution, and molecular evidence.

The phylogenies of &quot;Amaranthus&quot; using maximum parsimony and Bayesian analysis of nuclear and chloroplast genes suggest five clades within the genus: Diecious / Pumilus, Hybris, Galapagos, Eurasian/ South African, Australian (ESA), ESA + South American.

&quot;Amaranthus&quot; includes three recognised subgenera and 75 species, although species numbers are questionable due to hybridisation and species concepts. Infrageneric classification focuses on inflorescence, flower characters and whether a species is monoecious/dioecious, as in the Sauer (1955) suggested classification. Bracteole morphology present on the stem is used for taxonomic classification of Amaranth. Wild species have longer bracteoles compared to cultivated species. A modified infrageneric classification of &quot;Amaranthus&quot; includes three subgenera: &quot;Acnida&quot;, &quot;Amaranthus&quot;, and &quot;Albersia&quot;, with the taxonomy further differentiated by sections within each of the subgenera.

There is near certainty that &quot;A. hypochondriacus&quot; is the common ancestor to the cultivated grain species, however the later series of domestication to follow remains unclear. There has been opposing hypotheses of a single as opposed to multiple domestication events of the three grain species. There is evidence of phylogenetic and geographical support for clear groupings that indicate separate domestication events in South America and Central America. &quot;A. hybridus&quot; may derive from South America, whereas &quot;A. caudatus&quot;, &quot;A. hypochondriacus&quot;, and &quot;A. quentiensis&quot; are native to Central and North America.

=== Species ===
Species include:
* &quot;Amaranthus acanthochiton&quot; – greenstripe
* &quot;Amaranthus acutilobus&quot; – a synonym of &quot;Amaranthus viridis&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus albus&quot; – white pigweed, tumble pigweed
* &quot;Amaranthus anderssonii&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus arenicola&quot; – sandhill amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus australis&quot; – southern amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus bigelovii&quot; – Bigelow&#x27;s amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus blitoides&quot; – mat amaranth, prostrate amaranth, prostrate pigweed
* &quot;Amaranthus blitum&quot; – purple amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus brownii&quot; – Brown&#x27;s amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus californicus&quot; – California amaranth, California pigweed
* &quot;Amaranthus cannabinus&quot; – tidal-marsh amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus caudatus&quot; – love-lies-bleeding, pendant amaranth, tassel flower, &quot;quilete&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus chihuahuensis&quot; – Chihuahuan amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus crassipes&quot; – spreading amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus crispus&quot; – crispleaf amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus cruentus&quot; – purple amaranth, red amaranth, Mexican grain amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus deflexus&quot; – large-fruit amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus dubius&quot; – spleen amaranth, &quot;khada sag&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus fimbriatus&quot; – fringed amaranth, fringed pigweed
* &quot;Amaranthus floridanus&quot; – Florida amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus furcatus&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus graecizans&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus grandiflorus&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus greggii&quot; – Gregg&#x27;s amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus hybridus&quot; – smooth amaranth, smooth pigweed, red amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus hypochondriacus&quot; – Prince-of-Wales feather, prince&#x27;s feather
* &quot;Amaranthus interruptus&quot; – Australian amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus minimus&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus mitchellii&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus muricatus&quot; – African amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus obcordatus&quot; – Trans-Pecos amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus palmeri&quot; – Palmer&#x27;s amaranth, Palmer pigweed, careless weed
* &quot;Amaranthus polygonoides&quot; – tropical amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus powellii&quot; – green amaranth, Powell amaranth, Powell pigweed
* &quot;Amaranthus pringlei&quot; – Pringle&#x27;s amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus pumilus&quot; – seaside amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus quitensis&quot; - Mucronate Amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus retroflexus&quot; – red-root amaranth, redroot pigweed, common amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus saradhiana&quot; - purpal stem amaranth, green leaf amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus scleranthoides&quot; – variously &quot;Amaranthus sclerantoides&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus scleropoides&quot; – bone-bract amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus spinosus&quot; – spiny amaranth, prickly amaranth, thorny amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus standleyanus&quot;
* &quot;Amaranthus thunbergii&quot; – Thunberg&#x27;s amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus torreyi&quot; – Torrey&#x27;s amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus tricolor&quot; – Joseph&#x27;s-coat
* &quot;Amaranthus tuberculatus&quot; – rough-fruit amaranth, tall waterhemp
* &quot;Amaranthus viridis&quot; – slender amaranth, green amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus watsonii&quot; – Watson&#x27;s amaranth
* &quot;Amaranthus wrightii&quot; – Wright&#x27;s amaranth
=== Etymology ===
&quot;Amaranth&quot; derives from Greek (), &quot;unfading&quot;, with the Greek word for &quot;flower&quot;, (), factoring into the word&#x27;s development as &quot;amaranth, the unfading flower&quot;. &quot;Amarant&quot; is an archaic variant. The name was first applied to the related &quot;Celosia&quot; (&quot;Amaranthus&quot; and &quot;Celosia&quot; share long-lasting dried flowers), as &quot;Amaranthus&quot; plants were not yet known in Europe.

== Ecology ==
Amaranth weed species have an extended period of germination, rapid growth, and high rates of seed production, and have been causing problems for farmers since the mid-1990s. This is partially due to the reduction in tillage, reduction in herbicidal use and the evolution of herbicidal resistance in several species where herbicides have been applied more often. The following 9 species of &quot;Amaranthus&quot; are considered invasive and noxious weeds in the U.S. and Canada: &quot;A. albus&quot;, &quot;A. blitoides&quot;, &quot;A. hybridus&quot;, &quot;A. palmeri&quot;, &quot;A. powellii&quot;, &quot;A. retroflexus&quot;, &quot;A. spinosus&quot;, &quot;A. tuberculatus&quot;, and &quot;A. viridis&quot;.

A new herbicide-resistant strain of &quot;A. palmeri&quot; has appeared; it is glyphosate-resistant and so cannot be killed by herbicides using the chemical. Also, this plant can survive in tough conditions. The species &quot;Amaranthus palmeri&quot; (Palmer amaranth) causes the greatest reduction in soybean yields and has the potential to reduce yields by 17-68% in field experiments. Palmer amaranth is among the &quot;top five most troublesome weeds&quot; in the southeast of the United States and has already evolved resistances to dinitroaniline herbicides and acetolactate synthase inhibitors. This makes the proper identification of &quot;Amaranthus&quot; species at the seedling stage essential for agriculturalists. Proper weed control needs to be applied before the species successfully colonizes in the crop field and causes significant yield reductions.

An evolutionary lineage of around 90 species within the genus has acquired the carbon fixation pathway, which increases their photosynthetic efficiency. This probably occurred in the Miocene.

== Uses ==
All parts of the plant are considered edible, though some may have sharp spines that need to be removed before consumption. Amaranth is high in oxalates, but this may be partially offset by its high calcium content.

=== Nutrition ===

Uncooked amaranth grain by weight is 12% water, 65% carbohydrates (including 7% dietary fiber), 14% protein, and 7% fat (table). A reference serving of uncooked amaranth grain provides of food energy, and is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of protein, dietary fiber, pantothenic acid, vitamin B6, folate, and several dietary minerals (table). Uncooked amaranth is particularly rich in manganese (159% DV), phosphorus (80% DV), magnesium (70% DV), iron (59% DV), and selenium (34% DV). Amaranth has a high oxalate content.


Cooking decreases its nutritional value substantially across all nutrients, with only dietary minerals remaining at moderate levels. Cooked amaranth leaves are a rich source of vitamin A, vitamin C, calcium, and manganese, with moderate levels of folate, iron, magnesium, and potassium. Amaranth does not contain gluten.

=== History ===
The native range of the genus is cosmopolitan. In pre-Hispanic times, amaranth was cultivated by the Aztec and their tributary communities in a quantity very similar to maize. Known to the Aztecs as , amaranth is thought to have represented up to 80% of their energy consumption before the Spanish conquest. Another important use of amaranth throughout Mesoamerica was in ritual drinks and foods. To this day, amaranth grains are toasted much like popcorn and mixed with honey, molasses, or chocolate to make a treat called , meaning &quot;joy&quot; in Spanish.

While all species are believed to be native to the Americas, several have been cultivated and introduced to warm regions worldwide. Amaranth&#x27;s cosmopolitan distribution makes it one of many plants providing evidence of pre-Columbian oceanic contact. The earliest archeological evidence for amaranth in the Old World was found in an excavation in Narhan, India, dated to 1000–800 BCE.

Because of its importance as a symbol of indigenous culture, its palatability, ease of cooking, and a protein that is particularly well-suited to human nutritional needs, interest in amaranth seeds (especially &quot;A. cruentus&quot; and &quot;A. hypochondriacus&quot;) revived in the 1970s. It was recovered in Mexico from wild varieties and is now commercially cultivated. It is a popular snack in Mexico, sometimes mixed with chocolate or puffed rice, and its use has spread to Europe and other parts of North America.

=== Seed ===
Several species are raised for amaranth &quot;grain&quot; in Asia and the Americas. Amaranth and its relative quinoa are considered pseudocereals because of their similarities to cereals in flavor and cooking. The spread of &quot;Amaranthus&quot; is of a joint effort of human expansion, adaptation, and fertilization strategies. Grain amaranth has been used for food by humans in several ways. The grain can be ground into a flour for use like other grain flours. It can be popped like popcorn, or flaked like oatmeal.

Seeds of Amaranth grain have been found in Antofagasta de la Sierra Department, Catamarca, Argentina in the southern Puna desert of the north of Argentina dating from 4,500 years ago, with evidence suggesting earlier use. Archeological evidence of seeds from &quot;A. hypochondriacus&quot; and &quot;A. cruentus&quot; found in a cave in Tehuacán, Mexico, suggests amaranth was part of Aztec civilization in the 1400s.

Ancient amaranth grains still used include the three species &quot;Amaranthus caudatus&quot;, &quot;A. cruentus&quot;, and &quot;A. hypochondriacus&quot;. Evidence from single-nucleotide polymorphisms and chromosome structure supports &quot;A. hypochondriacus&quot; as the common ancestor of the three grain species.

It has been proposed as an inexpensive native crop that could be cultivated by indigenous people in rural areas for several reasons:
* A small amount of seed plants a large area (seeding rate 1 kg/ha).
* Yields are high compared to the seeding rate: 1,000 kg or more per hectare.
* It is easily harvested and easily processed, post harvest, as there are no hulls to remove.
* Its seeds are a source of protein.
* It has rich content of the dietary minerals, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, and potassium.
* In cooked and edible forms, amaranth retains adequate content of several dietary minerals.
* It is easy to cook. Boil in water with twice the amount of water as grain by volume (or 2.4 times as much water by weight). Amaranth seed can also be popped one tablespoon at a time in a hot pan without oil, shaken every few seconds to avoid burning.
* It grows fast and, in three cultivated species, the large seedheads can weigh up to 1 kg and contain a half-million small seeds.

In the United States, the amaranth crop is mostly used for seed production. Most amaranth in American food products starts as a ground flour, blended with wheat or other flours to create cereals, crackers, cookies, bread or other baked products. Despite utilization studies showing that amaranth can be blended with other flours at levels above 50% without affecting functional properties or taste, most commercial products use amaranth only as a minor portion of their ingredients despite them being marketed as &quot;amaranth&quot; products.
=== Leaves, roots, and stems ===
Amaranth species are cultivated and consumed as a leaf vegetable in many parts of the world. Four species of &quot;Amaranthus&quot; are documented as cultivated vegetables in eastern Asia: &quot;Amaranthus cruentus&quot;, &quot;Amaranthus blitum, Amaranthus dubius&quot;, and &quot;Amaranthus tricolor&quot;.

==== Asia ====
In Indonesia and Malaysia, leaf amaranth is called (although the word has since been loaned to refer to spinach, in a different genus). In the Philippines, the Ilocano word for the plant is ; the Tagalog word for the plant is or .

In Uttar Pradesh and Bihar in India, it is called and is a popular red leafy vegetable (referred to in the class of vegetable preparations called ). It is called &quot;chua&quot; in Kumaun area of Uttarakhand, where it is a popular red-green vegetable. In Karnataka in India, it is called (). It is used to prepare curries such as &quot;hulee, palya, majjigay-hulee&quot;, and so on. In Kerala, it is called &quot;cheera&quot; and is consumed by stir-frying the leaves with spices and red chili peppers to make a dish called &quot;cheera thoran&quot;. In Tamil Nadu, it is called and is regularly consumed as a favourite dish, where the greens are steamed and mashed with light seasoning of salt, red chili pepper, and cumin. It is called . In the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana and other Telugu speaking regions of the country, this leaf is called as &quot;Thotakura&quot; and is cooked as a standalone curry, added as a part of mix leafy vegetable curry or added in preparation of a popular &quot;dal&quot; called () in (Telugu). In Maharashtra, it is called and is available in both red and white colour. In Orissa, it is called , it is used to prepare , in which the leaf is fried with chili and onions. In West Bengal, the green variant is called () and the red variant is called ().

In China, the leaves and stems are used as a stir-fry vegetable, or in soups. In Vietnam, it is called and is used to make soup. Two species are popular as edible vegetable in Vietnam: (&quot;Amaranthus tricolor&quot;) and or (&quot;Amaranthus viridis&quot;).

==== Africa ====
A traditional food plant in Africa, amaranth has the potential to improve nutrition, boost food security, foster rural development and support sustainable land care.

In Bantu regions of Uganda and western Kenya, it is known as &quot;doodo&quot; or &quot;litoto&quot;. It is also known among the Kalenjin as a drought crop (&quot;chepkerta&quot;). In Lingala (spoken in the Congo), it is known as or . In Nigeria, it is a common vegetable and goes with all Nigerian starch dishes. It is known in Yoruba as , a short form of (meaning &quot;make the husband fat&quot;), or (meaning &quot;we have money left over for fish&quot;). In Botswana, it is referred to as &quot;morug&quot; and cooked as a staple green vegetable.

==== Europe ====
In Greece, purple amaranth (&quot;Amaranthus blitum&quot;) is a popular dish called , or . It is boiled, then served with olive oil and lemon juice like a salad, sometimes alongside fried fish. Greeks stop harvesting the plant (which also grows wild) when it starts to bloom at the end of August.

==== Americas ====
In Brazil, green amaranth was, and to a degree still is, often considered an invasive species as all other species of amaranth (except the generally imported &quot;A. caudatus&quot; cultivar), though some have traditionally appreciated it as a leaf vegetable, under the names of or , which is consumed cooked, generally accompanying the staple food, rice and beans.

In the Caribbean, the leaves are called &quot;bhaji&quot; in Trinidad and &quot;callaloo&quot; in Jamaica, and are sautéed with onions, garlic, and tomatoes, or sometimes used in a soup called pepperpot soup.

===Oil===
Making up about 5% of the total fatty acids of amaranth, squalene is extracted as a vegetable-based alternative to the more expensive shark oil for use in dietary supplements and cosmetics.

=== Dyes ===
The flowers of the &#x27;Hopi Red Dye&#x27; amaranth were used by the Hopi (a tribe in the western United States) as the source of a deep red dye. Also a synthetic dye was named &quot;amaranth&quot; for its similarity in color to the natural amaranth pigments known as betalains. This synthetic dye is also known as Red No. 2 in North America and E123 in the European Union.

=== Ornamentals ===
The genus also contains several well-known ornamental plants, such as &quot;Amaranthus caudatus&quot; (love-lies-bleeding), a vigorous, hardy annual with dark purplish flowers crowded in handsome drooping spikes. Another Indian annual, &quot;A. hypochondriacus&quot; (prince&#x27;s feather), has deeply veined, lance-shaped leaves, purple on the under face, and deep crimson flowers densely packed on erect spikes.

Amaranths are recorded as food plants for some Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species including the nutmeg moth and various case-bearer moths of the genus &quot;Coleophora&quot;: &quot;C. amaranthella&quot;, &quot;C. enchorda&quot; (feeds exclusively on &quot;Amaranthus&quot;), &quot;C. immortalis&quot; (feeds exclusively on &quot;Amaranthus&quot;), &quot;C. lineapulvella&quot;, and &quot;C. versurella&quot; (recorded on &quot;A. spinosus&quot;).

== Culture ==
Diego Durán described the festivities for the Aztec god . The Aztec month of (7 December to 26 December) was dedicated to . People decorated their homes and trees with paper flags; ritual races, processions, dances, songs, prayers, and finally human sacrifices were held. This was one of the more important Aztec festivals, and the people prepared for the whole month. They fasted or ate very little; a statue of the god was made out of amaranth seeds and honey, and at the end of the month, it was cut into small pieces so everybody could eat a piece of the god. After the Spanish conquest, cultivation of amaranth was outlawed, while some of the festivities were subsumed into the Christmas celebration.

Amaranth is associated with longevity and, poetically, with death and immortality. Amaranth garlands were used in the mourning of Achilles.

John Milton&#x27;s &quot;Paradise Lost&quot; portrays a showy amaranth in the Garden of Eden, &quot;remov&#x27;d from Heav&#x27;n&quot; when it blossoms because the flowers &quot;shade the fountain of life&quot;. He describes amaranth as &quot;immortal&quot; in reference to the flowers that generally do not wither and retain bright reddish tones of color, even when deceased; referred to in one species as &quot;love-lies-bleeding.&quot;

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Ancient grains

==References==
==Further reading==
* Howard, Brian Clark. &quot;Amaranth: Another Ancient Wonder Food, But Who Will Eat It?&quot;. National Geographic Online, August 12, 2013.
* Fanton M., Fanton J. &quot;Amaranth&quot; The Seed Savers&#x27; Handbook. (1993)
* Assad, R., Reshi, Z. A., Jan, S., &amp; Rashid, I. (2017). Biology of amaranths. The Botanical Review, 83(4), 382–436.

==External links==
* Grain amaranth, Crops For A Future</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="16" end="28" title="cosmopolitan distribution" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="77" end="82" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="86" end="92" title="annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="108" end="123" title="perennial plant" label="perennial plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q156344" start="147" end="156" title="Amaranth" label="amaranths"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036253" start="203" end="220" title="prostrate pigweed" label="prostrate pigweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q162791" start="237" end="255" title="Amaranthus caudatus" label="love lies bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q20134" start="303" end="317" title="leaf vegetable" label="leaf vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q749997" start="320" end="332" title="pseudocereal" label="pseudocereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="339" end="355" title="ornamental plant" label="ornamental plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q217753" start="359" end="365" title="Catkin" label="Catkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="371" end="376" title="cymes" label="cymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="395" end="402" title="flowers" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q910979" start="500" end="508" title="Plant pigments" label="pigments"/>
<link wikidata="Q189939" start="606" end="615" title="Succulent plant" label="succulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="662" end="667" title="bract" label="bract"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="751" end="760" title="dioecious" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q66368485" start="815" end="825" title="monoecious" label="monoecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="843" end="850" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159223" start="1037" end="1044" title="Celosia" label="Celosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10407363" start="1052" end="1066" title="Amaranth grain" label="Amaranth grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1226" end="1239" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="1467" end="1473" title="Calyx (botany)" label="calice"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="1544" end="1555" title="immortality" label="immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1841" end="1848" title="America" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="1856" end="1863" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="1870" end="1877" title="Quechuan languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q33738" start="1885" end="1889" title="Mayan languages" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36803" start="1914" end="1923" title="Purépecha language" label="Purépecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q35575" start="1928" end="1935" title="Huichol language" label="Huichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q36807" start="1963" end="1973" title="Tarahumara language" label="Tarahumara"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="2008" end="2024" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="2028" end="2033" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="2059" end="2068" title="Perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q756954" start="2146" end="2151" title="tepal" label="tepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="2157" end="2163" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="2178" end="2184" title="Pollen" label="porate"/>
<link wikidata="Q987774" start="2299" end="2314" title="vascular bundle" label="vascular bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q283604" start="2351" end="2368" title="C4 carbon fixation" label="C4 photosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="2638" end="2651" title="Inflorescence" label="Inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q148600" start="2677" end="2684" title="panicle" label="panicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q504930" start="2925" end="2933" title="perianth" label="perianth"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="2945" end="2950" title="bract" label="bract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="2986" end="2995" title="monecious" label="monecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021182" start="3008" end="3019" title="Amaranthus hybridus" label="A. hybridus"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="3031" end="3040" title="dioecious" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349335" start="3053" end="3063" title="Amaranthus palmeri" label="A. palmeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818113" start="3130" end="3140" title="unilocular" label="unilocular"/>
<link wikidata="Q447888" start="3187" end="3196" title="operculum (botany)" label="operculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="3530" end="3543" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322731" start="3590" end="3602" title="antinutrient" label="antinutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q290439" start="3620" end="3630" title="polyphenol" label="polyphenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q207653" start="3633" end="3640" title="saponin" label="saponin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="3643" end="3649" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q417351" start="3656" end="3663" title="oxalate" label="oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q155931" start="3998" end="4011" title="Amaranthaceae" label="Amaranthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4033" end="4038" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="4142" end="4150" title="taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704821" start="4807" end="4818" title="Dehiscence (botany)" label="indehiscent"/>
<link wikidata="Q756954" start="4864" end="4869" title="tepal" label="tepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805805" start="5148" end="5165" title="Maximum parsimony (phylogenetics)" label="maximum parsimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="5170" end="5178" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068120" start="5191" end="5198" title="Nuclear gene" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="5203" end="5214" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="5215" end="5219" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="5234" end="5239" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="5488" end="5501" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybridisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740176" start="5948" end="5954" title="Amaranthus tuberculatus" label="Acnida"/>
<link wikidata="Q159611" start="6131" end="6149" title="Amaranthus hypochondriacus" label="A. hypochondriacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740152" start="6795" end="6819" title="Amaranthus acanthochiton" label="Amaranthus acanthochiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245265" start="6897" end="6915" title="Amaranthus viridis" label="Amaranthus viridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164118" start="6930" end="6946" title="Amaranthus albus" label="Amaranthus albus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740155" start="6993" end="7015" title="Amaranthus anderssonii" label="Amaranthus anderssonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740156" start="7030" end="7050" title="Amaranthus arenicola" label="Amaranthus arenicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740154" start="7085" end="7105" title="Amaranthus australis" label="Amaranthus australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740153" start="7140" end="7160" title="Amaranthus bigelovii" label="Amaranthus bigelovii"/>
<link wikidata="Q164132" start="7201" end="7221" title="Amaranthus blitoides" label="Amaranthus blitoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q160572" start="7290" end="7307" title="Amaranthus blitum" label="Amaranthus blitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740157" start="7340" end="7358" title="Amaranthus brownii" label="Amaranthus brownii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740158" start="7397" end="7420" title="Amaranthus californicus" label="Amaranthus californicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740160" start="7477" end="7498" title="Amaranthus cannabinus" label="Amaranthus cannabinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162791" start="7536" end="7555" title="Amaranthus caudatus" label="Amaranthus caudatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q388951" start="7645" end="7669" title="Amaranthus chihuahuensis" label="Amaranthus chihuahuensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740159" start="7706" end="7726" title="Amaranthus crassipes" label="Amaranthus crassipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740162" start="7762" end="7780" title="Amaranthus crispus" label="Amaranthus crispus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159191" start="7816" end="7835" title="Amaranthus cruentus" label="Amaranthus cruentus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163252" start="7906" end="7925" title="Amaranthus deflexus" label="Amaranthus deflexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238412" start="7963" end="7980" title="Amaranthus dubius" label="Amaranthus dubius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740164" start="8036" end="8057" title="Amaranthus fimbriatus" label="Amaranthus fimbriatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740161" start="8108" end="8129" title="Amaranthus floridanus" label="Amaranthus floridanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740167" start="8163" end="8182" title="Amaranthus furcatus" label="Amaranthus furcatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162295" start="8197" end="8218" title="Amaranthus graecizans" label="Amaranthus graecizans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740166" start="8233" end="8256" title="Amaranthus grandiflorus" label="Amaranthus grandiflorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740165" start="8271" end="8289" title="Amaranthus greggii" label="Amaranthus greggii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021182" start="8328" end="8347" title="Amaranthus hybridus" label="Amaranthus hybridus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159611" start="8410" end="8436" title="Amaranthus hypochondriacus" label="Amaranthus hypochondriacus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8500" end="8522" title="Amaranthus interruptus" label="Amaranthus interruptus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8559" end="8577" title="Amaranthus minimus" label="Amaranthus minimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740169" start="8592" end="8613" title="Amaranthus mitchellii" label="Amaranthus mitchellii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671840" start="8628" end="8648" title="Amaranthus muricatus" label="Amaranthus muricatus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8682" end="8703" title="Amaranthus obcordatus" label="Amaranthus obcordatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349335" start="8741" end="8759" title="Amaranthus palmeri" label="Amaranthus palmeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740171" start="8830" end="8853" title="Amaranthus polygonoides" label="Amaranthus polygonoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q162185" start="8888" end="8907" title="Amaranthus powellii" label="Amaranthus powellii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8972" end="8991" title="Amaranthus pringlei" label="Amaranthus pringlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740174" start="9032" end="9050" title="Amaranthus pumilus" label="Amaranthus pumilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021182" start="9084" end="9104" title="Amaranthus quitensis" label="Amaranthus quitensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157663" start="9140" end="9162" title="Amaranthus retroflexus" label="Amaranthus retroflexus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9231" end="9252" title="Amaranthus saradhiana" label="Amaranthus saradhiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740175" start="9361" end="9385" title="Amaranthus sclerantoides" label="Amaranthus sclerantoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9400" end="9423" title="Amaranthus scleropoides" label="Amaranthus scleropoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881023" start="9460" end="9479" title="Amaranthus spinosus" label="Amaranthus spinosus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9546" end="9569" title="Amaranthus standleyanus" label="Amaranthus standleyanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740172" start="9584" end="9605" title="Amaranthus thunbergii" label="Amaranthus thunbergii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740173" start="9647" end="9665" title="Amaranthus torreyi" label="Amaranthus torreyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242205" start="9705" end="9724" title="Amaranthus tricolor" label="Amaranthus tricolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740176" start="9760" end="9783" title="Amaranthus tuberculatus" label="Amaranthus tuberculatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245265" start="9837" end="9855" title="Amaranthus viridis" label="Amaranthus viridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740178" start="9905" end="9924" title="Amaranthus watsonii" label="Amaranthus watsonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740180" start="9964" end="9983" title="Amaranthus wrightii" label="Amaranthus wrightii"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="10067" end="10072" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q159223" start="10327" end="10334" title="Celosia" label="Celosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878333" start="10719" end="10726" title="tillage" label="tillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q164118" start="10987" end="10995" title="Amaranthus albus" label="A. albus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164132" start="11009" end="11021" title="Amaranthus blitoides" label="A. blitoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021182" start="11035" end="11046" title="Amaranthus hybridus" label="A. hybridus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349335" start="11060" end="11070" title="Amaranthus palmeri" label="A. palmeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q162185" start="11084" end="11095" title="Amaranthus powellii" label="A. powellii"/>
<link wikidata="Q157663" start="11109" end="11123" title="Amaranthus retroflexus" label="A. retroflexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881023" start="11137" end="11148" title="Amaranthus spinosus" label="A. spinosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740176" start="11162" end="11177" title="Amaranthus tuberculatus" label="A. tuberculatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245265" start="11195" end="11205" title="Amaranthus viridis" label="A. viridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q407232" start="11293" end="11303" title="glyphosate" label="glyphosate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="11516" end="11523" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226496" start="11752" end="11766" title="dinitroaniline" label="dinitroaniline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823839" start="11782" end="11813" title="acetolactate synthase inhibitor" label="acetolactate synthase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q283604" start="12162" end="12177" title="C4 carbon fixation" label="carbon fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="12266" end="12273" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q184832" start="12431" end="12439" title="Oxalic acid" label="oxalates"/>
<link wikidata="Q10407363" start="12532" end="12546" title="amaranth grain" label="amaranth grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="12575" end="12587" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="12603" end="12616" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="12623" end="12630" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="12639" end="12642" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q186205" start="12711" end="12722" title="food energy" label="food energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="12765" end="12776" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="12785" end="12792" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="12794" end="12807" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q179894" start="12809" end="12825" title="pantothenic acid" label="pantothenic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q205130" start="12827" end="12837" title="vitamin B6" label="vitamin B6"/>
<link wikidata="Q127060" start="12839" end="12845" title="folate" label="folate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="12859" end="12875" title="mineral (nutrient)" label="dietary minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="12927" end="12936" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="12948" end="12958" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="12969" end="12978" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="12989" end="12993" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="13008" end="13016" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="13243" end="13252" title="vitamin A" label="vitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="13254" end="13263" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="13265" end="13272" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="13342" end="13351" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q188251" start="13379" end="13385" title="gluten" label="gluten"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="13593" end="13599" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="13694" end="13710" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="Spanish conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="13757" end="13768" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q10407363" start="13814" end="13828" title="amaranth grain" label="amaranth grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="13875" end="13880" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="13882" end="13890" title="molasses" label="molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="13895" end="13904" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351803" start="14191" end="14220" title="Pre-Columbian transoceanic contact theories" label="pre-Columbian oceanic contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q139925" start="15003" end="15009" title="quinoa" label="quinoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q749997" start="15025" end="15037" title="pseudocereal" label="pseudocereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q772414" start="15457" end="15492" title="Antofagasta de la Sierra Department" label="Antofagasta de la Sierra Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q44756" start="15494" end="15503" title="Catamarca Province" label="Catamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310805" start="15531" end="15535" title="Puna de Atacama" label="Puna"/>
<link wikidata="Q842261" start="15751" end="15759" title="Tehuacán" label="Tehuacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q162791" start="15900" end="15919" title="Amaranthus caudatus" label="Amaranthus caudatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159191" start="15933" end="15944" title="Amaranthus cruentus" label="A. cruentus"/>
<link wikidata="Q501128" start="16002" end="16032" title="single-nucleotide polymorphism" label="single-nucleotide polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408689" start="16038" end="16058" title="chromosome structure" label="chromosome structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="16591" end="16606" title="dietary mineral" label="dietary mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="16731" end="16747" title="dietary minerals" label="dietary minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q20134" start="17761" end="17775" title="leaf vegetable" label="leaf vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q159191" start="17906" end="17925" title="Amaranthus cruentus" label="Amaranthus cruentus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160572" start="17939" end="17956" title="Amaranthus blitum" label="Amaranthus blitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238412" start="17958" end="17975" title="Amaranthus dubius" label="Amaranthus dubius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242205" start="17993" end="18012" title="Amaranthus tricolor" label="Amaranthus tricolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81464" start="18140" end="18147" title="spinach" label="spinach"/>
<link wikidata="Q35936" start="18196" end="18203" title="Ilocano language" label="Ilocano"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="18232" end="18239" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="18271" end="18284" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="18289" end="18294" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="18524" end="18533" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796150" start="18806" end="18812" title="thoran" label="thoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139389" start="19275" end="19278" title="dal" label="dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="19299" end="19305" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="19487" end="19498" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="19689" end="19693" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="19935" end="19948" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q56932" start="20140" end="20148" title="Kalenjin people" label="Kalenjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="20154" end="20161" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q36217" start="20195" end="20202" title="Lingala language" label="Lingala"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="20340" end="20346" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q160572" start="20615" end="20632" title="Amaranthus blitum" label="Amaranthus blitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916401" start="21248" end="21262" title="rice and beans" label="rice and beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="21517" end="21527" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q407560" start="21542" end="21550" title="squalene" label="squalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380845" start="21619" end="21628" title="shark oil" label="shark oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="21640" end="21659" title="dietary supplements" label="dietary supplements"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="21664" end="21673" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q117255" start="21759" end="21763" title="Hopi" label="Hopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q899955" start="21831" end="21834" title="natural dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q421074" start="21873" end="21881" title="Amaranth (dye)" label="amaranth"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="21940" end="21947" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q423717" start="21958" end="21966" title="betalain" label="betalain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852702" start="22221" end="22226" title="hardiness (plants)" label="hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="22253" end="22259" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="22548" end="22559" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="22561" end="22570" title="butterfly" label="butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="22575" end="22579" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q843371" start="22603" end="22614" title="Nutmeg (moth)" label="nutmeg moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306644" start="22664" end="22674" title="Coleophora" label="Coleophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220424" start="22969" end="22980" title="Diego Durán" label="Diego Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="23213" end="23228" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="23806" end="23814" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="23817" end="23828" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="23842" end="23855" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="23895" end="23909" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q162791" start="24231" end="24249" title="Amaranthus caudatus" label="love-lies-bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q24652614" start="24285" end="24299" title="Ancient grains" label="Ancient grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="24432" end="24451" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1543" wikidata="Q161256" url="?curid=1543" title="Agapanthus africanus">
<text>Agapanthus africanus, or the African lily, is a flowering plant from the genus &quot;Agapanthus&quot; found only on rocky sandstone slopes of the winter rainfall fynbos from the Cape Peninsula to Swellendam. It is also known as the lily-of-the-Nile in spite of only occurring in South Africa.

== Description ==
The plant is a rhizomatous evergreen geophyte from in height. The leathery leaves are suberect and long and strap shaped. Flowers are broadly funnel-shaped, pale to deep blue, and thick-textured with a dark blue stripe running down the center of each petal. Paler flowers are more common in &quot;Agapanthus africanus walshii&quot; while &quot;Agapanthus africanus africanus&quot; flowers tend to be darker. The flowers grow in large clusters, with each flower being long. This species flowers from November to April, particularly after fire. Peak flowering occurs from December to February.

== Ecology ==
Pollination is by wind, bees and sunbirds and seed dispersal by the wind. Chacma baboons and buck sometimes eat the flower heads just as the first flowers begin to open. These plants are adapted to survive fire in the fynbos and resprout from thick, fleshy roots after fire has passed through the area.

==Cultivation and use==
Unlike the more common &quot;Agapanthus praecox&quot;, this species is less suitable as a garden plant as it is far more difficult to grow. &quot;A. africanus&quot; subsp. &quot;africanus&quot; may be grown in rockeries in a well drained, slightly acid sandy mix. They seem to be best when grown in shallow pots and will flower regularly if fed with a slow release fertiliser. &quot;A. africanus&quot; subsp. &quot;walshii&quot; is by far the most difficult &quot;Agapanthus&quot; to grow. It can only be grown as a container plant and will not survive if planted out. They require a very well-drained, sandy, acid mix with minimal watering in summer. Both subspecies require hot, dry summers, and winter rainfall climate. It will not tolerate extended freezing temperatures. 

The name &quot;A. africanus&quot; has long been misapplied to &quot;A. praecox&quot; in horticultural use and publications across the world, and horticultural plants sold as &quot;A. africanus&quot; are actually hybrids or cultivars of &quot;A. praecox&quot;.

Extracts of &quot;A. africanus&quot; have been shown to have antifungal properties. Application of these extracts to the seeds of other plant species, including economically important species, has shown that it significantly reduces the severity of the impacts of certain pathogens. In the case of sorghum, this application was even found to perform better than Thiram, a commonly used fungicide when exposed to &quot;Sporisorium sorghi&quot; and &quot;S. cruentum&quot;. Similarly, it has found to induce resistance to rust leaf in wheat through increasing the activity of pathogenesis related proteins.

== Conservation ==
While the species as a whole has not yet been assessed, &quot;A. africanus&quot; subsp. &quot;walshii&quot; is considered to be endangered by the South African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI). It is known only from a small area in the Elgin valley (less than five locations) and the population continues to decline. The largest subpopulation is threatened by unregulated informal settlement expansion. A proportion of the population is protected within the Kogelberg Biosphere Reserve and is not threatened.

==See also==

* List of plants known as lily

==References==
==External links==
*Plantweb: &quot;Agapanthus africanus&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161256" start="29" end="41" title="Agapanthus africanus" label="African lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q195861" start="162" end="168" title="fynbos" label="fynbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q748494" start="178" end="192" title="Cape Peninsula" label="Cape Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023257" start="196" end="206" title="Swellendam" label="Swellendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="943" end="946" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q208221" start="952" end="959" title="sunbird" label="sunbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q257670" start="993" end="1006" title="Chacma baboon" label="Chacma baboon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316016" start="1148" end="1156" title="Resprouter" label="resprout"/>
<link wikidata="Q161246" start="1276" end="1294" title="Agapanthus praecox" label="Agapanthus praecox"/>
<link wikidata="Q416572" start="2648" end="2654" title="Thiram" label="Thiram"/>
<link wikidata="Q193237" start="2672" end="2681" title="fungicide" label="fungicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579233" start="2704" end="2722" title="Sporisorium sorghi" label="Sporisorium sorghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579232" start="2739" end="2750" title="Sporisorium cruentum" label="S. cruentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30296386" start="3057" end="3110" title="South African National Biodiversity Institute" label="South African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425781" start="3376" end="3403" title="Kogelberg Nature Reserve" label="Kogelberg Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q96477890" start="3444" end="3472" title="List of plants known as lily" label="List of plants known as lily"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1544" wikidata="Q128176" url="?curid=1544" title="Agamemnon">
<text>In Greek mythology, Agamemnon (; &quot;Agamémnōn&quot;) was a king of Mycenae who commanded the Achaeans during the Trojan War. He was the son (or grandson) of King Atreus and Queen Aerope, the brother of Menelaus, the husband of Clytemnestra, and the father of Iphigenia, Iphianassa, Electra, Laodike, Orestes and Chrysothemis. Legends make him the king of Mycenae or Argos, thought to be different names for the same area. Agamemnon was killed upon his return from Troy by Clytemnestra, or in an older version of the story, by Clytemnestra&#x27;s lover Aegisthus.

== Etymology ==
Different etymologies have been proposed for the name &quot;Agamemnon&quot; (). According to one view, the name means &#x27;very steadfast&#x27;, &#x27;unbowed&#x27; or &#x27;resolute&#x27;. This is based on the interpretation of the name as a compound word comprising the elements &#x27;very much&#x27; and &#x27;to stay, wait; stand fast&#x27;. According to another view, the name developed from the unattested form * (*), a compound word composed of the elements &#x27;very much&#x27; and &#x27;to think on, provide for&#x27;, with the overall meaning of &#x27;very mindful&#x27;. Yet another proposal derives the second part of the compound word from &#x27;to be inclined, to wish eagerly, to strive&#x27; for the overall meaning of &#x27;very eagerly wishing&#x27;. Linguist Václav Blažek proposes a relationship with Vedic Sanskrit &quot;Agni&quot; on etymological and functional bases.

== Description ==
In the account of Dares the Phrygian, Agamemnon was described as &quot;...[white-bodied], large, and powerful. He was eloquent, wise, and noble, a man richly endowed&quot; (Agamemnonem albo corpore, magnum, membris valentibus, facundum, prudentem, nobilem).

== Ancestry and early life ==
Agamemnon was a descendant of Pelops, son of Tantalus. According to the common story (as told in the &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot; of Homer), Agamemnon and his younger brother Menelaus were the sons of Atreus, king of Mycenae, and Aerope, daughter of the Cretan king Catreus. However, according to another tradition, Agamemnon and Menelaus were the sons of Atreus&#x27; son Pleisthenes, with their mother being Aerope, Cleolla, or Eriphyle. In this tradition, Pleisthenes dies young, with Agamemnon and Menelaus being raised by Atreus. Agamemnon had a sister Anaxibia (or Astyoche) who married Strophius, the son of Crisus.Agamemnon&#x27;s father, Atreus, murdered the sons of his twin brother Thyestes and fed them to Thyestes after discovering Thyestes&#x27; adultery with his wife Aerope. Thyestes fathered Aegisthus with his own daughter, Pelopia, and this son vowed gruesome revenge on Atreus&#x27; children. Aegisthus murdered Atreus, restored Thyestes to the throne, and took possession of the throne of Mycenae and jointly ruled with his father. During this period, Agamemnon and his brother Menelaus took refuge with Tyndareus, King of Sparta.
In Sparta, Agamemnon and Menelaus respectively married Tyndareus&#x27; daughters Clytemnestra and Helen. In some stories (such as &quot;Iphigenia at Aulis&quot; by Euripides) Clytemnestra was already married to Tantalus, and Agamemnon murders him and the couple&#x27;s infant son before marrying Clytemnestra.

Agamemnon and Clytemnestra had four children: one son, Orestes, and three daughters, Iphigenia, Electra, and Chrysothemis. Menelaus succeeded Tyndareus in Sparta, while Agamemnon, with his brother&#x27;s assistance, drove out Aegisthus and Thyestes to recover his father&#x27;s kingdom. He extended his dominion by conquest and became the most powerful prince in Greece.

Agamemnon&#x27;s family history had been tarnished by murder, incest, and treachery, consequences of the heinous crime perpetrated by his ancestor, Tantalus, and then of a curse placed upon Pelops, son of Tantalus, by Myrtilus, whom he had murdered. Thus misfortune hounded successive generations of the House of Atreus, until atoned by Orestes in a court of justice held jointly by humans and gods.

== Trojan War ==
=== Sailing for Troy ===
Agamemnon gathers the reluctant Greek forces to sail for Troy. In order to recruit Odysseus, who is feigning madness so as to not have to go to war, Agamemnon sends Palamedes, who threatens to kill Odysseus&#x27; infant son Telemachus. Odysseus is forced to stop acting mad in order to save his son and joined the assembled Greek forces. Preparing to depart from Aulis, a port in Boeotia, Agamemnon&#x27;s army incurs the wrath of the goddess Artemis, although the myths give various reasons for this. In Aeschylus&#x27; play &quot;Agamemnon&quot;, Artemis is angry for she predicts that so many young men will die at Troy, whereas in Sophocles&#x27; &quot;Electra&quot;, Agamemnon has slain an animal sacred to Artemis, and subsequently boasts that he is her equal in hunting. Misfortunes, including a plague and a lack of wind, prevent the army from sailing. Finally, the prophet Calchas announces that the wrath of the goddess can only be propitiated by the sacrifice of Agamemnon&#x27;s daughter Iphigenia.

Classical dramatizations differ on how willing either father or daughter are to this fate; some include such trickery as claiming she was to be married to Achilles, but Agamemnon does eventually sacrifice Iphigenia. Her death appeases Artemis and the Greek army set out for Troy. Several alternatives to the human sacrifice have been presented in Greek mythology. Other sources, such as &quot;Iphigenia at Aulis&quot;, say that Agamemnon is prepared to kill his daughter but that Artemis accepts a deer in her place and whisks her away to Tauris in the Crimean Peninsula. However, this version is widely considered to be the work of an interpolator, and not Euripides himself. Hesiod says she became the goddess Hecate.

During the war, but before the events of the &quot;Iliad&quot;, Odysseus contrives a plan to get revenge on Palamedes for threatening his son&#x27;s life. By forging a letter from Priam, king of the Trojans, and caching some gold in Palamedes tent, Odysseus has Palamedes accused of treason and Agamemnon orders him to be stoned to death.

=== The &quot;Iliad&quot; ===
The &quot;Iliad&quot; tells the story of the quarrel between Agamemnon and Achilles in the final year of the war. In Book One, following one of the Achaean army&#x27;s raids, Chryseis, daughter of Chryses, one of Apollo&#x27;s priests, is taken as a war prize by Agamemnon. Chryses pleads with Agamemnon to free his daughter but meets with little success. Chryses then prays to Apollo for the safe return of his daughter. Apollo responds by unleashing a plague over the Achaean army. The prophet Calchas tells that the plague may be dispelled by returning Chryseis to her father. After bitterly berating Calchas for his painful prophecies, which first forced him to sacrifice his daughter and now to return his concubine, Agamemnon reluctantly agrees. However, Agamemnon demands a new prize from the army as compensation and seizes Achilles&#x27; prize, the beautiful captive Briseis. This creates deadly resentment between Achilles and Agamemnon, causing Achilles to withdraw from battle and refuse to fight.

Agamemnon is then visited in a dream by Zeus who tells him to rally his forces and attack the Trojans (in Book Two). After several days of fighting, including duels between Menelaus and Paris, and between Ajax and Hector, the Achaeans are pushed back to the fortifications around their ships. In Book Nine, Agamemnon, having realized Achilles&#x27;s importance in winning the war, sends ambassadors begging for Achilles to return, offering him riches and the hand of his daughter in marriage. Achilles refuses, only being spurred back into action when his companion Patroclus is killed in battle by Hector, eldest son of King Priam and Queen Hecuba. In Book Nineteen, Agamemnon, reconciled with Achilles, gives him the offered rewards for returning to the war. Achilles sets out to turn back the Trojans and to duel with Hector. After Hector&#x27;s death, Agamemnon assists Achilles in performing Patroclus&#x27; funeral in Book Twenty-three. Agamemnon volunteers for the javelin throwing contest, one of the games being held in Patroclus&#x27; honor, but his skill with the javelin is so well known that Achilles awards him the prize without contest.

Although not the equal of Achilles in bravery, Agamemnon was a representative of &quot;kingly authority&quot;. As commander-in-chief, he summoned the princes to the council and led the army in battle. His chief fault was his overwhelming haughtiness; an over-exalted opinion of his position that led him to insult Chryses and Achilles, thereby bringing great disaster upon the Greeks.

Agamemnon was the commander-in-chief of the Greeks during the Trojan War. During the fighting, Agamemnon killed Antiphus and fifteen other Trojan soldiers, according to one source. In the &quot;Iliad&quot; itself, he is shown to slaughter hundreds more in Book Eleven during his &quot;aristeia,&quot; loosely translated to &quot;day of glory&quot;, which is the most similar to Achilles&#x27; &quot;aristeia&quot; in Book Twenty-one. Even before his &quot;aristeia,&quot; Agamemnon is considered to be one of the three best warriors on the Greek side, as proven when Hector challenges any champion of the Greek side to fight him in Book Seven, and Agamemnon (along with Diomedes and Ajax the Greater) is one of the three Hector most wishes to fight out of the nine strongest Greek warriors who volunteer.

=== End of the war ===
According to Sophocles&#x27;s &quot;Ajax,&quot; after Achilles had fallen in battle, Agamemnon and Menelaus award Achilles&#x27; armor to Odysseus. This angers Ajax, who feels he is now the strongest among the Achaean warriors and so deserves the armor. Ajax considers killing them, but is driven to madness by Athena and instead slaughters the herdsmen and cattle that had not yet been divided as spoils of war. He then commits suicide in shame for his actions. As Ajax dies he curses the sons of Atreus (Agamemnon and Menelaus), along with the entire Achaean army. Agamemnon and Menelaus consider leaving Ajax&#x27;s body to rot, denying him a proper burial, but are convinced otherwise by Odysseus and Ajax&#x27;s half-brother Teucer. After the capture of Troy, Cassandra, the doomed prophetess and daughter of Priam, fell to Agamemnon&#x27;s lot in the distribution of the prizes of war.

== Return to Greece and death ==
After a stormy voyage, Agamemnon and Cassandra land in Argolis, or, in another version, are blown off course and land in Aegisthus&#x27;s country. Clytemnestra, Agamemnon&#x27;s wife, has taken Aegisthus, son of Thyestes, as a lover. When Agamemnon comes home he is slain by Aegisthus (in the oldest versions of the story) or by Clytemnestra. According to the accounts given by Pindar and the tragedians, Agamemnon is slain in a bath by his wife alone, after being ensnared by a blanket or a net thrown over him to prevent resistance. This is the case in Aeschylus&#x27;s &quot;Oresteia.&quot;
In Homer&#x27;s version of the story in the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, Aegisthus ambushes and kills Agamemnon in a feasting hall under the pretense of holding a feast in honor of Agamemnon&#x27;s return home from Troy. Clytemnestra also kills Cassandra. Her motivations are her wrath at the sacrifice of Iphigenia (as in the &quot;Oresteia&quot; and &quot;Iphigenia at Aulis&quot;) and her jealousy of Cassandra and other war prizes taken by Agamemnon (as in the &quot;Odyssey&quot; and works by Ovid&quot;)&quot;.

Aegisthus and Clytemnestra then rule Agamemnon&#x27;s kingdom for a time, Aegisthus claiming his right of revenge for Atreus&#x27;s crimes against Thyestes (Thyestes then crying out &quot;thus perish all the race of Pleisthenes!&quot;, thus explaining Aegisthus&#x27; action as justified by his father&#x27;s curse). Agamemnon&#x27;s son Orestes later avenges his father&#x27;s murder, with the help or encouragement of his sister Electra, by murdering Aegisthus and Clytemnestra (his own mother), thereby inciting the wrath of the Erinyes (English: the Furies), winged goddesses who track down wrongdoers with their hounds&#x27; noses and drive them to insanity.

== The Curse of the House of Atreus ==
Agamemnon&#x27;s family history is rife with misfortune, born from several curses contributing to the miasma around the family. The curse begins with Agamemnon&#x27;s great-grandfather Tantalus, who is in Zeus&#x27;s favor until he tries to feed his son Pelops to the gods in order to test their omniscience, as well as stealing some ambrosia and nectar. Tantalus is then banished to the underworld, where he stands in a pool of water that evaporates every time he reaches down to drink, and above him is a fruit tree whose branches are blown just out of reach by the wind whenever he reaches for the fruit. This begins the cursed house of Atreus, and his descendants would face similar or worse fates.

Later, using his relationship with Poseidon, Pelops convinces the god to grant him a chariot so he may beat Oenomaus, king of Pisa, in a race, and win the hand of his daughter Hippodamia. Myrtilus, who in some accounts helps Pelops win his chariot race, attempts to lie with Pelops&#x27;s new bride Hippodamia. In anger, Pelops throws Myrtilus off a cliff, but not before Myrtilus curses Pelops and his entire line. Pelops and Hippodamia have many children, including Atreus and Thyestes, who are said to have murdered their half-brother Chrysippus. Pelops banishes Atreus and Thyestes to Mycanae, where Atreus becomes king. Thyestes later conspires with Atreus&#x27;s wife, Aerope, to supplant Atreus, but they are unsuccessful. Atreus then kills Thyestes&#x27; son and cooks him into a meal which Thyestes eats, and afterwards Atreus taunts him with the hands and feet of his now dead son. Thyestes, on the advice of an oracle, then has a son with his own daughter Pelopia. Pelopia tries to expose the infant Aegisthus, but he is found by a shepherd and raised in the house of Atreus. When Aegisthus reaches adulthood Thyestes reveals the truth of his birth, and Aegithus then kills Atreus.

Atreus and Aerope have three children, Agamemnon, Menelaus, and Anaxibia. The continued miasma surrounding the house of Atreus expresses itself in several events throughout their lives. Agamemnon is forced to sacrifice his own daughter, Iphigenia, to appease the gods and allow the Greek forces to sail for Troy. When Agamemnon refuses to return Chryseis to her father Chryses, he brings plague upon the Greek camp. He is also later killed by his wife, Clytemnestra, who conspires with her new lover Aegisthus in revenge for the death of Iphigenia. Menelaus&#x27;s wife, Helen of Troy, runs away with Paris, ultimately leading to the Trojan War. According to book 4 of the &quot;Odyssey,&quot; after the war his fleet is scattered by the gods to Egypt and Crete. When Menelaus finally returns home, his marriage with Helen is now strained and they produce no sons. Both Agamemnon and Menelaus are cursed by Ajax for not granting him Achilles&#x27;s armor as he commits suicide.

Agamemnon and Clytemnestra have three remaining children, Electra, Orestes, and Chrysothemis. After growing to adulthood and being pressured by Electra, Orestes vows to avenge his father Agamemnon by killing his mother Clytemnestra and Aegisthus. After successfully doing so, he wanders the Greek countryside for many years constantly plagued by the Erinyes (Furies) for his sins. Finally, with the help of Athena and Apollo he is absolved of his crimes, dispersing the miasma, and the curse on house Atreus comes to an end.

== Other stories ==
Athenaeus tells a tale of how Agamemnon mourns the loss of his friend or lover Argynnus, when he drowns in the Cephisus river. He buries him, honored with a tomb and a shrine to Aphrodite Argynnis. This episode is also found in Clement of Alexandria, in Stephen of Byzantium &quot;(Kopai&quot; and &quot;Argunnos),&quot; and in Propertius, III with minor variations.

The fortunes of Agamemnon have formed the subject of numerous tragedies, ancient and modern, the most famous being the &quot;Oresteia&quot; of Aeschylus. In the legends of the Peloponnesus, Agamemnon was regarded as the highest type of a powerful monarch, and in Sparta he was worshipped under the title of &quot;Zeus Agamemnon&quot;. His tomb was pointed out among the ruins of Mycenae and at Amyclae.

In works of art, there is considerable resemblance between the representations of Zeus, king of the gods, and Agamemnon, king of men. He is generally depicted with a sceptre and diadem, conventional attributes of kings.

Agamemnon&#x27;s mare is named Aetha. She is also one of two horses driven by Menelaus at the funeral games of Patroclus.

In Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot; Agamemnon makes an appearance in the kingdom of Hades after his death. There, the former king meets Odysseus and explains just how he was murdered before he offers Odysseus a warning about the dangers of trusting a woman.

Agamemnon is a character in William Shakespeare&#x27;s play &quot;Troilus and Cressida&quot;, set during the Trojan War.

In Frank Herbert&#x27;s &quot;Dune&quot;, the House of Atreides trace themselves back to the House of Atreus. At a key point in Children of Dune, Alia Atreides, in a struggle with her ancestral memories, hears Agamemnon shouting &quot;I, your ancestor Agamemnon, demand audience!&quot;

== In media and art ==
=== Visual arts ===
==== General works ====
* The &quot;Mask of Agamemnon&quot;, discovered by Heinrich Schliemann in 1876, on display at National Archeological Museum of Athens, Athens
* &quot;&quot;, by Louis Desprez, 1787, on display at The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York
* &quot;&quot;, by Pierre-Narcisse Guérin, 1817, on display at the Musée des Beaux-Arts d&#x27;Orléans, Orléans
* &quot;&quot;, by Frederic Leighton, 1868, on display at Ferens Art Gallery, Kingston upon Hull
* &quot;&quot;, anonymous, 1545, on display at The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York

==== With Iphigenia ====
* &quot;Sacrifice of Iphigenia&quot;, by Arnold Houbraken, 1690–1700, on display at the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam
* &quot;&quot;, by Charles de la Fosse, 1680, on display at the Palace of Versailles, Versailles
* &quot;&quot;, by Gaetano Gandolfi, 1789, on display at The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York
* &quot;&quot;, by Pietro Testa, 1640
* &quot;&quot;, by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, 1757, on display at the Villa Varmarana, Vicenza
* &quot;&quot;, by Jan Steen, 1671, on display at the Leiden Collection, New York
* &quot;&quot;, by Sebastian Bourdon, 1653, on display at the Musée des Beaux-Arts d&#x27;Orléans, Orléans

==== With Achilles ====
* &quot;The Quarrel Between Agamemnon and Achilles&quot;, by Giovanni Battista Gaulli, 1695, on display at the Museé de l’Oise, Beauvais
* &quot;The Anger of Achilles&quot;, by Jacques-Louis David, 1819, on display at Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth
* &quot;&quot;, by Michel-Martin Drolling, 1810, on display at the École des Beaux-Arts, Paris
* &quot;&quot;, by William Page, on display at the Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington DC

== See also ==
* HMS &quot;Agamemnon&quot;
* National Archaeological Museum of Athens

== Citations ==
== General references ==
=== Secondary sources ===
* Aeschylus, &quot;Agamemnon&quot; in &quot;Aeschylus, with an English translation by Herbert Weir Smyth, Ph. D. in two volumes&quot;, Vol 2, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1926, Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Apollodorus, &quot;Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.&quot; Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Athenaeus, &quot;The Learned Banqueters, Volume VI: Books 12-13.594b&quot;, edited and translated by S. Douglas Olson, Loeb Classical Library No. 345, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 2011. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Collard, Christopher and Martin Cropp (2008a), &quot;Euripides Fragments: Aegeus–Meleanger&quot;, Loeb Classical Library No. 504, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 2008. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Collard, Christopher and Martin Cropp (2008b), &quot;Euripides Fragments: Oedipus-Chrysippus: Other Fragments&quot;, Loeb Classical Library No. 506, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 2008. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Dictys Cretensis, &quot;The Trojan War. The Chronicles of Dictys of Crete and Dares the Phrygian&quot;, translated by R. M. Frazer (Jr.). Indiana University Press. 1966.
* Euripides, &quot;Helen&quot;, translated by E. P. Coleridge in &quot;The Complete Greek Drama&quot;, edited by Whitney J. Oates and Eugene O&#x27;Neill Jr. Volume 2. New York. Random House. 1938. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Euripides, &quot;Iphigenia in Tauris&quot;, translated by Robert Potter in &quot;The Complete Greek Drama&quot;, edited by Whitney J. Oates and Eugene O&#x27;Neill Jr. Volume 2. New York. Random House. 1938. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Euripides, &quot;Orestes&quot;, translated by E. P. Coleridge in &quot;The Complete Greek Drama&quot;, edited by Whitney J. Oates and Eugene O&#x27;Neill Jr. Volume 1. New York. Random House. 1938. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Gantz, Timothy, &quot;Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).
* Grimal, Pierre, &quot;The Dictionary of Classical Mythology&quot;, Wiley-Blackwell, 1996. .
* Hard, Robin, &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose&#x27;s &quot;Handbook of Greek Mythology&quot;&quot;, Psychology Press, 2004, . Google Books.
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hyginus, Gaius Julius, &quot;Fabulae&quot;, in &quot;The Myths of Hyginus&quot;, edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960. Online version at ToposText.
* Most, G.W., &quot;Hesiod: The Shield, Catalogue of Women, Other Fragments&quot;, Loeb Classical Library, No. 503, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 2007, 2018. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Parada, Carlos, &quot;Genealogical Guide to Greek Mythology&quot;, Jonsered, Paul Åströms Förlag, 1993. .
* Pausanias, &quot;Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.&quot; Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Sophocles, &quot;The Ajax of Sophocles. Edited with introduction and notes by Sir Richard Jebb&quot;, Sir Richard Jebb. Cambridge. Cambridge University Press. 1893 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

=== Primary sources ===
* Homer, &quot;Iliad&quot;
* Euripides, &quot;Electra&quot;
* Sophocles, &quot;Electra&quot;
* Seneca, &quot;Agamemnon&quot;
* Aeschylus, &quot;The Libation Bearers&quot;
* Homer, &quot;Odyssey&quot; I, 28–31; XI, 385–464
* Aeschylus, &quot;Agamemnon&quot;
* Apollodorus, &quot;Epitome&quot;, II, 15 – III, 22; VI, 23

== External links ==
* Agamemnon – World History Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="20" end="29" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="70" end="77" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="96" end="104" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="116" end="126" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q192469" start="165" end="171" title="Atreus" label="Atreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q508543" start="182" end="188" title="Aerope" label="Aerope"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="205" end="213" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="230" end="242" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="262" end="271" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28362963" start="273" end="283" title="Iphianassa (daughter of Agamemnon)" label="Iphianassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131651" start="285" end="292" title="Electra" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9020942" start="294" end="301" title="Laodice (Greek myth)" label="Laodike"/>
<link wikidata="Q192407" start="303" end="310" title="Orestes" label="Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16190106" start="315" end="327" title="Chrysothemis" label="Chrysothemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="369" end="374" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317385" start="455" end="471" title="Returns from Troy" label="return from Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212091" start="555" end="564" title="Aegisthus" label="Aegisthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210319" start="985" end="1000" title="Linguistic reconstruction" label="unattested form"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072710" start="1363" end="1376" title="Václav Blažek" label="Václav Blažek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36858" start="1406" end="1420" title="Vedic Sanskrit" label="Vedic Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q394867" start="1427" end="1431" title="Agni" label="Agni"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="1513" end="1531" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares the Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192485" start="1814" end="1820" title="Pelops" label="Pelops"/>
<link wikidata="Q182101" start="1829" end="1837" title="Tantalus" label="Tantalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1891" end="1896" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="1913" end="1920" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="1972" end="1980" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192469" start="1998" end="2004" title="Atreus" label="Atreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="2014" end="2021" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q508543" start="2027" end="2033" title="Aerope" label="Aerope"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="2051" end="2057" title="Cretan" label="Cretan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754835" start="2063" end="2070" title="Catreus" label="Catreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065234" start="2170" end="2181" title="Pleisthenes" label="Pleisthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680510" start="2215" end="2222" title="Cleolla" label="Cleolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q42306576" start="2355" end="2363" title="Anaxibia" label="Anaxibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627549" start="2368" end="2376" title="Astyoche" label="Astyoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976095" start="2390" end="2399" title="Strophius" label="Strophius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445864" start="2412" end="2418" title="Crisus" label="Crisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622504" start="2490" end="2498" title="Thyestes" label="Thyestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="2557" end="2565" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q212091" start="2606" end="2615" title="Aegisthus" label="Aegisthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11940784" start="2639" end="2646" title="Pelopia (daughter of Thyestes)" label="Pelopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192946" start="2922" end="2931" title="Tyndareus" label="Tyndareus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="2941" end="2947" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="3030" end="3042" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="3047" end="3052" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233770" start="3085" end="3103" title="Iphigenia in Aulis" label="Iphigenia at Aulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="3113" end="3122" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q515531" start="3160" end="3168" title="Tantalus, son of Thyestes" label="Tantalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192407" start="3315" end="3322" title="Orestes" label="Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="3345" end="3354" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131651" start="3356" end="3363" title="Electra" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="3686" end="3692" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="3694" end="3700" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166722" start="3706" end="3715" title="Betrayal" label="treachery"/>
<link wikidata="Q182101" start="3780" end="3788" title="Tantalus" label="Tantalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192485" start="3822" end="3828" title="Pelops" label="Pelops"/>
<link wikidata="Q615912" start="3850" end="3858" title="Myrtilus" label="Myrtilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192469" start="3936" end="3951" title="House of Atreus" label="House of Atreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="4158" end="4166" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q252387" start="4240" end="4249" title="Palamedes (mythology)" label="Palamedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192482" start="4299" end="4309" title="Telemachus" label="Telemachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821780" start="4438" end="4443" title="Aulis (ancient Greece)" label="Aulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="4455" end="4462" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="4518" end="4525" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="4580" end="4589" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="4607" end="4616" title="Agamemnon (play)" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="4710" end="4719" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q733444" start="4732" end="4739" title="Electra (Sophocles)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="4878" end="4884" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q725527" start="4957" end="4964" title="Calchas" label="Calchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="5075" end="5084" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="5242" end="5250" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="5395" end="5410" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233770" start="5480" end="5498" title="Iphigenia at Aulis" label="Iphigenia at Aulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="5640" end="5657" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="5764" end="5770" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="5799" end="5805" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q252387" start="5916" end="5925" title="Palamedes (mythology)" label="Palamedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="5988" end="5993" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="6188" end="6193" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="6326" end="6333" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q611124" start="6353" end="6361" title="Chryseis" label="Chryseis"/>
<link wikidata="Q852301" start="6375" end="6382" title="Chryses" label="Chryses"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="6391" end="6404" title="Apollo" label="Apollo&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q725527" start="6674" end="6681" title="Calchas" label="Calchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q244318" start="7054" end="7061" title="Briseis" label="Briseis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="7375" end="7380" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="7394" end="7398" title="Ajax the Great" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="7403" end="7409" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="7755" end="7764" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q852301" start="8656" end="8663" title="Chryses" label="Chryses"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="8746" end="8764" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q28045388" start="8840" end="8848" title="Antiphus" label="Antiphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="9570" end="9586" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q412341" start="9593" end="9597" title="Ajax (play)" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="9695" end="9703" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="9767" end="9774" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="9868" end="9874" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q878184" start="10287" end="10293" title="Teucer" label="Teucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170779" start="10322" end="10331" title="Cassandra" label="Cassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="10371" end="10376" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q191897" start="10538" end="10545" title="Argolis" label="Argolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622504" start="10695" end="10703" title="Thyestes" label="Thyestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="10861" end="10867" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="11038" end="11054" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="11402" end="11410" title="Oresteia" label="Oresteia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="11567" end="11571" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065234" start="11803" end="11814" title="Pleisthenes" label="Pleisthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192407" start="11925" end="11932" title="Orestes" label="Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="12119" end="12126" title="Erinyes" label="Erinyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176637" start="12393" end="12399" title="Miasma (Greek mythology)" label="miasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="12496" end="12500" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="12587" end="12598" title="omniscience" label="omniscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q131409" start="12625" end="12633" title="ambrosia" label="ambrosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521549" start="12679" end="12689" title="Greek underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q847890" start="13103" end="13111" title="Oenomaus" label="Oenomaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q328354" start="13171" end="13181" title="Hippodamia of Pisa" label="Hippodamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q615912" start="13183" end="13191" title="Myrtilus" label="Myrtilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q328354" start="13422" end="13432" title="Hippodamia (daughter of Oenomaus)" label="Hippodamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043413" start="13533" end="13543" title="Chrysippus of Elis" label="Chrysippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11940784" start="13962" end="13969" title="Pelopia (daughter of Thyestes)" label="Pelopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062217" start="13988" end="13994" title="Infant exposure" label="expose"/>
<link wikidata="Q42306576" start="14253" end="14261" title="Anaxibia" label="Anaxibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="14496" end="14500" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59772562" start="14535" end="14543" title="Chryseis (mythology)" label="Chryseis"/>
<link wikidata="Q852301" start="14558" end="14565" title="Chryses of Troy" label="Chryses"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="14760" end="14773" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="14790" end="14795" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="14823" end="14833" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="14935" end="14940" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="14945" end="14950" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="15518" end="15525" title="Erinyes" label="Erinyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="15575" end="15581" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="15586" end="15592" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q294923" start="15714" end="15723" title="Athenaeus" label="Athenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622255" start="15793" end="15801" title="Argynnus" label="Argynnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235405" start="15825" end="15833" title="Cephissus (Boeotia)" label="Cephisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="15892" end="15901" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="15942" end="15963" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="15968" end="15988" title="Stephen of Byzantium" label="Stephen of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8827" start="16042" end="16052" title="Propertius" label="Propertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="16144" end="16153" title="tragedy" label="tragedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="16207" end="16215" title="Oresteia" label="Oresteia"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="16258" end="16270" title="Peloponnesus" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="16345" end="16351" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691167" start="16395" end="16409" title="Agamemnon (Zeus)" label="Zeus Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13074886" start="16476" end="16483" title="Amyclae" label="Amyclae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="16568" end="16572" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152065" start="16652" end="16659" title="sceptre" label="sceptre"/>
<link wikidata="Q746591" start="16664" end="16670" title="diadem" label="diadem"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="16818" end="16827" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="16852" end="16859" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="17117" end="17136" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q183304" start="17155" end="17175" title="Troilus and Cressida" label="Troilus and Cressida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="17214" end="17227" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="17241" end="17245" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q437365" start="17339" end="17355" title="Children of Dune" label="Children of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126741" start="17577" end="17594" title="Mask of Agamemnon" label="Mask of Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q57106" start="17616" end="17635" title="Heinrich Schliemann" label="Heinrich Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q637187" start="17659" end="17698" title="National Archaeological Museum, Athens" label="National Archeological Museum of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261719" start="17726" end="17739" title="Louis Desprez" label="Louis Desprez"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="17761" end="17791" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="The Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q362704" start="17821" end="17843" title="Pierre-Narcisse Guérin" label="Pierre-Narcisse Guérin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330194" start="17869" end="17904" title="Musée des Beaux-Arts d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Musée des Beaux-Arts d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q160252" start="17933" end="17950" title="Frederic Leighton" label="Frederic Leighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444068" start="17972" end="17990" title="Ferens Art Gallery" label="Ferens Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="17992" end="18010" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="18058" end="18088" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="The Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q514276" start="18166" end="18182" title="Arnold Houbraken" label="Arnold Houbraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q190804" start="18213" end="18224" title="Rijksmuseum" label="Rijksmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066580" start="18255" end="18274" title="Charles de La Fosse" label="Charles de la Fosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="18300" end="18320" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491011" start="18352" end="18368" title="Gaetano Gandolfi" label="Gaetano Gandolfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="18390" end="18420" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="The Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155480" start="18450" end="18462" title="Pietro Testa" label="Pietro Testa"/>
<link wikidata="Q186202" start="18488" end="18513" title="Giovanni Battista Tiepolo" label="Giovanni Battista Tiepolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722506" start="18539" end="18554" title="Villa Valmarana (Vigardolo)" label="Villa Varmarana"/>
<link wikidata="Q205863" start="18583" end="18592" title="Jan Steen" label="Jan Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791441" start="18618" end="18635" title="Thomas Kaplan" label="Leiden Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q553795" start="18665" end="18682" title="Sébastien Bourdon" label="Sebastian Bourdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330194" start="18708" end="18743" title="Musée des Beaux-Arts d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Musée des Beaux-Arts d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q520573" start="18839" end="18863" title="Giovanni Battista Gaulli" label="Giovanni Battista Gaulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330521" start="18889" end="18904" title="Musée départemental de l&amp;#x27;Oise" label="Museé de l’Oise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207608" start="18923" end="18944" title="The Anger of Achilles" label="The Anger of Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="18955" end="18974" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="Jacques-Louis David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741629" start="18996" end="19014" title="Kimbell Art Museum" label="Kimbell Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463574" start="19046" end="19068" title="Michel Martin Drolling" label="Michel-Martin Drolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056289" start="19094" end="19114" title="École des Beaux-Arts" label="École des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016524" start="19141" end="19153" title="William Page (painter)" label="William Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192305" start="19173" end="19204" title="Smithsonian American Art Museum" label="Smithsonian American Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564241" start="19238" end="19263" title="HMS Agamemnon" label="HMS &amp;quot;Agamemnon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q637187" start="19266" end="19306" title="National Archaeological Museum of Athens" label="National Archaeological Museum of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="19394" end="19403" title="Oresteia" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="19543" end="19567" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="19624" end="19635" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="19786" end="19810" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="20017" end="20039" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="20075" end="20099" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="20253" end="20275" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="20311" end="20335" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="20508" end="20530" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="20566" end="20590" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q475001" start="20646" end="20662" title="Dictys Cretensis" label="Dictys Cretensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248812" start="20835" end="20840" title="Helen (play)" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q523227" start="21080" end="21099" title="Iphigenia in Tauris" label="Iphigenia in Tauris"/>
<link wikidata="Q663886" start="21337" end="21344" title="Orestes (play)" label="Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807209" start="21567" end="21581" title="Timothy Gantz" label="Gantz, Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="21999" end="22004" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="22110" end="22134" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="22223" end="22228" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="22336" end="22360" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="22449" end="22470" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus, Gaius Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="22478" end="22485" title="Fabulae" label="Fabulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q328969" start="22645" end="22655" title="Glenn W. Most" label="Most, G.W."/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="22726" end="22748" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="22785" end="22809" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="22979" end="22988" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="23264" end="23273" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q356011" start="23366" end="23382" title="Richard Claverhouse Jebb" label="Sir Richard Jebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="23502" end="23507" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="23515" end="23520" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="23529" end="23538" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q540161" start="23546" end="23553" title="Electra (Euripides)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="23562" end="23571" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q733444" start="23579" end="23586" title="Electra (Sophocles)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="23595" end="23601" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="23627" end="23636" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23644" end="23664" title="Oresteia#The Libation Bearers" label="The Libation Bearers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="23673" end="23678" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="23686" end="23693" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="23724" end="23733" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="23741" end="23750" title="Agamemnon (play)" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="23759" end="23770" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124761" start="23778" end="23785" title="Epitome" label="Epitome"/>
<link wikidata="Q54817642" start="23854" end="23880" title="World History Encyclopedia" label="World History Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1545" wikidata="Q2717210" url="?curid=1545" title="Aga Khan I">
<text>Hasan Ali Shah (; 1804 – 12 April 1881), known as Aga Khan I (), was the 46th imam of the Nizari Isma&#x27;ilis. He served as the governor of Kerman and a prominent leader in Iran and later in the Indian subcontinent. He was the first Nizari imam to hold the title Aga Khan.

==Early life and family==
The Imam Hasan Ali Shah was born in 1804 in Kahak, Iran to Shah Khalil Allah III, the 45th Ismaili Imam, and Bibi Sarkara, the daughter of Muhammad Sadiq Mahallati (d. 1815), a poet and a Ni‘mat Allahi Sufi. Shah Khalil Allah moved to Yazd in 1815, probably out of concern for his Indian followers, who used to travel to Persia to see their Imam and for whom Yazd was a much closer and safer destination than Kahak. Meanwhile, his wife and children (Including Hasan Ali) continued to live in Kahak off the revenues obtained from the family holdings in the Mahallat () region. Two years later, in 1817, Shah Khalil Allah was killed in Yazd during a brawl between some of his followers and local shopkeepers. He was succeeded by his eldest son Hasan Ali Shah, also known as Muhammad Hasan, who became the 46th Imam.

While Khalil Allah resided in Yazd, his land holdings in Kahak were being managed by his son-in-law, Imani Khan Farahani, husband of his daughter Shah Bibi. After Khalil Allah&#x27;s death, a conflict ensued between Imani Khan Farahani and the local Nizaris (followers of Imam Khalil Allah), as a result of which Khalil Allah&#x27;s widow and children found themselves left unprovided for. The young Imam and his mother moved to Qumm, but their financial situation worsened. The dowager decided to go to the Qajar court in Tehran to obtain justice for her husband&#x27;s death and was eventually successful. Those who had been involved in the Shah Khalil Allah&#x27;s murder were punished. Not only that, but the Persian king Fath Ali Shah gave his own daughter, princess Sarv-i-Jahan Khanum, in marriage to the young Imam Hasan Ali Shah and provided a princely dowry in land holdings in the Mahallat region. King Fath Ali Shah also appointed Hasan Ali Shah as governor of Qumm and bestowed upon him the honorific of &quot;Aga Khan&quot;. Thus did the title of &quot;Aga Khan&quot; enter the family. Hasan Ali Shah become known as Aga Khan Mahallati, and the title of Aga Khan was inherited by his successors. Aga Khan I&#x27;s mother later moved to India where she died in 1851. Until Fath Ali Shah&#x27;s death in 1834, the Imam Hasan Ali Shah enjoyed a quiet life and was held in high esteem at the Qajar court.

==Governorship of Kerman==

Soon after the accession of Muhammad Shah Qajar to the throne of his grandfather, Fath Ali Shah, the Imam Hasan Ali Shah was appointed governor of Kerman in 1835. At the time, Kerman was held by the rebellious sons of Shuja al-Saltana, a pretender to the Qajar throne. The area was also frequently raided by the Afghans. Hasan Ali Shah managed to restore order in Kerman, as well as in Bam and Narmashir, which were also held by rebellious groups. Hasan Ali Shah sent a report of his success to Tehran, but did not receive any material appreciation for his achievements. Despite the service he rendered to the Qajar government, Hasan Ali Shah was dismissed from the governorship of Kerman in 1837, less than two years after his arrival there, and was replaced by Firuz Mirza Nusrat al-Dawla, a younger brother of Muhammad Shah Qajar. Refusing to accept his dismissal, Hasan Ali Shah withdrew with his forces to the citadel at Bam. Along with his two brothers, he made preparations to resist the government forces that were sent against him. He was besieged at Bam for some fourteen months. When it was clear that continuing the resistance was of little use, Hasan Ali Shah sent one of his brothers to Shiraz in order to speak to the governor of Fars to intervene on his behalf and arrange for safe passage out of Kerman. With the governor having interceded, Hasan Ali Shah surrendered and emerged from the citadel of Bam only to be double-crossed. He was seized and his possessions were plundered by the government troops. Hasan Ali Shah and his dependents were sent to Kerman and remained as prisoners there for eight months. He was eventually allowed to go to Tehran near the end of 1838-39 where he was able to present his case before the Shah. The Shah pardoned him on the condition that he return peacefully to Mahallat. Hasan Ali Shah remained in Mahallat for about two years. He managed to gather an army in Mahallat which alarmed Muhammad Shah, who travelled to Delijan near Mahallat to determine the truth of the reports about Hasan Ali Shah. Hasan Ali Shah was on a hunting trip at the time, but he sent a messenger to request permission of the monarch to go to Mecca for the hajj pilgrimage. Permission was given, and Hasan Ali Shah&#x27;s mother and a few relatives were sent to Najaf and other holy cities in Iraq in which the shrines of his ancestors, the Shiite Imams are found.

Prior to leaving Mahallat, Hasan Ali Shah equipped himself with letters appointing him to the governorship of Kerman. Accompanied by his brothers, nephews and other relatives, as well as many followers, he left for Yazd, where he intended to meet some of his local followers. Hasan Ali Shah sent the documents reinstating him to the position of governor of Kerman to Bahman Mirza Baha al-Dawla, the governor of Yazd. Bahman Mirza offered Hasan Ali Shah lodging in the city, but Hasan Ali Shah declined, indicating that he wished to visit his followers living around Yazd. Hajji Mirza Aqasi sent a messenger to Bahman Mirza to inform him of the spuriousness of Hasan Ali Shah&#x27;s documents and a battle between Bahman Mīrzā and Hasan Ali Shah broke out in which Bahman Mirza was defeated. Other minor battles were won by Hasan Ali Shah before he arrived in Shahr-e Babak, which he intended to use as his base for capturing Kerman. At the time of his arrival in Shahr-e Babak, a formal local governor was engaged in a campaign to drive out the Afghans from the city&#x27;s citadel, and Hasan Ali Shah joined him in forcing the Afghans to surrender.

Soon after March 1841, Hasan Ali Shah set out for Kerman. He managed to defeat a government force consisting of 4,000 men near Dashtab, and continued to win a number of victories before stopping at Bam for a time. Soon, a government force of 24,000 men forced Hasan Ali Shah to flee from Bam to Rigan on the border of Baluchistan, where he suffered a decisive defeat. Hasan Ali Shah decided to escape to Afghanistan, accompanied by his brothers and many soldiers and servants.

==Afghanistan==
Fleeing Iran, Hasan Ali Shah arrived in Kandahar, Afghanistan in 1841 – a town that had been occupied by an Anglo-Indian army in 1839 in the First Anglo-Afghan War. A close relationship developed between Hasan Ali Shah and the British, which coincided with the final years of the First Anglo-Afghan War (1838–1842). After his arrival, Hasan Ali Shah wrote to Sir William Macnaghten, discussing his plans to seize and govern Herat on behalf of the British. Although the proposal seemed to have been approved, the plans of the British were thwarted by the uprising of Dost Muhammad&#x27;s son Muhammad Akbar Khan, who defeated and annihilated the British-Indian garrison at Gandamak on its retreat from Kabul in January 1842.

==Sindh==
Hasan Ali Shah soon proceeded to Sindh, where he rendered further services to the British. The British were able to annex Sindh and for his services, Hasan Ali Shah received an annual pension of £2,000 from General Charles James Napier, the British conqueror of Sindh with whom he had a good relationship.

==Bombay==
In October 1844, Hasan Ali Shah left Sindh for the city of Bombay in the Bombay Presidency, British India passing through Cutch and Kathiawar where he spent some time visiting the communities of his followers in the area. After arriving in Bombay in February 1846, the Persian government demanded his extradition from India. The British refused and only agreed to transfer Hasan Ali Shah&#x27;s residence to Calcutta, where it would be harder for him to launch new attacks against the Persian government. The British also negotiated the safe return of Hasan Ali Shah to Persia, which was in accordance with his own wish. The government agreed to Hasan Ali Shah&#x27;s return provided that he would avoid passing through Baluchistan and Kirman and that he was to settle peacefully in Mahallat. Hasan Ali Shah was eventually forced to leave for Calcutta in April 1847, where he remained until he received news of the death of Muhammad Shah Qajar. Hasan Ali Shah left for Bombay and the British attempted to obtain permission for his return to Persia. Although some of his lands were restored to the control of his relatives, his safe return could not be arranged, and Hasan Ali Shah was forced to remain a permanent resident of India. While in India, Hasan Ali Shah continued his close relationship with the British, and was even visited by the Prince of Wales (the future King Edward VII) when he was on a state visit to India. The British came to address Hasan Ali Shah as His Highness. Hasan Ali Shah received protection from the British government in British India as the spiritual head of an important Muslim community.

==Khoja reassumption and dispute==

The vast majority of his Khoja Ismaili followers in India welcomed him warmly, but some dissident members, sensing their loss of prestige with the arrival of the Imam, wished to maintain control over communal properties. Because of this, Hasan Ali Shah decided to secure a pledge of loyalty from the members of the community to himself and to the Ismaili form of Islam. Although most of the members of the community signed a document issued by Hasan Ali Shah summarizing the practices of the Ismailis, a group of dissenting Khojas surprisingly asserted that the community had always been Sunni. This group was outcast by the unanimous vote of all the Khojas assembled in Bombay. In 1866, these dissenters filed a suit in the Bombay High Court against Hasan Ali Shah, claiming that the Khojas had been Sunni Muslims from the very beginning. The case, commonly referred to as the Aga Khan Case, was heard by Sir Joseph Arnould. The hearing lasted several weeks, and included testimony from Hasan Ali Shah himself. After reviewing the history of the community, Justice Arnould gave a definitive and detailed judgement against the plaintiffs and in favour of Hasan Ali Shah and other defendants. The judgement was significant in that it legally established the status of the Khojas as a community referred to as Shia Nizari Ismailis, and of Hasan Ali Shah as the spiritual head of that community. Hasan Ali Shah&#x27;s authority thereafter was not seriously challenged again.

==Final years==

Hasan Ali Shah spent his final years in Bombay with occasional visits to Pune. Maintaining the traditions of the Iranian nobility to which he belonged, he kept excellent stables and became a well-known figure at the Bombay racecourse. Hasan Ali Shah died after an imamate of sixty-four years in April 1881. He was buried in a specially built shrine at Hasanabad in the Mazagaon area of Bombay. He was survived by three sons and five daughters. Hasan Ali Shah was succeeded as Imam by his eldest son Aqa Ali Shah, who became Aga Khan II.

==Notes==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2717210" start="0" end="14" title="Aga Khan I" label="Hasan Ali Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717210" start="50" end="60" title="Aga Khan I" label="Aga Khan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306841" start="78" end="82" title="Imamate in Nizari doctrine" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623739" start="90" end="96" title="Nizari" label="Nizari"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="97" end="111" title="Ismaili" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171714" start="142" end="148" title="Kerman" label="Kerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="197" end="216" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q393440" start="265" end="273" title="Aga Khan" label="Aga Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5779901" start="346" end="351" title="Kahak, Delijan" label="Kahak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506064" start="361" end="382" title="Shah Khalil Allah III" label="Shah Khalil Allah III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996783" start="490" end="503" title="Ni‘mat Allahi" label="Ni‘mat Allahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182394" start="537" end="541" title="Yazd" label="Yazd"/>
<link wikidata="Q175299" start="1843" end="1856" title="Fath Ali Shah" label="Fath Ali Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170573" start="2090" end="2094" title="Qumm" label="Qumm"/>
<link wikidata="Q558231" start="2589" end="2608" title="Muhammad Shah Qajar" label="Muhammad Shah Qajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q171714" start="2708" end="2714" title="Kerman" label="Kerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q106636" start="2947" end="2950" title="Bam, Iran" label="Bam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420932" start="2955" end="2964" title="Narmashir" label="Narmashir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953847" start="3324" end="3351" title="Nosrat-od-Dowleh Firouz Mirza" label="Firuz Mirza Nusrat al-Dawla"/>
<link wikidata="Q43277" start="3476" end="3490" title="Arg e Bam" label="citadel at Bam"/>
<link wikidata="Q888740" start="4531" end="4538" title="Delijan" label="Delijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q613306" start="4544" end="4552" title="Mahallat" label="Mahallat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159862" start="5815" end="5828" title="Shahr-e Babak" label="Shahr-e Babak"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="6641" end="6649" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q989092" start="6742" end="6764" title="First Anglo-Afghan War" label="First Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397705" start="6964" end="6982" title="William Macnaghten" label="William Macnaghten"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="7025" end="7030" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q32027" start="7167" end="7180" title="Dost Mohammad Barakzai" label="Dost Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q983036" start="7192" end="7211" title="Wazir Akbar Khan" label="Muhammad Akbar Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q984094" start="7273" end="7281" title="Gandamak" label="Gandamak"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="7369" end="7374" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q721083" start="7551" end="7571" title="Charles James Napier" label="Charles James Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="7691" end="7696" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="7713" end="7719" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q891827" start="7727" end="7744" title="Bombay Presidency" label="Bombay Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="7746" end="7759" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720882" start="7776" end="7781" title="Cutch State" label="Cutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408929" start="7786" end="7795" title="Kathiawar" label="Kathiawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="8062" end="8070" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="9030" end="9040" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q11284510" start="9339" end="9344" title="Khoja" label="Khoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281122" start="10220" end="10238" title="Joseph Arnould" label="Sir Joseph Arnould"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768827" start="11130" end="11152" title="Aga Khan&amp;#x27;s Maqbara" label="specially built shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121900" start="11173" end="11181" title="Mazagaon" label="Mazagaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q959911" start="11328" end="11339" title="Aga Khan II" label="Aga Khan II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1546" wikidata="Q366213" url="?curid=1546" title="Aga Khan III">
<text>Sir Sultan Muhammed Shah (; 2 November 187711 July 1957), known as Aga Khan III (), was the 48th imam of the Nizari Ism&#x27;aili branch of Shia Islam. He was one of the founders and the first permanent president of the All-India Muslim League (AIML). His goal was the advancement of Muslim agendas and the protection of Muslim rights in British India. The League, until the late 1930s, was not a large organisation but represented landed and commercial Muslim interests as well as advocating for British education during the British Raj. Aga Khan called on the British Raj to consider Muslims to be a separate nation within India, the famous &#x27;Two Nation Theory&#x27;. Even after he resigned as president of the AIML in 1912, he still exerted a major influence on its policies and agendas. He was nominated to represent India at the League of Nations in 1932 and served as President of the 18th Assembly of The League of Nations (1937–1938).

== Early life ==
He was born in Karachi, Sindh (now in Pakistan), in 1877 under the British Raj, to Aga Khan II (who had emigrated from Persia) and his third wife, Nawab A&#x27;lia Shamsul-Muluk, a granddaughter of Fath Ali Shah of Persia. After attending Eton College, he studied at the University of Cambridge.

== Career ==
In 1885, at the age of seven, he succeeded his father as Imam of the Shi&#x27;a Isma&#x27;ili Muslims.

The Aga Khan travelled to distant parts of the world to receive the homage of his followers, with the objective either of settling differences or of advancing their welfare through financial help and personal advice and guidance. The distinction of Knight Commander of the Indian Empire (KCIE) was conferred upon him by Queen Victoria in 1897, and he was promoted to Knight Grand Commander (GCIE) in the 1902 Coronation Honours list and invested as such by King Edward VII at Buckingham Palace on October 24, 1902. He was made a Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India (GCSI) by George V (1912) and appointed a GCMG in 1923. He received recognition for his public services from the German Emperor, the Sultan of Turkey, the Shah of Persia, and other potentates.

In 1906, Aga Khan was a founding member and first president of the All India Muslim League, a political party that pushed for the creation of an independent Muslim nation in the north-west regions of India, then under British colonial rule, and later established the country of Pakistan in 1947.

During the three Round Table Conferences (India) in London from 1930 to 1932, he played an important role in bringing about Indian constitutional reforms. In 1934, he was made a member of the Privy Council.

There were similarities in Aga Khan&#x27;s views on education with those of other Muslim social reformers, but the scholar Shenila Khoja-Moolji argues that he also expressed a distinct interest in advancing women&#x27;s education for women themselves.

== Imamat ==
Under the leadership of Sir Sultan Muhammad Shah, Aga Khan III, the first half of the 20th century was a period of significant development for the Ismā&#x27;īlī community. Numerous institutions for social and economic development were established in the Indian Subcontinent and in East Africa. Ismailis have marked the jubilees of their Imāms with public celebrations, which are symbolic affirmations of the ties that link the Ismāʿīlī Imām and its followers. Although the Jubilees have no religious significance, they serve to reaffirm the Imamat&#x27;s worldwide commitment to the improvement of the quality of human life, especially in developing countries.

The Jubilees of Sir Sultan Mahomed Shah, Aga Khan III, are well remembered. During his 72 years of Imamat (1885–1957), the community celebrated his Golden (1937), Diamond (1946), and Platinum (1954) Jubilees. To show their appreciation and affection, the Ismā&#x27;īliyya weighed their Imam in gold, diamonds, and, symbolically, platinum, respectively, the proceeds of which were used to further develop major social welfare and development institutions in Asia and Africa.

In India and later in Pakistan, social development institutions were established, in the words of Aga Khan III, &quot;for the relief of humanity&quot;. They included institutions such as the Diamond Jubilee Trust and Platinum Jubilee Investments Limited, which in turn assisted the growth of various types of cooperative societies. &quot;Diamond Jubilee High School for Girls&quot; was established throughout the remote northern areas of what is now Pakistan. In addition, scholarship programmes, established at the time of the Golden Jubilee to give assistance to needy students, were progressively expanded. In East Africa, major social welfare and economic development institutions were established. Those involved in social welfare included the accelerated development of schools and community centres and a modern, fully equipped hospital in Nairobi. Among the economic development institutions established in East Africa were companies such as the Diamond Jubilee Investment Trust (now Diamond Trust of Kenya) and the Jubilee Insurance Company, which are quoted on the Nairobi Stock Exchange and have become major players in national development.

Sir Sultan Mahomed Shah also introduced organisational reforms that gave Ismāʿīlī communities the means to structure and regulate their own affairs. These were built on the Muslim tradition of a communitarian ethic on the one hand and a responsible individual conscience with the freedom to negotiate one&#x27;s own moral commitment and destiny on the other. In 1905, he ordained the first Ismā&#x27;īlī Constitution for the social governance of the community in East Africa. The new administration for the community&#x27;s affairs was organised into a hierarchy of councils at the local, national, and regional levels. The constitution also set out rules in such matters as marriage, divorce, and inheritance, guidelines for mutual cooperation and support among Ismā&#x27;īlīs, and their interface with other communities. Similar constitutions were promulgated in India, and all were periodically revised to address emerging needs and circumstances in diverse settings.

In 1905, the Aga Khan was involved in the Haji Bibi case, where he was questioned about the origin of his followers. In his response, in addition to enumerating his followers in Iran, Russia, Afghanistan, Central Asia, Syria and other places, he also noted that “In Hindustan and Africa there are many Guptis who believe in me… I consider them Shi’i Imami Ismailis; by caste they are Hindus”.

Following the Second World War, far-reaching social, economic and political changes profoundly affected a number of areas where Ismāʿīlīs resided. In 1947, British rule in the Indian Subcontinent was replaced by the sovereign, independent nations of India, Pakistan and later Bangladesh, resulting in the migration of millions people and significant loss of life and property. In the Middle East, the Suez crisis of 1956 as well as the preceding crisis in Iran, demonstrated the sharp upsurge of nationalism, which was as indicative of the region&#x27;s social and economic aspirations as of its political independence. Africa was also set on its course to decolonisation, swept by what Harold Macmillan, the then British prime minister, termed the &quot;wind of change&quot;. By the early 1960s, most of East and Central Africa, where the majority of the Ismāʿīlī population on the continent resided, including Tanganyika, Kenya, Uganda, Madagascar, Rwanda, Burundi and Zaire, had attained their political independence.

== Religious and social views ==

The Aga Khan was deeply influenced by the views of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan. Along with Sir Sayyid, the Aga Khan was one of the backers and founders of the Aligarh University, for which he tirelessly raised funds and to which he donated large sums of his own money. The Aga Khan himself can be considered an Islamic modernist and an intellectual of the Aligarh movement.

From a religious standpoint, the Aga Khan followed a modernist approach to Islam. He believed there to be no contradiction between religion and modernity, and urged Muslims to embrace modernity. Although he opposed a wholesale replication of Western society by Muslims, the Aga Khan did believe increased contact with the West would be overall beneficial to Muslim society. He was intellectually open to Western philosophy and ideas, and believed engagement with them could lead to a revival and renaissance within Islamic thought.

Like many other Islamic modernists, the Aga Khan held a low opinion of the traditional religious establishment (the ʿUlamāʾ) as well as what he saw as their rigid formalism, legalism, and literalism. Instead, he advocated for renewed ijtihād (independent reasoning) and ijmāʿ (consensus), the latter of which he understood in a modernist way to mean consensus-building. According to him, Muslims should go back to the original sources, especially the Qurʾān, in order to discover the true essence and spirit of Islam. Once the principles of the faith were discovered, they would be seen to be universal and modern. Islam, in his view, had an underlying liberal and democratic spirit. He also called for full civil and religious liberties, peace and disarmament, and an end to all wars.

The Aga Khan opposed sectarianism, which he believed to sap the strength and unity of the Muslim community. In specific, he called for a rapprochement between Sunnism and Shīʿism. This did not mean that he thought religious differences would go away, and he himself instructed his Ismāʿīlī followers to be dedicated to their own teachings. However, he believed in unity through accepting diversity, and by respecting differences of opinion. On his view, there was strength to be found in the diversity of Muslim traditions.

The Aga Khan called for social reform in Muslim society, and he was able to implement them within his own Ismāʿīlī community. As he believed Islam to essentially be a humanitarian religion, the Aga Khan called for the reduction and eradication of poverty. Like Sir Sayyid, the Aga Khan was concerned that Muslims had fallen behind the Hindu community in terms of education. According to him, education was the path to progress. He was a tireless advocate for compulsory and universal primary education, and also for the creation of higher institutions of learning.

In terms of women&#x27;s rights, the Aga Khan was more progressive in his views than Sir Sayyid and many other Islamic modernists of his time. The Aga Khan framed his pursuit of women&#x27;s rights not simply in the context of women being better mothers or wives, but rather, for women&#x27;s own benefit. He endorsed the spiritual equality of men and women in Islam, and he also called for full political equality. This included the right to vote and the right to an education. In regards to the latter issue, he endorsed compulsory primary education for girls. He also encouraged women to pursue higher university-level education, and saw nothing wrong with co-educational institutions. Whereas Sir Sayyid prioritized the education of boys over girls, the Aga Khan instructed his followers that if they had a son and daughter, and if they could only afford to send one of them to school, they should send the daughter over the boy.

The Aga Khan campaigned against the institution of purda and zenāna, which he felt were oppressive and un-Islamic institutions. He completely banned the purda and the face veil for his Ismāʿīlī followers. The Aga Khan also restricted polygamy, encouraged marriage to widows, and banned child marriage. He also made marriage and divorce laws more equitable to women. Overall, he encouraged women to take part in all national activities and to agitate for their full religious, social, and political rights.

Today, in large part due to the Aga Khan&#x27;s reforms, the Ismāʿīlī community is one of the most progressive, peaceful, and prosperous branches of Islam.

== Racehorse ownership and equestrianism ==

He was an owner of Thoroughbred racing horses, including a record equaling five winners of The Derby (Blenheim, Bahram, Mahmoud, My Love, Tulyar) and a total of sixteen winners of British Classic Races. He was a British flat racing Champion Owner thirteen times. According to Ben Pimlott, biographer of Queen Elizabeth II, the Aga Khan presented Her Majesty with a filly called &quot;Astrakhan&quot;, who won at Hurst Park Racecourse in 1950.

In 1926, the Aga Khan gave a cup (the Aga Khan Trophy) to be awarded to the winners of an international team show jumping competition held at the annual horse show of the Royal Dublin Society in Dublin, Ireland, every first week in August. It attracts competitors from all of the main show jumping nations and is carried live on Irish national television.

== Marriages and children ==
* He married, on November 2, 1896, in Pune, India, Shahzadi Begum, his first cousin and a granddaughter of Aga Khan I.
* He married in 1908, Cleope Teresa Magliano (1888–1926). They had two sons: Prince Giuseppe Mahdi Khan (d. February 1911) and Prince Aly Khan (1911–1960). She died in 1926, following an operation on December 1, 1926.
* He married, on 7 December 1929 (civil), in Aix-les-Bains, France, and 13 December 1929 (religious), in Bombay, India, Andrée Joséphine Carron (1898–1976). A co-owner of a dressmaking shop in Paris, she became known as Princess Andrée Aga Khan. By this marriage, he had one son, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan (1933–2003). The couple was divorced in 1943.
* He married, on October 9, 1944, in Geneva, Switzerland, Begum Om Habibeh Aga Khan (Yvonne Blanche Labrousse) (15 February 19061 July 2000). According to an interview she gave to an Egyptian journalist, her first name was Yvonne, though she is referred to as Yvette in most published references. The daughter of a tram conductor and a dressmaker, she was working as Aga Khan&#x27;s social secretary at the time of their marriage. She converted to Islam and became known as &quot;Om Habibeh&quot; (Little Mother of the Beloved). In 1954, her husband bestowed upon her the title &quot;Mata Salamat&quot;.

=== Publications ===
He wrote a number of books and papers two of which are of immense importance, namely (1) India in Transition, about the prepartition politics of India and (2) The Memoirs of Aga Khan: World Enough and Time, his autobiography. The Aga Khan III proposed &quot;the South Asiatic Federation&quot; in India in Transition that India might be re-organized into some states, and those states should have their own autonomies. He was the first person to design a detailed plan of such a federation of India.


== Death and succession ==
Aga Khan III was succeeded as Aga Khan by his grandson Karim Aga Khan, who succeeded him as Imam of the Ismaili Muslims. At the time of his death on 11 July 1957, he was surrounded by his family members in Versoix. His last words were repeating the verses of the Quran.

On July 12, a solicitor brought the will of the Aga Khan III from London to Geneva and read it before the family:

&quot;Ever since the time of my ancestor Ali, the first Imam, that is to say over a period of thirteen hundred years, it has always been the tradition of our family that each Imam chooses his successor at his absolute and unfettered discretion from amongst any of his descendants, whether they be sons or remote male issue and in these circumstances and in view of the fundamentally altered conditions in the world in very recent years due to the great changes which have taken place including the discoveries of atomic science, I am convinced that it is in the best interest of the Shia Muslim Ismailia Community that I should be succeeded by a young man who has been brought up and developed during recent years and in the midst of the new age and who brings a new outlook on life to his office as Imam.&lt;br&gt;For these reasons, I appoint my grandson Karim, the son of my own son, Aly Salomone Khan to succeed to the title of Aga Khan and to the Imam and Pir of all Shia Ismailian followers.&lt;br&gt;I desire that my successor shall, during the first seven years of his Imamat, be guided on questions of general Imamat Policy, by my said wife, Yvette called Yve Blanche Labrousse Om Habibeh, the Begum Aga Khan, who has been familiar for many years with the problems facing my followers, and in whose wise judgment, I place the greatest confidence. I warn my successor to the Imamat, never to do anything during his Imamat that would reduce the responsibility of the Imam for the maintenance of the true Shia Imami Ismaili faith, as developed historically from the time of my ancestor Ali, the founder until my own.&quot;

He is buried in the Mausoleum of Aga Khan, on the Nile in Aswan, Egypt (at ).

== Legacy ==
Pakistan Post issued a special &#x27;Birth Centenary of Agha Khan III&#x27; postage stamp in his honor in 1977. Pakistan Post again issued a postage stamp in his honor in its &#x27;Pioneers of Freedom&#x27; series in 1990.

== Honours ==
* 21 May 1898 Knight Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire, KCIE
* 1901 First Class of the Royal Prussian Order of the Crown – &quot;in recognition of the valuable services rendered by His Highness to the Imperial German Government in the settlement of various matters with the Mohammedan population of German East Africa&quot;
* 26 June 1902 Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire, GCIE
* 12 December 1911 Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India, GCSI
* 30 May 1923 Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, GCVO – &quot;on the occasion of the King&#x27;s birthday&quot;
* 1 January 1934 Appointed a member of His Majesty&#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council by King George V
* 1 January 1955 Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George, GCMG –
* 14 November 1960 Knight of the Grand Cross of the Order of Prince Henry the Navigator, GCIH.

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* Daftary, F., &quot;The Isma&#x27;ilis: Their History and Doctrines&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1990.
* Khoja-Moolji, Shenila. “Redefining Muslim women: Aga Khan III’s reforms for women’s education.” &quot;South Asia Graduate Research Journal&quot; 20, no. 1, 2011, 69-94&quot;.&quot;
* Khoja-Moolji, Shenila. &quot;Forging the Ideal Educated Girl&quot;. &quot;The Production of Desirable Subjects in Muslim South Asia.&quot; Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
* Naoroji M. Dumasia, &quot;A Brief History of the Aga Khan&quot; (1903).
* Aga Khan III, &quot;The Memoirs of Aga Khan: World Enough and Time&quot;, London: Cassel &amp; Company, 1954; published the same year in the United States by Simon &amp; Schuster.
* Edwards, Anne (1996). &quot;Throne of Gold: The Lives of the Aga Khans&quot;, New York: William Morrow, 1996
* Naoroji M. Dumasia, &quot;The Aga Khan and his ancestors&quot;, New Delhi: Readworthy Publications (P) Ltd., 2008
* Valliani, Amin; &quot;Aga Khan&#x27;s Role in the Founding and Consolidation of the All India Muslim League&quot;, &quot;Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society&quot; (2007) 55# 1/2, pp 85–95.

== External links ==
* Video Clip from the History Channel website
* Institute of Ismaili Studies: Selected speeches of Sir Sultan Mahomed Shah Aga Khan III 
* The Official Ismaili Website
* Official Website of Aga Khan Development Network
* Aga Khan materials in the South Asian American Digital Archive (SAADA)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q366213" start="0" end="24" title="Aga Khan III" label="Sir Sultan Muhammed Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q366213" start="67" end="79" title="Aga Khan III" label="Aga Khan III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306841" start="97" end="101" title="Imamate in Nizari doctrine" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623739" start="109" end="115" title="Nizari" label="Nizari"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="116" end="129" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ili" label="Ism&amp;#x27;aili"/>
<link wikidata="Q223898" start="220" end="243" title="All-India Muslim League" label="All-India Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="526" end="537" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q231915" start="649" end="666" title="Two Nation Theory" label="Two Nation Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="838" end="855" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="916" end="933" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="980" end="987" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="989" end="994" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="1003" end="1011" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1032" end="1043" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q959911" start="1048" end="1059" title="Aga Khan II" label="Aga Khan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1084" end="1090" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q175299" start="1163" end="1176" title="Fath Ali Shah" label="Fath Ali Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1180" end="1186" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="1204" end="1216" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1236" end="1259" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19819982" start="1332" end="1336" title="Shia Imam" label="Imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="1344" end="1354" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="1355" end="1368" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ili" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q93710" start="1628" end="1665" title="Order of the Indian Empire" label="Knight Commander of the Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="1699" end="1713" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507474" start="1783" end="1806" title="1902 Coronation Honours" label="1902 Coronation Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="1841" end="1851" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="2078" end="2092" title="German Emperor" label="German Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="2098" end="2114" title="List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire" label="Sultan of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q733253" start="2120" end="2134" title="Shah of Persia" label="Shah of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223898" start="2226" end="2249" title="All India Muslim League" label="All India Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2377" end="2398" title="British Raj" label="British colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735594" start="2473" end="2504" title="Round Table Conferences (India)" label="Round Table Conferences (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="2648" end="2661" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q113027179" start="2787" end="2807" title="Shenila Khoja-Moolji" label="Shenila Khoja-Moolji"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="3357" end="3365" title="Ismāʿīlī" label="Ismāʿīlī"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="4070" end="4075" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="4089" end="4097" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690949" start="4902" end="4910" title="Aga Khan University Hospital, Nairobi" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="4914" end="4921" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q86750510" start="6235" end="6249" title="Haji Bibi case" label="Haji Bibi case"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="6537" end="6557" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ilism" label="Shi’i Imami Ismailis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="6577" end="6583" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6601" end="6617" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6837" end="6842" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="6844" end="6852" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="6863" end="6873" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="6988" end="6999" title="Suez crisis" label="Suez crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="7244" end="7258" title="decolonisation" label="decolonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="7274" end="7290" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="7443" end="7451" title="Ismāʿīlī" label="Ismāʿīlī"/>
<link wikidata="Q431731" start="7499" end="7509" title="Tanganyika (1961–1964)" label="Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="7511" end="7516" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="7518" end="7524" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="7526" end="7536" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="7558" end="7563" title="Zaire" label="Zaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q196546" start="7694" end="7715" title="Syed Ahmad Khan" label="Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16854550" start="7796" end="7814" title="Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College" label="Aligarh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935373" start="7948" end="7965" title="Islamic Modernism" label="Islamic modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726562" start="7993" end="8009" title="Aligarh Movement" label="Aligarh movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935373" start="8065" end="8074" title="Islamic Modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="8196" end="8205" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="8416" end="8434" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="8661" end="8668" title="Ulama" label="ʿUlamāʾ"/>
<link wikidata="Q73599" start="8779" end="8786" title="Ijtihad" label="ijtihād"/>
<link wikidata="Q652172" start="8815" end="8820" title="Ijma" label="ijmāʿ"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="8996" end="9002" title="Quran" label="Qurʾān"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352121" start="9353" end="9365" title="sectarianism" label="sectarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="9491" end="9498" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunnism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="9503" end="9510" title="Shia Islam" label="Shīʿism"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="9613" end="9621" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ilism" label="Ismāʿīlī"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074672" start="11409" end="11414" title="Purdah" label="purda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500863" start="11419" end="11425" title="Zenana" label="zenāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074672" start="11511" end="11516" title="Purdah" label="purda"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629" start="12158" end="12167" title="Epsom Derby" label="The Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926043" start="12169" end="12177" title="Blenheim (horse)" label="Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842833" start="12179" end="12185" title="Bahram (horse)" label="Bahram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734291" start="12187" end="12194" title="Mahmoud (horse)" label="Mahmoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945952" start="12196" end="12203" title="My Love (horse)" label="My Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852437" start="12205" end="12211" title="Tulyar (horse)" label="Tulyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969650" start="12247" end="12268" title="British Classic Races" label="British Classic Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953919" start="12279" end="12313" title="British flat racing Champion Owner" label="British flat racing Champion Owner"/>
<link wikidata="Q816577" start="12343" end="12354" title="Ben Pimlott" label="Ben Pimlott"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="12376" end="12388" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304494" start="12432" end="12437" title="filly" label="filly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948594" start="12479" end="12500" title="Hurst Park Racecourse" label="Hurst Park Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q389829" start="12549" end="12564" title="Aga Khan Trophy" label="Aga Khan Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211773" start="12620" end="12632" title="show jumping" label="show jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q934417" start="12682" end="12702" title="Royal Dublin Society" label="Royal Dublin Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="12935" end="12939" title="Pune" label="Pune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717210" start="13004" end="13014" title="Aga Khan I" label="Aga Khan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q450229" start="13143" end="13158" title="Prince Aly Khan" label="Prince Aly Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181955" start="13279" end="13292" title="Aix-les-Bains" label="Aix-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="13339" end="13345" title="Mumbai" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q123987" start="13521" end="13539" title="Sadruddin Aga Khan" label="Sadruddin Aga Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="13623" end="13629" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q444528" start="13644" end="13669" title="Begum Om Habibeh Aga Khan" label="Begum Om Habibeh Aga Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311793" start="14795" end="14809" title="Aga Khan IV" label="Karim Aga Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19819982" start="14832" end="14836" title="Shia Imam" label="Imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="14844" end="14851" title="Ismaili" label="Ismaili"/>
<link wikidata="Q63979" start="14946" end="14953" title="Versoix" label="Versoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q311793" start="15982" end="15987" title="Aga Khan IV" label="Karim"/>
<link wikidata="Q450229" start="16012" end="16029" title="Prince Aly Khan" label="Aly Salomone Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q959631" start="16775" end="16796" title="Mausoleum of Aga Khan" label="Mausoleum of Aga Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="16805" end="16809" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="16813" end="16818" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046330" start="16847" end="16860" title="Pakistan Post" label="Pakistan Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q93710" start="17099" end="17149" title="Order of the Indian Empire" label="Knight Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q585238" start="17163" end="17215" title="Order of the Crown (Prussia)" label="First Class of the Royal Prussian Order of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q93710" start="17434" end="17490" title="Order of the Indian Empire" label="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330936" start="17516" end="17572" title="Order of the Star of India" label="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q94050" start="17593" end="17640" title="Royal Victorian Order" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="17744" end="17792" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="17801" end="17809" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="17827" end="17886" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q93488" start="17914" end="17968" title="Order of Prince Henry" label="Knight of the Grand Cross of the Order of Prince Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q113027179" start="18137" end="18158" title="Shenila Khoja-Moolji" label="Khoja-Moolji, Shenila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768304" start="18764" end="18777" title="Anne Edwards" label="Edwards, Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="19231" end="19246" title="History (U.S. TV channel)" label="History Channel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1547" wikidata="Q366650" url="?curid=1547" title="Agasias">
<text>Agasias was the name of several people in classical history, including two Greek sculptors.

* Agasias of Arcadia, a warrior mentioned by Xenophon
* Agasias, son of Dositheus, Ephesian sculptor of the Borghese Gladiator
* Agasias, son of Menophilus (), Ephesian sculptor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4691421" start="95" end="113" title="Agasias of Arcadia" label="Agasias of Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185392" start="201" end="219" title="Borghese Gladiator" label="Borghese Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q390740" start="222" end="248" title="Agasias, son of Menophilus" label="Agasias, son of Menophilus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1548" wikidata="Q122968" url="?curid=1548" title="Alexander Agassiz">
<text>Alexander Emmanuel Rodolphe Agassiz (December 17, 1835March 27, 1910), son of Louis Agassiz and stepson of Elizabeth Cabot Agassiz, was an American scientist and engineer.

==Biography==
Agassiz was born in Neuchâtel, Switzerland, and immigrated to the United States with his parents, Louis and Cecile (Braun) Agassiz, in 1846. He graduated from Harvard University in 1855, subsequently studying engineering and chemistry, and taking the degree of Bachelor of Science at the Lawrence Scientific School of the same institution in 1857; in 1859 became an assistant in the United States Coast Survey. 
Thenceforward he became a specialist in marine ichthyology. Agassiz was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1862. Up until the summer of 1866, Agassiz worked as assistant curator in the museum of natural history that his father founded at Harvard.
E. J. Hulbert, a friend of Agassiz&#x27;s brother-in-law, Quincy Adams Shaw, had discovered a rich copper lode known as the Calumet conglomerate on the Keweenaw Peninsula in Michigan. Hulbert persuaded them, along with a group of friends, to purchase a controlling interest in the mines, which later became known as the Calumet and Hecla Mining Company based in Calumet, Michigan. That summer, he took a trip to see the mines for himself and he afterwards became treasurer of the enterprise.

Over the winter of 1866 and early 1867, mining operations began to falter, due to the difficulty of extracting copper from the conglomerate. Hulbert had sold his interests in the mines and had moved on to other ventures. But Agassiz refused to give up hope for the mines. He returned to the mines in March 1867, with his wife and young son. At that time, Calumet was a remote settlement, virtually inaccessible during the winter and very far removed from civilization even during the summer. With insufficient supplies at the mines, Agassiz struggled to maintain order, while back in Boston, Shaw was saddled with debt and the collapse of their interests. Shaw obtained financial assistance from John Simpkins, the selling agent for the enterprise to continue operations.

Agassiz continued to live at Calumet, making gradual progress in stabilizing the mining operations, such that he was able to leave the mines under the control of a general manager and return to Boston in 1868 before winter closed navigation. The mines continued to prosper and in May 1871, several mines were consolidated to form the Calumet and Hecla Mining Company with Shaw as its first president. In August 1871, Shaw &quot;retired&quot; to the board of directors and Agassiz became president, a position he held until his death. Until the turn of the century, this company was by far the largest copper producer in the United States, many years producing over half of the total.

Agassiz was a major factor in the mine&#x27;s continued success and visited the mines twice a year. He innovated by installing a giant engine, known as the Superior, which was able to lift 24 tons of rock from a depth of . He also built a railroad and dredged a channel to navigable waters. However, after a time the mines did not require his full-time, year-round, attention and he returned to his interests in natural history at Harvard. Out of his copper fortune, he gave some US$500,000 to Harvard for the museum of comparative zoology and other purposes.

Shortly after the death of his father in 1873, Agassiz acquired a small peninsula in Newport, Rhode Island, which features views of Narragansett Bay. Here he built a substantial house and a laboratory for use as his summer residence. The house was completed in 1875 and today is known as the Inn at Castle Hill.

He was a member of the scientific-expedition to South America in 1875, where he inspected the copper mines of Peru and Chile, and made extended surveys of Lake Titicaca, besides collecting invaluable Peruvian antiquities, which he gave to the Museum of Comparative Zoology (MCZ), of which he was first curator from 1874 to 1885 and then director until his death in 1910, his personal secretary Elizabeth Hodges Clark running the day-to-day management of the MCZ when his work took him abroad. He assisted Charles Wyville Thomson in the examination and classification of the collections of the 1872 &quot;Challenger&quot; Expedition, and wrote the &quot;Review of the Echini&quot; (2 vols., 1872–1874) in the reports. Between 1877 and 1880, he took part in the three dredging expeditions of the steamer &quot;Blake&quot; of the Coast Survey (renamed the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey in 1878), and presented a full account of them in two volumes (1888). Also in 1875, he was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society.

In 1896, Agassiz visited Fiji and Queensland and inspected the Great Barrier Reef, publishing a paper on the subject in 1898.

Of Agassiz&#x27;s other writings on marine zoology, most are contained in the bulletins and memoirs of the museum of comparative zoology. However, in 1865, he published with Elizabeth Cary Agassiz, his stepmother, &quot;Seaside Studies in Natural History&quot;, a work at once exact and stimulating. They also published, in 1871, &quot;Marine Animals of Massachusetts Bay&quot;.

He received the German Order Pour le Mérite for Science and Arts in August 1902.

Agassiz served as a president of the National Academy of Sciences, which since 1913 has awarded the Alexander Agassiz Medal in his memory. He died in 1910 on board the RMS &quot;Adriatic&quot; en route to New York from Southampton.

He and his wife Anna Russell (1840–1873) were the parents of three sons – George Russell Agassiz (1861–1951), Maximilian Agassiz (1866–1943) and Rodolphe Louis Agassiz (1871–1933).

==Legacy==
Alexander Agassiz is commemorated in the scientific name of a species of lizard, &quot;Anolis agassizi&quot;, and a fish, &quot;Leptochilichthys agassizii&quot;.

A statue of Alexander Agassiz erected in 1923 is located in Calumet, Michigan, next to his summer home where he stayed while fulfilling his duties as the President of the Calumet and Hecla Mining Company. The Company Headquarters, Agassiz&#x27; statue, and many other buildings and landmarks from the now defunct company are today administered and maintained by the Keweenaw National Historical Park, whose headquarters overlook the statue of Agassiz. A major building of the Hopkins Marine Station is named after him.

==Publications==
*Agassiz, Alexander (1863). &quot;List of the echinoderms sent to different institutions in exchange for other specimens, with annotations&quot;. &quot;Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology&quot; 1 (2): 17–28.
*Agassiz, Elizabeth C., and Alexander Agassiz (1865). &quot;Seaside Studies in Natural History.&quot; Boston: Ticknor and Fields. 
*Agassiz, Alexander (1872–1874). &quot;Illustrated Catalogue of the Museum of Comparative Zoology, at Harvard College. No. VII. Revision of the Echini. Parts 1–4&quot;. &quot;Memoirs of the Museum of Comparative Zoology&quot; 3: 1–762. Plates
*Agassiz, Alexander (1877). &quot;North American starfishes&quot;. &quot;Memoirs of the Museum of Comparative Zoology&quot; 5 (1): 1–136.
*Agassiz, Alexander (1881). &quot;Report on the Echinoidea dredged by H.M.S. Challenger during the years 1873–1876&quot;. &quot;Report of the Scientific Results of the Voyage of H.M.S. Challenger During the Years 1873–76. Zoology.&quot; 9: 1–321.
*Agassiz, Alexander (1903). &quot;Three cruises of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey steamer &#x27;Blake&#x27; in the Gulf of Mexico, in the Caribbean Sea, and along the Atlantic coast of the United States, from 1877 to 1880. Vol I&quot;. &quot;Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology&quot; 14: 1–314.
*Agassiz, Alexander (1903). &quot;Three cruises of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey steamer &#x27;Blake&#x27; in the Gulf of Mexico, in the Caribbean Sea, and along the Atlantic coast of the United States, from 1877 to 1880. Vol II&quot;. &quot;Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology&quot; 15: 1–220.
*Agassiz, Alexander (1903). &quot;The coral reefs of the tropical Pacific&quot;. &quot;Memoirs of the Museum of Comparative Zoology&quot; 28: 1–410. Plates I. Plates II. Plates III.
*Agassiz, Alexander (1903). &quot;The coral reefs of the Maldives&quot;. &quot;Memoirs of the Museum of Comparative Zoology&quot; 29: 1–168. 
*Agassiz, Alexander (1904). &quot;The Panamic deep sea Echini&quot;. &quot;Memoirs of the Museum of Comparative Zoology&quot; 31: 1–243. Plates.

==See also==
*Agassiz family

==References==
==External links==

* Agassiz, George (1913). Letters and Recollections of Alexander Agassiz with a sketch of his life and work. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Co.
* Murray, John (1911). &quot;Alexander Agassiz: His Life and Scientific Work&quot;. Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology 54 (3). pp 139–158.
* 
* Publications by and about Alexander Agassiz in the catalogue Helveticat of the Swiss National Library
* National Mining Hall of Fame: &quot;Alexander Agassiz&quot; 
*National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir
* Keweenaw National Historical Park Preserving many significant buildings and an archives of the Calumet and Hecla Mining Company and Alexander Agassiz.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122968" start="0" end="35" title="Alexander Agassiz" label="Alexander Emmanuel Rodolphe Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q122972" start="78" end="91" title="Louis Agassiz" label="Louis Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q272750" start="107" end="130" title="Elizabeth Cabot Agassiz" label="Elizabeth Cabot Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q69345" start="207" end="216" title="Neuchâtel" label="Neuchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q122972" start="285" end="290" title="Louis Agassiz" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="346" end="364" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="396" end="407" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="412" end="421" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="448" end="467" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676553" start="475" end="501" title="Lawrence Scientific School" label="Lawrence Scientific School"/>
<link wikidata="Q103439667" start="570" end="596" title="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey" label="United States Coast Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60242" start="646" end="657" title="ichthyology" label="ichthyology"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="695" end="732" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272115" start="934" end="951" title="Quincy Adams Shaw" label="Quincy Adams Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024102" start="1000" end="1020" title="Calumet and Hecla Mining Company" label="Calumet conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12430" start="1028" end="1046" title="Keweenaw Peninsula" label="Keweenaw Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="1050" end="1058" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024102" start="1196" end="1228" title="Calumet and Hecla Mining Company" label="Calumet and Hecla Mining Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645447" start="1238" end="1255" title="Calumet, Michigan" label="Calumet, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024102" start="2476" end="2508" title="Calumet and Hecla Mining Company" label="Calumet and Hecla Mining Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="3359" end="3366" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="3473" end="3494" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="3811" end="3815" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="3820" end="3825" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q35342" start="3856" end="3869" title="Lake Titicaca" label="Lake Titicaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420782" start="3944" end="3973" title="Museum of Comparative Zoology" label="Museum of Comparative Zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037469" start="4095" end="4117" title="Elizabeth Hodges Clark" label="Elizabeth Hodges Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q945539" start="4206" end="4229" title="Charles Wyville Thomson" label="Charles Wyville Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q644521" start="4299" end="4332" title="Challenger expedition" label="&amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764276" start="4467" end="4475" title="Marine biology dredge" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q103439667" start="4554" end="4593" title="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey" label="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="4712" end="4742" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="4770" end="4774" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="4779" end="4789" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="4808" end="4826" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q272750" start="5046" end="5068" title="Elizabeth Cary Agassiz" label="Elizabeth Cary Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q156478" start="5281" end="5295" title="Pour le Mérite" label="Pour le Mérite"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="5371" end="5399" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411550" start="5434" end="5457" title="Alexander Agassiz Medal" label="Alexander Agassiz Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q376252" start="5502" end="5526" title="RMS Adriatic (1907)" label="RMS &amp;quot;Adriatic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="5553" end="5564" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357226" start="5712" end="5734" title="Rodolphe Louis Agassiz" label="Rodolphe Louis Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530972" start="5847" end="5862" title="Anolis agassizi" label="Anolis agassizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844361" start="5888" end="5914" title="Leptochilichthys agassizii" label="Leptochilichthys agassizii"/>
<link wikidata="Q163481" start="6289" end="6322" title="Keweenaw National Historical Park" label="Keweenaw National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682339" start="6399" end="6421" title="Hopkins Marine Station" label="Hopkins Marine Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691433" start="8558" end="8572" title="Agassiz family" label="Agassiz family"/>
<link wikidata="Q201787" start="8994" end="9016" title="Swiss National Library" label="Swiss National Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1549" wikidata="Q380482" url="?curid=1549" title="Agathon">
<text>Agathon (; ; ) was an Athenian tragic poet whose works have been lost. He is best known for his appearance in Plato&#x27;s &quot;Symposium,&quot; which describes the banquet given to celebrate his obtaining a prize for his first tragedy at the Lenaia in 416. He is also a prominent character in Aristophanes&#x27; comedy the &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot;.

==Life and career==
Agathon was the son of Tisamenus, and the lover of Pausanias, with whom he appears in both the &quot;Symposium&quot; and Plato&#x27;s &quot;Protagoras&quot;. Together with Pausanias, around 407 BC he moved to the court of Archelaus, king of Macedon, who was recruiting playwrights; it is here that he probably died around 401 BC. Agathon introduced certain innovations into the Greek theater: Aristotle tells us in the &quot;Poetics&quot; (1451b21) that the characters and plot of his &quot;Anthos&quot; were original and not, following Athenian dramatic orthodoxy, borrowed from mythological or historical subjects. Agathon was also the first playwright to write choral parts which were apparently independent from the main plot of his plays.

Agathon is portrayed by Plato as a handsome young man, well dressed, of polished manners, courted by the fashion, wealth, and wisdom of Athens, and dispensing hospitality with ease and refinement. The epideictic speech in praise of love which Agathon recites in the &quot;Symposium&quot; is full of beautiful but artificial rhetorical expressions, and has led some scholars to believe he may have been a student of Gorgias. In the &quot;Symposium,&quot; Agathon is presented as the friend of the comic poet Aristophanes, but this alleged friendship did not prevent Aristophanes from harshly criticizing Agathon in at least two of his comic plays: the &quot;Thesmophoriazousae&quot; and the (now lost) &quot;Gerytades&quot;. In the later play &quot;Frogs&quot;, Aristophanes softens his criticisms, but even so, it may be only for the sake of punning on Agathon&#x27;s name (ἁγαθός &quot;good&quot;) that he makes Dionysus call him a &quot;good poet&quot;.

Agathon was also a friend of Euripides, another recruit to the court of Archelaus of Macedon.

==Physical appearance==
Agathon&#x27;s extraordinary physical beauty is brought up repeatedly in the sources; the historian W. Rhys Roberts observes that &quot;ὁ καλός Ἀγάθων (&quot;ho kalos Agathon&quot;) has become almost a stereotyped phrase.&quot; The most detailed surviving description of Agathon is in the &quot;Thesmophoriazousae,&quot; in which Agathon appears as a pale, clean-shaven young man dressed in women&#x27;s clothes. Scholars are unsure how much of Aristophanes&#x27; portrayal is fact and how much mere comic invention.

After a close reading of the &quot;Thesmophoriazousae,&quot; the historian Jane McIntosh Snyder observed that Agathon&#x27;s costume was almost identical to that of the famous lyric poet Anacreon, as he is portrayed in early 5th-century vase-paintings. Snyder theorizes that Agathon might have made a deliberate effort to mimic the sumptuous attire of his famous fellow poet, although by Agathon&#x27;s time, such clothing, especially the κεκρύφαλος (&quot;kekryphalos&quot;, an elaborate covering for the hair) had long fallen out of fashion for men. According to this interpretation, Agathon is mocked in the &quot;Thesmophoriazousae&quot; not only for his notorious effeminacy, but also for the pretentiousness of his dress: &quot;he seems to think of himself, in all his elegant finery, as a rival to the old Ionian poets, perhaps even to Anacreon himself.&quot;

==Plato&#x27;s epigram==
Agathon is the subject of an epigram attributed to Plato:

τὴν ψυχὴν Ἀγάθωνα φιλῶν ἐπὶ χείλεσιν εἶχον·
ἦλθε γὰρ ἡ τλήμων ὡς διαβησομένη.

One translation reads: 

My soul was on my lips as I was kissing Agathon. Poor soul! she came hoping to cross over to him.

The epigram was probably not composed by Plato. Stylistic evidence suggests that the poem (with most of Plato&#x27;s other alleged epigrams) was actually written sometime after Plato had died: its form is that of the Hellenistic erotic epigram, which did not become popular until after 300 BC. According to 20th-century scholar Walther Ludwig, the poems were spuriously inserted into an early biography of Plato sometime between 250 BC and 100 BC and adopted by later writers from this source. It is unlikely Plato would write a love epigram about Agathon, who was approximately twenty years older than him.

==Known plays==
Of Agathon&#x27;s plays, only six titles and thirty-one fragments have survived:
*&quot;Aerope&quot;
*&quot;Alcmeon&quot;
*&quot;Anthos&quot; or &quot;Antheus&quot; (&quot;The Flower&quot;)
*&quot;Mysoi&quot; (&quot;Mysians&quot;)
*&quot;Telephos&quot; (&quot;Telephus&quot;)
*&quot;Thyestes&quot;
Fragments in A Nauck, &quot;Tragicorum graecorum fragmenta&quot; (1887).
Fragments in Greek with English translations in Matthew Wright&#x27;s &quot;The Lost Plays of Greek Tragedy (Volume 1)
Neglected Authors&quot; (2016)

==Quotations==
==See also==
*List of speakers in Plato&#x27;s dialogues
*Symposium (Feuerbach)

==References==

===Notes===
===Sources===
*&quot;The Drama: Its History, Literature and Influence on Civilization&quot;, volume 1, by Alfred Bates. (London: Historical Publishing Company, 1906)
*&quot;Thesmoph.&quot; 59, 106, &quot;Eccles.&quot; 100 (Aristophanes)
*&quot;Lovers&#x27; Lips&quot; by Plato in the Project Gutenberg eText &quot;Select Epigrams from the Greek Anthology&quot; by J. W. Mackail. 

==External links==
*
*Agathon Poems</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380482" start="0" end="7" title="Agathon" label="Agathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="22" end="30" title="Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="110" end="115" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q486727" start="129" end="138" title="Symposium (Plato)" label="Symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q206883" start="166" end="173" title="Symposium" label="banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="229" end="236" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600879" start="244" end="250" title="Lenaia" label="Lenaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="295" end="307" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q761731" start="331" end="348" title="Thesmophoriazusae" label="Thesmophoriazusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q860084" start="428" end="437" title="Pausanias (Athenian)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q520328" start="517" end="527" title="Protagoras (dialogue)" label="Protagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q26846" start="599" end="608" title="Archelaus I of Macedon" label="Archelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="618" end="625" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="770" end="779" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q264714" start="802" end="809" title="Poetics (Aristotle)" label="Poetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773807" start="868" end="874" title="Anthos (play)" label="Anthos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346967" start="1323" end="1333" title="epideictic" label="epideictic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179785" start="1537" end="1544" title="Gorgias" label="Gorgias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="2035" end="2043" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="2108" end="2117" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q213484" start="2903" end="2911" title="Anacreon" label="Anacreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726898" start="3638" end="3665" title="Epigrams (Plato)" label="epigram attributed to Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773807" start="4625" end="4631" title="Anthos (play)" label="Anthos"/>
<link wikidata="Q916442" start="4756" end="4764" title="Telephus" label="Telephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q95964" start="4807" end="4814" title="Johann August Nauck" label="A Nauck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253086" start="5047" end="5089" title="List of speakers in Plato&amp;#x27;s dialogues" label="List of speakers in Plato&amp;#x27;s dialogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q12899451" start="5091" end="5112" title="Symposium (Feuerbach)" label="Symposium (Feuerbach)"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5263" end="5269" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="5365" end="5377" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q446098" start="5413" end="5418" title="Plato (comic poet)" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="5426" end="5443" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264214" start="5506" end="5519" title="J. W. Mackail" label="J. W. Mackail"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1550" wikidata="Q271850" url="?curid=1550" title="Agesilaus II">
<text>Agesilaus II (; ; 445/4 – 360/59 BC) was king of Sparta from 400 to 360 BC. Generally considered the most important king in the history of Sparta, Agesilaus was the main actor during the period of Spartan hegemony that followed the Peloponnesian War (431–404 BC). Although brave in combat, Agesilaus lacked the diplomatic skills to preserve Sparta&#x27;s position, especially against the rising power of Thebes, which reduced Sparta to a secondary power after its victory at Leuctra in 371 BC.

Despite the traditional secrecy fostered by the Spartiates, the reign of Agesilaus is particularly well-known thanks to the works of his friend Xenophon, who wrote a large history of Greece (the &quot;Hellenica&quot;) covering the years 411 to 362 BC, therefore extensively dealing with Agesilaus&#x27; rule. Xenophon furthermore composed a panegyric biography of his friend, perhaps to clean his memory from the criticisms voiced against him. Another historical tradition—much more hostile to Agesilaus than Xenophon&#x27;s writings—has been preserved in the &quot;Hellenica Oxyrhynchia&quot;, and later continued by Diodorus of Sicily. Moreover, Plutarch wrote a biography of Agesilaus in his &quot;Parallel Lives&quot;, which contains many elements deliberately omitted by Xenophon.

==Early life==

===Youth===
Agesilaus&#x27; father was King Archidamos II (r. 469–427), who belonged to the Eurypontid dynasty, one of the two royal families of Sparta. Archidamos already had a son from a first marriage with Lampito (his own step-aunt) named Agis. After the death of Lampito, Archidamos remarried in the early 440s with Eupolia, daughter of Melesippidas, whose name indicates an aristocratic status. The dates of Agesilaus&#x27; birth, death, and reign are disputed. The only secured information is that he was 84 at his death. The majority opinion is to date his birth to 445/4, but a minority of scholars move it a bit later, c.442. Most of the other dates of Agesilaus are similarly disputed, with the minority moving them about two years later than the majority. Agesilaus also had a sister named Kyniska (the first woman in ancient history to achieve an Olympic victory). The name Agesilaus was rare and harks back to Agesilaus I, one of the earliest kings of Sparta.

Agesilaus was born lame, a fact that should have cost him his life, since in Sparta deformed babies were thrown into a chasm. As he was not heir-apparent, he might have received some leniency from the tribal elders who examined male infants, or perhaps the first effects of the demographic decline of Sparta were already felt at the time, and only the most severely impaired babies were killed.

Starting at the age of 7, Agesilaus had to go through the rigorous education system of Sparta, called the &quot;agoge&quot;. Despite his disability, he brilliantly completed the training, which massively enhanced his prestige, especially after he became king. Indeed, as heirs-apparent were exempted of the &quot;agoge&quot;, few Spartan kings had gone through the same training as the citizens; another notable exception was Leonidas, the embodiment of the &quot;hero-king&quot;. Between 433 and 428, Agesilaus also became the younger lover of Lysander, an aristocrat from the circle of Archidamos, whose family had some influence in Libya.

=== Spartan prince ===
Little is known of Agesilaus&#x27; adult life before his reign, principally because Xenophon—his friend and main biographer—only wrote about his reign. Due to his special status, Agesilaus likely became a member of the Krypteia, an elite corps of young Spartans going undercover in Spartan territory to kill some helots deemed dangerous. Once he turned 20 and became a full citizen, Agesilaus was elected to a common mess, presumably that of his elder half-brother Agis II, who had become king in 427, of which Lysander was perhaps a member.

Agesilaus probably served during the Peloponnesian War (431–404) against Athens, likely at the Battle of Mantinea in 418. Agesilaus married Kleora at some point between 408 and 400. Despite the influence she apparently had on her husband, she is mostly unknown. Her father was Aristomenidas, an influential noble with connections in Thebes.

Thanks to three treaties signed with Persia in 412–411, Sparta received funding from the Persians, which it used to build a fleet that ultimately defeated Athens. This fleet was essentially led by Lysander, whose success gave him an enormous influence in the Greek cities of Asia as well as in Sparta, where he even schemed to become king. In 403 the two kings, Agis and Pausanias, acted together to relieve him from his command.

==Reign==

=== Accession to the throne (400–398 BC) ===
Agis II died while returning from Delphi between 400 and 398. After his funeral, Agesilaus contested the claim of Leotychidas, the son of Agis II, using the widespread belief in Sparta that Leotychidas was an illegitimate son of Alcibiades—a famous Athenian statesman and nephew of Pericles, who had gone into exile in Sparta during the Peloponnesian War, and then seduced the queen. The rumours were strengthened by the fact that even Agis only recognised Leotychidas as his son on his deathbed.

Diopeithes, a supporter of Leotychidas, however quoted an old oracle telling that a Spartan king could not be lame, thus refuting Agesilaus&#x27; claim, but Lysander cunningly returned the objection by saying that the oracle had to be understood figuratively. The lameness warned against by the oracle would therefore refer to the doubt on Leotychidas&#x27; paternity, and this reasoning won the argument. The role of Lysander in the accession of Agesilaus has been debated among historians, principally because Plutarch makes him the main instigator of the plot, while Xenophon downplays Lysander&#x27;s influence. Lysander doubtless supported Agesilaus&#x27; accession because he hoped that the new king would in return help him to regain the importance that he lost in 403.

=== Conspiracy of Cinadon (399 BC) ===
The Conspiracy of Cinadon took place during the first year of Agesilaus&#x27; reign, in the summer of 399. Cinadon was a &quot;hypomeion&quot;, a Spartan who had lost his citizen status, presumably because he could not afford the price of the collective mess—one of the main reasons for the dwindling number of Spartan citizens in the Classical Era, called &quot;oliganthropia&quot;. It is probable that the vast influx of wealth coming to the city after its victory against Athens in 404 triggered inflation in Sparta, which impoverished many citizens with a fixed income, like Cinadon, and caused their downgrade. Therefore, the purpose of the plot was likely to restore the status of these disfranchised citizens. However, the plot was uncovered and Cinadon and its leaders executed—probably with the active participation of Agesilaus, but no further action was taken to solve the social crisis at the origin of the conspiracy. The failure of Agesilaus to acknowledge the critical problem suffered by Sparta at the time has been criticised by modern historians.

=== Invasion of Asia Minor (396–394 BC) ===
According to the treaties signed in 412 and 411 between Sparta and the Persian Empire, the latter became the overlord of the Greek city-states of Asia Minor. In 401, these cities and Sparta supported the bid of Cyrus the Younger (the Persian Emperor&#x27;s younger son and a good friend of Lysander) against his elder brother, the new emperor Artaxerxes II, who nevertheless defeated Cyrus at Cunaxa. As a result, Sparta remained at war with Artaxerxes, and supported the Greek cities of Asia, which fought against Tissaphernes, the satrap of Lydia and Caria. In 397 Lysander engineered a large expedition in Asia headed by Agesilaus, likely to recover the influence he had over the Asian cities at the end of the Peloponnesian War. In order to win the approval of the Spartan assembly, Lysander built an army with only 30 Spartiates (full Spartan citizens), so the risk would be limited; the bulk of the army consisted of 2,000 neodamodes (freed helots) and 6,000 Greek allies. In addition, Agesilaus obtained the support of the oracles of Zeus at Olympia and Apollo at Delphi.

==== The sacrifice at Aulis (396 BC) ====
Lysander and Agesilaus had intended the expedition to be a Panhellenic enterprise, but Athens, Corinth, and especially Thebes, refused to participate. In Spring 396, Agesilaus came to Aulis (in Boeotian territory) to sacrifice on the place where Agamemnon had done so just before his departure to Troy at the head of the Greek army in the &quot;Iliad&quot;, thus giving a grandiose aspect to the expedition. However he did not inform the Boeotians and brought his own seer to perform the sacrifice, instead of the local one. Learning this, the Boeotians prevented him from sacrificing and further humiliated him by casting away the victim; they perhaps intended to provoke a confrontation, as the relations between Sparta and Thebes had become execrable. Agesilaus then left to Asia, but Thebes remained hateful to him for the rest of his life.

==== Campaign in Asia (396–394 BC) ====
Once Agesilaus landed in Ephesus, the Spartan main base, he concluded a three months&#x27; truce with Tissaphernes, likely to settle the affairs among the Greek allies. He integrated some of the Greek mercenaries formerly hired by Cyrus the Younger (the Ten Thousand) in his army. They had returned from Persia under the leadership of Xenophon, who also remained in Agesilaus&#x27; staff. In Ephesus, Agesilaus&#x27; authority was nevertheless overshadowed by Lysander, who was reacquainted with many of his supporters, men he had placed in control of the Greek cities at the end of the Peloponnesian War. Angered by his local aura, Agesilaus humiliated Lysander several times to force him to leave the army, despite his former relationship and Lysander&#x27;s role in his accession to the throne. Plutarch adds that after Agesilaus&#x27; emancipation from him, Lysander returned to his undercover scheme to make the monarchy elective.
After Lysander&#x27;s departure, Agesilaus raided Phrygia, the satrapy of Pharnabazus, until his advance guard was defeated not far from Daskyleion by the superior Persian cavalry. He then wintered at Ephesus, where he trained a cavalry force, perhaps on the advice of Xenophon, who had commanded the cavalry of the Ten Thousand. In 395, the Spartan king managed to trick Tissaphernes into thinking that he would attack Caria, in the south of Asia Minor, forcing the satrap to hold a defence line on the Meander river. Instead, Agesilaus moved north to the important city of Sardis. Tissaphernes hastened to meet the king there, but his cavalry sent in advance was defeated by Agesilaus&#x27; army. After his victory at the Battle of Sardis, Agesilaus became the first king to be given the command of both land and sea. He delegated the naval command to his brother-in-law Peisander, whom he appointed navarch despite his inexperience; perhaps Agesilaus wanted to avoid the rise of a new Lysander, who owed his prominence to his time as navarch. After his defeat, Tissaphernes was executed and replaced as satrap by Tithraustes, who gave Agesilaus 30 talents to move north to the satrapy of Pharnabazus (Persian satraps were often bitter rivals). Augesilaus&#x27; Phrygian campaign of 394 was fruitless, as he lacked the siege equipment required to take the fortresses of Leonton Kephalai, Gordion, and Miletou Teichos.Xenophon tells that Agesilaus then wanted to campaign further east in Asia and sow discontent among the subjects of the Achaemenid empire, or even to conquer Asia. Plutarch went further and wrote that Agesilaus had prepared an expedition to the heart of Persia, up to her capital of Susa, thus making him a forerunner of Alexander the Great. It is very unlikely that Agesilaus really had such a grand campaign in mind; regardless, he was soon forced to return to Europe in 394.

=== Corinthian War (395–387 BC) ===
Although Thebes and Corinth had been allies of Sparta throughout the Peloponnesian War, they were dissatisfied by the settlement of the war in 404, with Sparta as leader of the Greek world. Sparta&#x27;s imperialist expansion in the Aegean greatly upset its former allies, notably by establishing friendly regimes and garrisons in smaller cities. Through large gifts, Tithraustes also encouraged Sparta&#x27;s former allies to start a war in order to force the recall of Agesilaus from Asia—even though the influence of Persian gold has been exaggerated. The initiative came from Thebes, which provoked a war between their ally Ozolian Locris and Phocis in order to bring Sparta to the latter&#x27;s defence. Lysander and the other king Pausanias entered Boeotia, which enabled the Thebans to bring Athens in the war. Lysander then besieged Haliartus without waiting for Pausanias and was killed in a Boeotian counter-attack. In Sparta, Pausanias was condemned to death by Lysander&#x27;s friends and went into exile. After its success at Haliartus, Thebes was able to build a coalition against Sparta, with notably Argos and Corinth, where a war council was established, and securing the defection of most of the cities of northern and central Greece. Unable to wage war on two fronts and with the loss of Lysander and Pausanias, Sparta had no choice but to recall Agesilaus from Asia. The Asian Greeks fighting for him said they wanted to continue serving with him, while Agesilaus promised he would return to Asia as soon as he could.

Agesilaus returned to Greece by land, crossing the Hellespont and from there along the coast of the Aegean Sea. In Thessaly he won a cavalry battle near Narthacium against the Pharsalians who had made an alliance with Thebes. He then entered Boeotia by the Thermopylae, where he received reinforcements from Sparta. Meanwhile, Aristodamos—the regent of the young Agiad king Agesipolis—won a major victory at Nemea near Argos, which was offset by the disaster of the Spartan navy at Cnidus against the Persian fleet led by Conon, an exiled Athenian general. Agesilaus lied to his men about the outcome of the battle of Knidos to avoid demoralising them as they were about to fight a large engagement against the combined armies of Thebes, Athens, Argos and Corinth. The following Battle of Coronea was a classic clash between two lines of hoplites. The anti-Spartan allies were rapidly defeated, but the Thebans managed to retreat in good order, despite Agesilaus&#x27; activity on the front line, which caused him several injuries. The next day the Thebans requested a truce to recover their dead, therefore conceding defeat, although they had not been bested on the battlefield. Agesilaus appears to have tried to win an honourable victory, by risking his life and being merciful with some Thebans who had sought shelter in the nearby Temple of Athena Itonia. He then moved to Delphi, where he offered one tenth of the booty he had amassed since his landing at Ephesus, and returned to Sparta.

No pitched battle took place in Greece in 393. Perhaps Agesilaus was still recovering from his wounds, or he was deprived of command because of the opposition of Lysander&#x27;s and Pausanias&#x27; friends, who were disappointed by his lack of decisive victory and his appointment of Peisander as navarch before the disaster of Knidos. The loss of the Spartan fleet besides allowed Konon to capture the island of Kythera, in the south of the Peloponnese, from where he could raid Spartan territory. In 392, Sparta sent Antalcidas to Asia in order to negotiate a general peace with Tiribazus, the satrap of Lydia, while Sparta would recognise Persia&#x27;s sovereignty over the Asian Greek cities. However, the Greek allies also sent emissaries to Sardis to refuse Antalcidas&#x27; plan, and Artaxerxes likewise rejected it. A second peace conference in Sparta failed the following year because of Athens. A personal enemy of Antalcidas, Agesilaus likely disapproved these talks, which show that his influence at home had waned. Plutarch says that he befriended the young Agiad king Agesipolis, possibly to prevent his opponents from coalescing behind him.

By 391 Agesilaus had apparently recovered his influence as he was appointed at the head of the army, while his half-brother Teleutias became navarch. The target was Argos, which had absorbed Corinth into a political union the previous year. In 390 BC he made several successful expeditions into Corinthian territory, capturing Lechaeum and Peiraion. The loss, however, of a battalion (mora), destroyed by Iphicrates, neutralised these successes, and Agesilaus returned to Sparta. In 389 BC he conducted a campaign in Acarnania, but two years later the Peace of Antalcidas, warmly supported by Agesilaus, put an end to the war, maintaining Spartan hegemony over Greece and returning the Greek cities of Asia Minor to the Achaemenid Empire. In this interval, Agesilaus declined command over Sparta&#x27;s aggression on Mantineia, and justified Phoebidas&#x27; seizure of the Theban Cadmea so long as the outcome provided glory to Sparta.

===Decline===

When war broke out afresh with Thebes, Agesilaus twice invaded Boeotia (in 378 and 377 BC), although he spent the next five years largely out of action due to an unspecified but apparently grave illness. In the congress of 371 an altercation is recorded between him and the Theban general Epaminondas, and due to his influence, Thebes was peremptorily excluded from the peace, and orders given for Agesilaus&#x27;s royal colleague Cleombrotus to march against Thebes in 371. Cleombrotus was defeated and killed at the Battle of Leuctra and the Spartan supremacy overthrown.

In 370 Agesilaus was engaged in an embassy to Mantineia, and reassured the Spartans with an invasion of Arcadia. He preserved an unwalled Sparta against the revolts and conspiracies of helots, perioeci and even other Spartans; and against external enemies, with four different armies led by Epaminondas penetrating Laconia that same year.

====Asia Minor expedition (366 BC)====
In 366 BC, Sparta and Athens, dissatisfied with the Persian king&#x27;s support of Thebes following the embassy of Philiscus of Abydos, decided to provide careful military support to the opponents of the Achaemenid king. Athens and Sparta provided support for the revolting satraps in the Revolt of the Satraps, in particular Ariobarzanes: Sparta sent a force to Ariobarzanes under an aging Agesilaus, while Athens sent a force under Timotheus, which was however diverted when it became obvious that Ariobarzanes had entered frontal conflict with the Achaemenid king. An Athenian mercenary force under Chabrias was also sent to the Egyptian Pharaoh Tachos, who was also fighting against the Achaemenid king. According to Xenophon, Agesilaus, in order to gain money for prosecuting the war, supported the satrap Ariobarzanes of Phrygia in his revolt against Artaxerxes II in 364 (Revolt of the Satraps).

Again, in 362, Epaminondas almost succeeded in seizing the city of Sparta with a rapid and unexpected march. The Battle of Mantinea, in which Agesilaus took no part, was followed by a general peace: Sparta, however, stood aloof, hoping even yet to recover her supremacy.

====Expedition to Egypt====

Sometime after the Battle of Mantineia, Agesilaus went to Egypt at the head of a mercenary force to aid the king Nectanebo I and his regent Teos against Persia. In the summer of 358, he transferred his services to Teos&#x27;s cousin and rival, Nectanebo II, who, in return for his help, gave him a sum of over 200 talents. On his way home Agesilaus died in Cyrenaica, around the age of 84, after a reign of some 41 years. His body was embalmed in wax, and buried at Sparta.

He was succeeded by his son Archidamus III.

==Legacy==
Agesilaus was of small stature and unimpressive appearance, and was lame from birth. These facts were used as an argument against his succession, an oracle having warned Sparta against a &quot;lame reign.&quot; Most ancient writers considered him a highly successful leader in guerrilla warfare, alert and quick, yet cautious—a man, moreover, whose personal bravery was rarely questioned in his own time. Of his courage, temperance, and hardiness, many instances are cited, and to these were added the less Spartan qualities of kindliness and tenderness as a father and a friend. As examples, there was the story of his riding a stick-horse with his children and upon being discovered by a friend desiring that the friend not mention what he had seen until he was the father of children; and because of the affection of his son Archidamus for Cleonymus, he saved Sphodrias, Cleonymus&#x27; father, from execution for his incursion into Piraeus and dishonourable retreat in 378. Modern writers tend to be slightly more critical of Agesilaus&#x27; reputation and achievements, reckoning him an excellent soldier, but one who had a poor understanding of sea power and siege-craft.

As a statesman he won himself both enthusiastic adherents and bitter enemies. Agesilaus was most successful in the opening and closing periods of his reign: commencing but then surrendering a glorious career in Asia; and in extreme age, maintaining his prostrate country. Other writers acknowledge his extremely high popularity at home, but suggest his occasionally rigid and arguably irrational political loyalties and convictions contributed greatly to Spartan decline, notably his unremitting hatred of Thebes, which led to Sparta&#x27;s humiliation at the Battle of Leuctra and thus the end of Spartan hegemony. Historian J. B. Bury remarks that &quot;there is something melancholy about his career:&quot; born into a Sparta that was the unquestioned continental power of Hellas, the Sparta which mourned him eighty four years later had suffered a series of military defeats which would have been unthinkable to his forebears, had seen its population severely decline, and had run so short of money that its soldiers were increasingly sent on campaigns fought more for money than for defense or glory.
Plutarch also describes how often, to remove the threat of instigators of internal dissension, Agesilaus would send his enemies abroad with governorships, where they often were corrupt and procured themselves enemies. Agesilaus would then protect them against these new enemies of theirs, so as to make them his friends. As a result, he no longer had to face internal opposition, as his enemies had henceforth become allies.

As for his personal life, though he had two daughters, Eupolia and Prolyta, and a wife, Cleora, he nonetheless had the habbit of forming homosexual &quot;attachments for young men&quot;.
Other historical accounts paint Agesilaus as a prototype for the ideal leader. His awareness, thoughtfulness, and wisdom were all traits to be emulated diplomatically, while his bravery and shrewdness in battle epitomised the heroic Greek commander. These historians point towards the unstable oligarchies established by Lysander in the former Athenian Empire and the failures of Spartan leaders (such as Pausanias and Kleombrotos) for the eventual suppression of Spartan power. The ancient historian Xenophon was a huge admirer and served under Agesilaus during the campaigns into Asia Minor.

Plutarch includes among Agesilaus&#x27; 78 essays and speeches comprising the apophthegmata Agesilaus&#x27; letter to the ephors on his recall:
And when asked whether Agesilaus wanted a memorial erected in his honour:

Agesilaus lived in the most frugal style alike at home and in the field, and though his campaigns were undertaken largely to secure booty, he was content to enrich the state and his friends and to return as poor as he had set forth.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

=== Ancient sources ===
*Plutarch, &quot;Parallel Lives&quot;.
*Xenophon&quot;, Hellenica.&quot;

=== Modern sources ===

* Hans Beck &amp; Peter Funke, &quot;Federalism in Greek Antiquity&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2015. 
* Paul Cartledge, &quot;Sparta and Lakonia, A Regional History 1300–362 BC&quot;, London, Routledge, 1979 (originally published in 1979). 
*George L. Cawkwell, &quot;Agesilaus and Sparta&quot;, &quot;The Classical Quarterly&quot; 26 (1976): 62–84.
*David, Ephraim. &quot;Sparta Between Empire and Revolution (404-243 BC): Internal Problems and Their Impact on Contemporary Greek Consciousness.&quot; New York: Arno Press, 1981.
*Forrest, W.G. &quot;A History of Sparta, 950-192 B.C.&quot; 2d ed. London: Duckworth, 1980.
*Dustin A. Gish, &quot;Spartan Justice: The Conspiracy of Kinadon in Xenophon&#x27;s &quot;Hellenika&quot;&quot;, in &quot;Polis&quot;, vol. 26, no. 2, 2009, pp. 339–369.
*Hamilton, Charles D. &quot;Sparta&#x27;s Bitter Victories: Politics and Diplomacy in the Corinthian War.&quot; Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1979.
*D. M. Lewis, John Boardman, Simon Hornblower, M. Ostwald (editors), &quot;The Cambridge Ancient History, vol. VI, The Fourth Century B.C.&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1994.
*Anton Powell (editor), &quot;A Companion to Sparta, Volume I&quot;, Hoboken/Chichester, Wiley Blackwell, 2018. 
*D. R. Shipley, &quot;A Commentary on Plutarch&#x27;s&quot; Life of Agesilaos&quot;: Response to Sources in the Presentation of Character&quot;, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1997. 
*Debby Sneed, &quot;Disability and Infanticide in Ancient Greece&quot;, &quot;Hesperia: The Journal of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens&quot;, Vol. 90, No. 4, 2021, pp. 747–772.
*Maria Stamatopoulou, &quot;Thessalians Abroad, the Case of Pharsalos&quot;, in &quot;Mediterranean Historical Review&quot;, vol. 22.2 (2007), pp. 211–236.
*Graham Wylie, &quot;Agesilaus and the Battle of Sardis&quot;, in &quot;Klio&quot;, n°74 (1992), pp. 118–130.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q271850" start="0" end="12" title="Agesilaus II" label="Agesilaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="49" end="55" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516629" start="128" end="145" title="history of Sparta" label="history of Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254630" start="197" end="213" title="Spartan hegemony" label="Spartan hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="232" end="249" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="404" end="410" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q461599" start="475" end="482" title="Battle of Leuctra" label="Leuctra"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="639" end="647" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q674638" start="696" end="705" title="Hellenica" label="Hellenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606509" start="836" end="855" title="Agesilaus (Xenophon)" label="panegyric biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q552400" start="1061" end="1082" title="Hellenica Oxyrhynchia" label="Hellenica Oxyrhynchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="1113" end="1131" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="1143" end="1151" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="1196" end="1210" title="Parallel Lives" label="Parallel Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q313731" start="1342" end="1355" title="Archidamos II" label="Archidamos II"/>
<link wikidata="Q107905" start="1390" end="1400" title="List of kings of Sparta" label="Eurypontid"/>
<link wikidata="Q202826" start="1541" end="1545" title="Agis II" label="Agis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15987053" start="1619" end="1626" title="Eupolia" label="Eupolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q267195" start="2100" end="2107" title="Cynisca" label="Kyniska"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="2158" end="2173" title="ancient Olympic Games" label="Olympic victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q393054" start="2222" end="2233" title="Agesilaus I" label="Agesilaus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43336" start="2781" end="2786" title="agoge" label="agoge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44228" start="3095" end="3103" title="Leonidas I" label="Leonidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294184" start="3197" end="3210" title="Pederasty in ancient Greece" label="younger lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q143559" start="3214" end="3222" title="Lysander" label="Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="3419" end="3427" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324623" start="3554" end="3562" title="Crypteia" label="Krypteia"/>
<link wikidata="Q462484" start="3648" end="3654" title="helots" label="helots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897524" start="3745" end="3756" title="Syssitia" label="common mess"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="3915" end="3932" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="3951" end="3957" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362053" start="3973" end="3991" title="Battle of Mantinea (418 BC)" label="Battle of Mantinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="4211" end="4217" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4257" end="4263" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q433408" start="4591" end="4600" title="Pausanias of Sparta" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="4741" end="4747" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="4936" end="4946" title="Alcibiades" label="Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="4989" end="4997" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="5717" end="5725" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q722577" start="6026" end="6047" title="Conspiracy of Cinadon" label="Conspiracy of Cinadon"/>
<link wikidata="Q369194" start="6149" end="6158" title="hypomeion" label="hypomeion"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="6357" end="6370" title="Classical antiquity" label="Classical Era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6385" end="6398" title="oliganthropia" label="oliganthropia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="7278" end="7288" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q297960" start="7343" end="7360" title="Cyrus the Younger" label="Cyrus the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q188472" start="7475" end="7488" title="Artaxerxes II" label="Artaxerxes II"/>
<link wikidata="Q431205" start="7525" end="7531" title="Battle of Cunaxa" label="Cunaxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q355727" start="7647" end="7659" title="Tissaphernes" label="Tissaphernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="7665" end="7671" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="7675" end="7680" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="7685" end="7690" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q369194" start="7955" end="7965" title="Spartiates" label="Spartiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q612914" start="8061" end="8071" title="neodamodes" label="neodamodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q462484" start="8079" end="8085" title="helots" label="helots"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="8173" end="8177" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="8181" end="8188" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="8193" end="8199" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="8203" end="8209" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="8349" end="8356" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821780" start="8438" end="8443" title="Aulis (ancient Greece)" label="Aulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="8448" end="8455" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="8500" end="8509" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="8551" end="8555" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="8599" end="8604" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="9165" end="9172" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q651855" start="9394" end="9406" title="Ten Thousand" label="Ten Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="10126" end="10133" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458256" start="10150" end="10161" title="Pharnabazus II" label="Pharnabazus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171924" start="10213" end="10223" title="Dascylium" label="Daskyleion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="10496" end="10501" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q211089" start="10580" end="10593" title="Büyük Menderes River" label="Meander river"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="10651" end="10657" title="Sardis" label="Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10800" end="10816" title="Battle of Sardis (395 BC)" label="Battle of Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974236" start="10949" end="10958" title="Peisander (general)" label="Peisander"/>
<link wikidata="Q185878" start="10978" end="10985" title="navarch" label="navarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q552396" start="11192" end="11203" title="Tithraustes" label="Tithraustes"/>
<link wikidata="Q542854" start="11466" end="11473" title="Gordion" label="Gordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="11778" end="11782" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="11816" end="11835" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254630" start="12173" end="12198" title="Spartan hegemony" label="leader of the Greek world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894785" start="12638" end="12652" title="Ozolian Locris" label="Ozolian Locris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890323" start="12657" end="12663" title="Phocis" label="Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q433408" start="12747" end="12756" title="Pausanias of Sparta" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q359627" start="12851" end="12860" title="Haliartus" label="Haliartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118879" start="12911" end="12934" title="Battle of Haliartus" label="Boeotian counter-attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="13600" end="13610" title="Dardanelles" label="Hellespont"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="13649" end="13659" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="13664" end="13672" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16610810" start="13702" end="13712" title="Narthacium" label="Narthacium"/>
<link wikidata="Q985596" start="13725" end="13736" title="Farsala" label="Pharsalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="13791" end="13798" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194450" start="13806" end="13817" title="Thermopylae" label="Thermopylae"/>
<link wikidata="Q357594" start="13923" end="13933" title="Agesipolis I" label="Agesipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671704" start="13946" end="13953" title="Battle of Nemea" label="victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q748108" start="13957" end="13962" title="Nemea" label="Nemea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151812" start="14031" end="14037" title="Battle of Cnidus" label="Cnidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q363832" start="14071" end="14076" title="Conon" label="Conon"/>
<link wikidata="Q733113" start="14328" end="14345" title="Battle of Coronea (394 BC)" label="Battle of Coronea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155980" start="14885" end="14908" title="Iton (Thessaly)" label="Temple of Athena Itonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207239" start="15458" end="15465" title="Kythira" label="Kythera"/>
<link wikidata="Q508188" start="15564" end="15574" title="Antalcidas" label="Antalcidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q921102" start="15626" end="15635" title="Tiribazus" label="Tiribazus"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="15651" end="15656" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360710" start="16326" end="16335" title="Teleutias" label="Teleutias"/>
<link wikidata="Q57961021" start="16529" end="16537" title="Lechaeum" label="Lechaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973204" start="16542" end="16550" title="Perachora" label="Peiraion"/>
<link wikidata="Q898140" start="16587" end="16591" title="Mora (military unit)" label="mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q354424" start="16607" end="16617" title="Iphicrates" label="Iphicrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q416070" start="16719" end="16728" title="Acarnania" label="Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132922" start="16754" end="16773" title="Peace of Antalcidas" label="Peace of Antalcidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="16904" end="16914" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="16922" end="16939" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160195" start="17019" end="17028" title="Mantineia" label="Mantineia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088576" start="17044" end="17053" title="Phoebidas" label="Phoebidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276854" start="17082" end="17088" title="Cadmea" label="Cadmea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="17217" end="17224" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190436" start="17443" end="17454" title="Epaminondas" label="Epaminondas"/>
<link wikidata="Q373660" start="17585" end="17596" title="Cleombrotus I" label="Cleombrotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461599" start="17672" end="17689" title="Battle of Leuctra" label="Battle of Leuctra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160195" start="17775" end="17784" title="Mantineia" label="Mantineia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="17833" end="17840" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q462484" start="17914" end="17919" title="helot" label="helot"/>
<link wikidata="Q288216" start="17922" end="17930" title="perioeci" label="perioeci"/>
<link wikidata="Q190436" start="18020" end="18031" title="Epaminondas" label="Epaminondas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="18044" end="18051" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="18191" end="18197" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922032" start="18223" end="18242" title="Philiscus of Abydos" label="Philiscus of Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12015696" start="18397" end="18418" title="Revolt of the Satraps" label="Revolt of the Satraps"/>
<link wikidata="Q662006" start="18434" end="18446" title="Ariobarzanes of Phrygia" label="Ariobarzanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q713679" start="18542" end="18551" title="Timotheus (general)" label="Timotheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q543525" start="18710" end="18718" title="Chabrias" label="Chabrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q198688" start="18757" end="18763" title="Teos of Egypt" label="Tachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="18829" end="18837" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="18912" end="18918" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q662006" start="18919" end="18942" title="Ariobarzanes of Phrygia" label="Ariobarzanes of Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188472" start="18965" end="18978" title="Artaxerxes II of Persia" label="Artaxerxes II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12015696" start="18987" end="19008" title="Revolt of the Satraps" label="Revolt of the Satraps"/>
<link wikidata="Q233399" start="19125" end="19143" title="Battle of Mantinea (362 BC)" label="Battle of Mantinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="19371" end="19376" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="19394" end="19403" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q175775" start="19426" end="19437" title="Nectanebo I" label="Nectanebo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q198688" start="19453" end="19457" title="Teos of Egypt" label="Teos"/>
<link wikidata="Q313126" start="19557" end="19569" title="Nectanebo II" label="Nectanebo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14877141" start="19627" end="19634" title="attic talent" label="talents"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="19670" end="19679" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q448580" start="19816" end="19830" title="Archidamus III" label="Archidamus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="19993" end="19999" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="20121" end="20138" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335617" start="20473" end="20484" title="Stick horse" label="stick-horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q448580" start="20672" end="20682" title="Archidamus III" label="Archidamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608630" start="20707" end="20716" title="Sphodrias" label="Sphodrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="20780" end="20787" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="21009" end="21020" title="siegecraft" label="siege-craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q461599" start="21583" end="21600" title="Battle of Leuctra" label="Battle of Leuctra"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="23243" end="23251" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="23324" end="23334" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="23337" end="23345" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q651941" start="23415" end="23428" title="Apophthegmata Laconica" label="apophthegmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q109432" start="23459" end="23464" title="ephor" label="ephor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="23853" end="23861" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="23869" end="23883" title="Parallel Lives" label="Parallel Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="23892" end="23900" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q674638" start="23908" end="23917" title="Hellenica" label="Hellenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578596" start="23952" end="23961" title="Hans Beck (historian)" label="Hans Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395093" start="23968" end="23979" title="Peter Funke" label="Peter Funke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976948" start="24061" end="24075" title="Paul Cartledge" label="Paul Cartledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537767" start="24199" end="24217" title="George Cawkwell" label="George L. Cawkwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q566658" start="24921" end="24934" title="John Boardman (art historian)" label="John Boardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518994" start="24936" end="24952" title="Simon Hornblower" label="Simon Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q124100513" start="24982" end="25011" title="The Cambridge Ancient History" label="The Cambridge Ancient History"/>
<link wikidata="Q56043361" start="25574" end="25593" title="Maria Stamatopoulou" label="Maria Stamatopoulou"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1551" wikidata="Q249118" url="?curid=1551" title="Agis">
<text>Agis or AGIS may refer to:

== People ==
* Agis I (died 900 BC), Spartan king
* Agis II (died 401 BC), Spartan king
* Agis III (died 331 BC), Spartan king
* Agis IV (265–241 BC), Spartan king
* Agis (Paeonian) (died 358 BC), King of the Paeonians
* Agis of Argos, ancient Greek poet
* Maurice Agis (1931–2009), British sculptor and artist

== Other uses ==
* &quot;Agis&quot; (play), by John Home
* Agis, several fictional emperors of Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Galactic Empire
* Apex Global Internet Services
* Atomic gravitational wave interferometric sensor
* Advanced Glaucoma Intervention Study, conducted by the National Eye Institute

== See also ==
* Agide (disambiguation), modern Italian given name related to Agis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q249118" start="0" end="4" title="Agis" label="Agis"/>
<link wikidata="Q249118" start="8" end="12" title="Agis" label="AGIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q394074" start="43" end="49" title="Agis I" label="Agis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q202826" start="80" end="87" title="Agis II" label="Agis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q314364" start="118" end="126" title="Agis III" label="Agis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q299479" start="157" end="164" title="Agis IV" label="Agis IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692688" start="194" end="209" title="Agis (Paeonian)" label="Agis (Paeonian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331853" start="249" end="262" title="Agis of Argos" label="Agis of Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413890" start="285" end="297" title="Maurice Agis" label="Maurice Agis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692686" start="359" end="382" title="Agis (play)" label="&amp;quot;Agis&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="455" end="470" title="Galactic Empire (Asimov)" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779418" start="473" end="502" title="Apex Global Internet Services" label="Apex Global Internet Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302080" start="505" end="553" title="Atomic gravitational wave interferometric sensor" label="Atomic gravitational wave interferometric sensor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="556" end="592" title="National Eye Institute#The Advanced Glaucoma Intervention Study" label="Advanced Glaucoma Intervention Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q54819656" start="652" end="674" title="Agide (disambiguation)" label="Agide (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1552" wikidata="Q599501" url="?curid=1552" title="Antonio Agliardi">
<text>Antonio Agliardi (4 September 1832 – 19 March 1915) was an Italian Roman Catholic Cardinal, archbishop, and papal diplomat.

==Biography==
Agliardi was born at Cologno al Serio, in what is now the Province of Bergamo.

He studied theology and canon law, and after acting as parish priest in his native diocese for twelve years was sent by the pope to Canada as a bishop&#x27;s chaplain. On his return he was appointed secretary to the Congregation of the Propaganda.

In 1884, he was created by Pope Leo XIII Archbishop of Caesarea &quot;in partibus&quot; and sent to India as an Apostolic Delegate to report on the establishment of the hierarchy there.

In 1887 he again visited India, to carry out the terms of the concordat arranged with Portugal. The same year he was appointed secretary of the Congregation &quot;super negotiis ecclesiae extraordinariis&quot;. In 1889 he became papal Apostolic Nuncio to Bavaria at Munich and in 1892 at Vienna. Allowing himself to be involved in the ecclesiastical disputes that divided Hungary in 1895, he was made the subject of formal complaint by the Hungarian government and in 1896 was recalled.

In the consistory of 1896 he was elevated to Cardinal-Priest of &quot;Santi Nereo e Achilleo&quot;. In 1899 he was made Cardinal Bishop of Albano. In 1903, he was named vice-chancellor of the Catholic Church, and became the Chancellor of the Apostolic Chancery in the Secretariat of State in 1908.

He died in Rome and was buried in Bergamo.

==Episcopal lineage==

Agliardi&#x27;s episcopal lineage, or apostolic succession was:

* Cardinal Scipione Rebiba
* Cardinal Giulio Antonio Santorio
* Cardinal Girolamo Bernerio
* Archbishop Galeazzo Sanvitale
* Cardinal Ludovico Ludovisi
* Cardinal Luigi Caetani
* Cardinal Ulderico Carpegna
* Cardinal Paluzzo Paluzzi Altieri degli Albertoni
* Pope Benedict XIII
* Pope Benedict XIV
* Cardinal Enrico Enríquez
* Archbishop Manuel Quintano Bonifaz
* Cardinal Buenaventura Fernández de Córdoba Spínola
* Cardinal Giuseppe Doria Pamphili
* Pope Pius VIII
* Pope Pius IX
* Cardinal Alessandro Franchi
* Cardinal Giovanni Simeoni
* Cardinal Antonio Agliardi
==Notes==
==References==
*

==External links==
*Catholic-Hierarchy.org 

 
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q599501" start="0" end="16" title="Antonio Agliardi" label="Antonio Agliardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="67" end="81" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="82" end="90" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="92" end="102" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q100394" start="160" end="176" title="Cologno al Serio" label="Cologno al Serio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16137" start="197" end="216" title="Province of Bergamo" label="Province of Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="230" end="238" title="Christian theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="243" end="252" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="343" end="347" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="351" end="357" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917451" start="363" end="385" title="bishop&amp;#x27;s chaplain" label="bishop&amp;#x27;s chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q386359" start="435" end="465" title="Congregation of the Propaganda" label="Congregation of the Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="495" end="508" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025445" start="509" end="531" title="Archbishop of Caesarea" label="Archbishop of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780644" start="568" end="573" title="Apostolic Nunciature to India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="580" end="598" title="Apostolic Delegate" label="Apostolic Delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="637" end="646" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213541" start="717" end="726" title="concordat" label="concordat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="741" end="749" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q620048" start="890" end="917" title="Apostolic Nuncio to Bavaria" label="Apostolic Nuncio to Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="921" end="927" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="943" end="949" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1027" end="1034" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q841535" start="1150" end="1160" title="Papal consistory" label="consistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="1188" end="1203" title="Cardinal-Priest" label="Cardinal-Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223492" start="1213" end="1235" title="Santi Nereo e Achilleo" label="Santi Nereo e Achilleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="1263" end="1278" title="Cardinal Bishop" label="Cardinal Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q191115" start="1282" end="1288" title="Albano Laziale" label="Albano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443420" start="1385" end="1403" title="Apostolic Chancery" label="Apostolic Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q644545" start="1411" end="1431" title="Secretariat of State (Vatican)" label="Secretariat of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1453" end="1457" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="1476" end="1483" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="1547" end="1567" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q729922" start="1585" end="1600" title="Scipione Rebiba" label="Scipione Rebiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386026" start="1612" end="1635" title="Giulio Antonio Santorio" label="Giulio Antonio Santorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q771426" start="1647" end="1664" title="Girolamo Bernerio" label="Girolamo Bernerio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="1667" end="1677" title="Archbishop" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q785289" start="1678" end="1696" title="Galeazzo Sanvitale" label="Galeazzo Sanvitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q707750" start="1708" end="1725" title="Ludovico Ludovisi" label="Ludovico Ludovisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q720427" start="1737" end="1750" title="Luigi Caetani" label="Luigi Caetani"/>
<link wikidata="Q980628" start="1762" end="1779" title="Ulderico Carpegna" label="Ulderico Carpegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348288" start="1791" end="1830" title="Paluzzo Paluzzi Altieri degli Albertoni" label="Paluzzo Paluzzi Altieri degli Albertoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q155971" start="1833" end="1851" title="Pope Benedict XIII" label="Pope Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q126711" start="1854" end="1871" title="Pope Benedict XIV" label="Pope Benedict XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054630" start="1883" end="1898" title="Enrico Enríquez" label="Enrico Enríquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845048" start="1912" end="1935" title="Manuel Quintano Bonifaz" label="Manuel Quintano Bonifaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927618" start="1947" end="1988" title="Buenaventura Fernández de Córdoba Spínola" label="Buenaventura Fernández de Córdoba Spínola"/>
<link wikidata="Q669526" start="2000" end="2023" title="Giuseppe Doria Pamphili" label="Giuseppe Doria Pamphili"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443" start="2026" end="2040" title="Pope Pius VIII" label="Pope Pius VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="2043" end="2055" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q647382" start="2067" end="2085" title="Alessandro Franchi (cardinal)" label="Alessandro Franchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q746874" start="2097" end="2113" title="Giovanni Simeoni" label="Giovanni Simeoni"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1553" wikidata="Q61876" url="?curid=1553" title="Agnes of Merania">
<text>Agnes of Merania (1175 – July 1201) was Queen of France by marriage to King Philip II.

She is called Marie by some of the French chroniclers.

==Biography==
Agnes Maria was the daughter of Berthold, Duke of Merania and Agnes of Rochlitz.

In June 1196, Agnes married Philip II of France, who had repudiated his second wife Ingeborg of Denmark in 1193. Pope Innocent III espoused the cause of Ingeborg; but Philip did not submit until 1200, when, nine months after interdict had been added to excommunication, he consented to a separation from Agnes.

Agnes died, possibly in childbirth, in July of the next year, at the castle of Poissy, and was buried in the Convent of St Corentin, near Nantes.

==Family==
Agnes and Philip had two children: 
*Mary, b. 1198
*Philip I, Count of Boulogne, b 1200
Both were legitimized by the Pope in 1201. 

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*

==External links==

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61876" start="0" end="16" title="Agnes of Merania" label="Agnes of Merania"/>
<link wikidata="Q878198" start="40" end="55" title="Queen of France" label="Queen of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="76" end="85" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q61454" start="190" end="215" title="Berthold, Duke of Merania" label="Berthold, Duke of Merania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488841" start="220" end="237" title="Agnes of Rochlitz" label="Agnes of Rochlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="268" end="287" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231755" start="324" end="343" title="Ingeborg of Denmark, Queen of France" label="Ingeborg of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="353" end="370" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="465" end="474" title="Interdict (Catholic canon law)" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210856" start="493" end="508" title="Excommunication (Catholic Church)" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q457" start="631" end="637" title="Poissy" label="Poissy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="661" end="683" title="Convent of St Corentin" label="Convent of St Corentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="690" end="696" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704768" start="747" end="751" title="Marie of France, Duchess of Brabant" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19007" start="762" end="789" title="Philip I, Count of Boulogne" label="Philip I, Count of Boulogne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1556" wikidata="Q229413" url="?curid=1556" title="Agrippina the Elder">
<text>(Vipsania) Agrippina the Elder (also, in Latin, , &quot;Germanicus&#x27;s Agrippina&quot;; – AD 33) was a prominent member of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. She was the daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa (a close supporter of the first Roman emperor, Augustus) and Augustus&#x27; daughter, Julia the Elder. Her brothers Lucius and Gaius Caesar were the adoptive sons of Augustus, and were his heirs until their deaths in AD 2 and 4, respectively. Following their deaths, her second cousin Germanicus was made the adoptive son of Tiberius, Augustus&#x27; stepson, as part of the succession scheme in the adoptions of AD 4 (in which Tiberius was adopted by Augustus). As a result of the adoption, Agrippina was wed to Germanicus in order to bring him closer to the Julian family.

Agrippina the Elder is known to have traveled with Germanicus throughout his career, taking her children wherever they went. In AD 14, Germanicus was deployed in Gaul as a governor and general, and, while there, the late Augustus sent her son Gaius to stay with her. Agrippina liked to dress him in a little soldiers&#x27; outfit for which Gaius earned the nickname &quot;Caligula&quot; (&quot;little soldier&#x27;s boots&quot;). After three years in Gaul, they returned to Rome, and her husband was awarded a triumph on 26 May AD 17 to commemorate his victories. The following year, Germanicus was sent to govern over the eastern provinces. While Germanicus was active in his administration, the governor of Syria Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso began feuding with him. During the feud, her husband died of illness on 10 October AD 19.

Germanicus was cremated in Antioch, and she transported his ashes to Rome where they were interred at the Mausoleum of Augustus. Agrippina was vocal in claims of her husband being murdered in order to promote Tiberius&#x27; son, Drusus Julius Caesar (&quot;Drusus the Younger&quot;), as heir. Following the model of her stepgrandmother Livia, she spent the time following Germanicus&#x27; death supporting the cause of her sons Nero and Drusus Caesar. This put her and her sons at odds with the powerful Praetorian prefect Lucius Aelius Sejanus, who began eliminating their supporters with accusations of treason and sexual misconduct in AD 26. Her family&#x27;s rivalry with Sejanus would culminate with her and Nero&#x27;s exile in AD 29. Nero was exiled to Pontia and she was exiled to the island of Pandateria, where she would remain until her death by starvation in AD 33.

==Name==

Following the Roman custom of parents and children sharing the same nomen and cognomen, women in the same family would often share the same name. Accordingly, Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa first daughter with Attica was named Vipsania Agrippina. To distinguish Agrippa and Julia&#x27;s daughter from their granddaughter Julia Agrippina, historians refer to this daughter as &quot;Agrippina the Elder&quot; (Latin: &quot;Agrippina Maior&quot;). Likewise, Agrippina&#x27;s daughter is referred to as 
&quot;Agrippina the Younger&quot; (&quot;Minor&quot;). Like her father, Agrippina the Elder avoided her nomen and has not been found to have used &quot;Vipsania&quot; in inscription. An inscription in Rhodiapolis records her with the nomen &quot;Julia&quot;, although this appears to be a mistake.

==Background==
Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa was an early supporter of Augustus (then &quot;Octavius&quot;). He was a key general in Augustus&#x27; armies, commanding troops during the wars against Sextus Pompey and Mark Antony. From early in the emperor&#x27;s reign, Agrippa was trusted to handle affairs in the eastern provinces and was even given the signet ring of Augustus, who appeared to be on his deathbed in 23BC, a sign that he would become &quot;princeps&quot; were Augustus to die. It is probable that he was to rule until the emperor&#x27;s nephew, Marcus Claudius Marcellus, came of age. However, Marcellus died that year of an illness that became an epidemic in Rome.

Now, with Marcellus dead, Augustus arranged for the marriage of Agrippa to his daughter Julia the Elder, who was previously the wife of Marcellus. Agrippa was given &quot;tribunicia potestas&quot; (&quot;the tribunician power&quot;) in 18 BC, a power that only the emperor and his immediate heir could hope to attain. The tribunician power allowed him to control the Senate, and it was first given to Julius Caesar. Agrippa acted as tribune in the Senate to pass important legislation and, though he lacked some of the emperor&#x27;s power and authority, he was approaching the position of co-regent.

After the birth of Agrippa&#x27;s second son, Lucius, in 17 BC, Lucius and his brother Gaius were adopted together by Augustus. Around the time of their adoption in the summer, Augustus held the fifth ever &quot;Ludi Saeculares&quot; (&quot;Secular Games&quot;). Cassius Dio says the adoption of the boys coupled with the games served to introduce a new era of peace – the &quot;Pax Augusta&quot;. It is not known what Agrippa thought of their adoption; however, following their adoption, Agrippa was dispatched to govern the eastern provinces, bringing his family with him.

==Early life and family==

Agrippina was born in 14 BC to Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa and Julia the Elder, before their return to Rome in 13 BC. She had several siblings, including half-sisters Vipsania Agrippina, Vipsania Attica, Vipsania Marcella and Vipsania Marcellina (from her father&#x27;s marriages to Pomponia Caecilia Attica and Claudia Marcella Major); and four full siblings, with three brothers; Gaius, Lucius, and Postumus Agrippa (all were adopted by Augustus; Gaius and Lucius were adopted together following Lucius&#x27; birth in 17 BC; Postumus in AD 4), and a sister Julia the Younger.

She was a prominent member of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. On her mother&#x27;s side, she was the younger granddaughter of Augustus. She was the Stepdaughter of Tiberius by her mother&#x27;s marriage to him, and sister in law of Claudius, the brother of her husband Germanicus. Her son Gaius, better known as &quot;Caligula&quot;, would be the third emperor, and her grandson Nero would be the last emperor of the dynasty.

In 13 BC, her father returned to Rome and was promptly sent to Pannonia to suppress a rebellion. Agrippa arrived there that winter (in 12 BC), but the Pannonians gave up that same year. Agrippa returned to Campania in Italy, where he fell ill and died soon after. After her father&#x27;s death, she spent the rest of her childhood in Augustus&#x27; household where access to her was strictly controlled.

Some of the currency issued in 13–12 BC, the &quot;aurei&quot; and &quot;denarii&quot;, make it clear that her brothers Gaius and Lucius were Augustus&#x27; intended heirs. Their father was no longer available to assume the reins of power if the Emperor were to die, and Augustus had to make it clear who his intended heirs were in case anything should happen. Lucius&#x27; and Gaius&#x27; military and political careers would steadily advance until their deaths in AD 2 and 4, respectively.

The death of her brothers meant that Augustus had to find other heirs. Although he initially considered Agrippina&#x27;s second cousin Germanicus a potential heir for a time, Livia convinced Augustus to adopt Tiberius, Livia&#x27;s son from her first marriage with Tiberius Claudius Nero. Although Augustus adopted Tiberius, it was on condition that Tiberius first adopt Germanicus so that Germanicus would become second in the line of succession. It was a corollary to the adoption, probably in the next year, that Agrippina was married to Germanicus.

By her husband Germanicus, she had nine children: Nero Julius Caesar, Drusus Julius Caesar, Tiberius Julius Caesar, a child of unknown name (normally referenced as &quot;Ignotus&quot;), Gaius the Elder, the Emperor Caligula (Gaius the Younger), the Empress Agrippina the Younger, Julia Drusilla, and Julia Livilla. Only six of her children came of age; Tiberius and Ignotus died as infants, and Gaius the Elder in his early childhood.

==Marriage==

Her husband&#x27;s career in the military began in AD 6, with the Batonian War in Pannonia and Dalmatia. Throughout Germanicus&#x27; military career, Agrippina is known to have traveled with her husband and their children. Germanicus&#x27; career advanced steadily as he advanced in ranks following the &quot;cursus honorum&quot; until, in AD 12, he was made consul. The following year, he was given command over Gaul and the forces on the Rhine, totaling eight legions.

On 18 May AD 14, her one-year-old son Gaius was sent by Augustus from Rome to join her in Gaul. She was pregnant at the time and, while Germanicus was collecting taxes across Gaul, she remained at an unspecified separate location, presumably for her safety. Augustus sent her a letter with her son&#x27;s party, which read:
Later that year, on 19 August, Augustus died while away in Campania. As a result, Tiberius was made &quot;princeps&quot;. While Germanicus was administering the oath of fealty to Tiberius, a mutiny began among the forces on the Rhine. During the mutiny, Agrippina brought out their sixth child, Gaius, and made preparations to take him away to a safer town nearby. He was in a full army outfit including the legionary hobnailed boots (&quot;caligae&quot;). These military-booties earned Gaius the nickname &quot;Caligula&quot; (lit. &quot;little boots&quot;), and garnered sympathy for Agrippina and the child among the soldiery. Tacitus attributes her actions as having quelled the mutiny (Tacitus, &quot;Annals&quot; 1.40–4).

Once the mutiny was put to an end, Germanicus allowed the soldiers to deal with the ringleaders, which they did with brutal severity. He then led them against the Germanic tribes, perhaps in an effort to prevent future mutiny. Germanicus would remain in Gaul fighting against the Germanic tribes until AD 16, at which time he was recalled to Rome by Tiberius. His campaigns won him much renown among the Roman people, and he was awarded a triumph on 26 May AD 17.

===Widowhood===

In AD 18, Agrippina left for the eastern provinces with her family. Germanicus was sent the east to govern the provinces, the same assignment her father was given years earlier. Agrippina was pregnant on their journey east and, on the way to Syria, she gave birth to her youngest daughter Julia Livilla on the island of Lesbos. Inscriptions celebrating her fertility have been found on the island.

Tiberius sent Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso to assist her husband, naming him governor of Syria. During their time there, Germanicus was active in his administration of the eastern regions. Piso did not get along well with Germanicus and their relationship only got worse. In AD 19, Germanicus ordered Piso to leave the province, which Piso began to do. On his way back to Rome, Piso stopped at the island of Kos off the coast of Syria. Around that time Germanicus fell ill and he died on 10 October AD 19 at Antioch. Rumours spread of Piso poisoning her husband on the emperor&#x27;s orders.

After Germanicus&#x27; cremation in the forum of Antioch, Agrippina personally carried the ashes of her husband to Rome. The transportation of the ashes witnessed national mourning. She landed at the port of Brundisium in southern Italy where she was met with huge crowds of sympathizers; a praetorian escort was provided by the emperor in light of her rank as the wife of a governor-general. As she passed each town, the people and local magistrates came out to show their respect. Drusus the Younger (son of Tiberius), Claudius, and the consuls journeyed to join the procession as well. Once she made it to Rome, her husband&#x27;s ashes were interred at the Mausoleum of Augustus. Tiberius and Livia did not make an appearance.

==Life after Germanicus==

Her marriage to Germanicus had served to unite the imperial family. Agrippina may have suspected Tiberius&#x27; involvement in the death of her husband and, with Germanicus dead, she no longer had any familial ties to the emperor. Historian Richard Alston says it is likely that either Tiberius or Livia were behind the exile of Agrippina&#x27;s sister Julia the Younger and the death of Postumus. He notes the death of Agrippina&#x27;s mother, who starved herself to death amidst her exile in AD 14, linking her death to Tiberius&#x27; disdain for her.

Agrippina was vocal about her feelings claiming that Germanicus was murdered to promote Drusus the Younger as Tiberius&#x27; heir, and worried that the birth of the Younger Drusus&#x27; twin sons would displace her own sons in the line of succession.

At about this time, Tiberius&#x27; Praetorian Prefect Sejanus was becoming powerful in Rome and began feuding with Drusus the Younger. While the exact causes of the feud are unknown, it ended when the Younger Drusus died of seemingly natural causes on 14 September AD 23. After the death of Tiberius&#x27; son, Agrippina wanted to advance the careers of her sons, who were all potential heirs for Tiberius. It has been suggested that to achieve this, Agrippina commissioned the Great Cameo of France and presented it to Tiberius as a personalized gift that positioned the family of Germanicus around the emperor. The work was designed to convince Tiberius to choose her children as his heirs.

Ultimately, the death of Tiberius&#x27; son elevated her own children to the position of heirs. Her sons were the logical choice, because they were the sons of Germanicus and Tiberius&#x27; grandsons were too young. Nero was becoming popular in the Senate due in part, Tacitus says, to his resemblance with his father. The rise of her children was threatening to Sejanus&#x27; position. Resultantly, Sejanus began spreading rumors about Agrippina in the imperial court. The coming years were marked with increasing hostility between Sejanus and Agrippina and her sons. This effectively caused factions to rise in the aristocracy between her family and Sejanus.

===Political rivalry===

On New Year&#x27;s Day, AD 24, Sejanus had the priests and magistrates add prayers for the health of Nero and Drusus in addition to those normally offered to the emperor on that day. Tiberius was not happy with this and he voiced his displeasure in the Senate. In addition, he questioned the priests of the Palatine. Some of the priests who offered the prayers were relatives of Agrippina and Germanicus. This made Tiberius suspicious of her and marked a change in his attitude toward her and her older sons, but not Caligula.

In AD 25, Sejanus requested Livilla&#x27;s hand in marriage. Livilla was a niece of the emperor, which would have made him a member of the imperial family. While this did make his ambitions clear, his request was denied. The loss may have been huge for Sejanus had the dissensions in the imperial household not been deteriorating. Relations were so bad that Agrippina refused to eat at Tiberius&#x27; dinner parties for fear of being poisoned. She also asked Tiberius if she could be allowed to remarry, which he also refused.

If either of them were allowed to remarry it would have threatened the line of succession that Tiberius was comfortable with. By refusing Sejanus&#x27; request, Tiberius made it clear he was content with the children of Germanicus and his own grandchildren being his successors. Had Sejanus married Livilla, their children would have provided another line of possible successors. The implication of Agrippina&#x27;s request was that she needed a man from outside the imperial family to serve as protector and step-father of possible imperial heirs, a powerful position. It was also an implied reprimand: Tiberius was meant to be the guardian of the imperial family.

Tiberius was in a tough position. He was faced with a conflict between his family and his friend. His solution was surprising. In AD 26, he left Rome altogether and retired to the island of Capri in the Bay of Naples. He cut himself off from the factions altogether and abandoned politics. He left Rome in the care of Sejanus. This allowed Sejanus to freely attack his rivals.

===Downfall===
With Tiberius away from Rome, the city would see a rise of politically motivated trials on the part of Sejanus and his supporters against Agrippina and her associates. Many of her friends and associates were subsequently accused of &quot;maiestas&quot; (&quot;treason&quot;) by the growing number of accusers. It was also common to see charges of sexual misconduct and corruption. In AD 27, Agrippina found herself placed under house arrest in her suburban villa outside Herculaneum.

In AD 28, the Senate voted that altars to &quot;Clementia&quot; (mercy) and &quot;Amicitia&quot; (friendship) be raised. At that time, &quot;Clementia&quot; was considered a virtue of the ruling class, for only the powerful could give clemency. The altar of &quot;Amicitia&quot; was flanked by statues of Sejanus and Tiberius. By this time, his association with Tiberius was such that there were those in Roman society who erected statues in his honor and gave prayers and sacrifices in his honor. Sejanus&#x27; birthday was honored as if he were a member of the imperial family. According to Richard Alston, &quot;Sejanus&#x27; association with Tiberius must have at least indicated to the people that he would be further elevated.&quot;

Sejanus did not begin his final attack on Agrippina until after the death of Livia in AD 29. Tacitus reports a letter being sent to the Senate from Tiberius denouncing Agrippina for her arrogance and prideful attitude, and Nero for engaging in shameful sexual activities. The Senate would not begin these highly unpopular prosecutions against her or her son until it received clear instructions from Tiberius to do so. Despite public outcry, Agrippina and Nero were declared public enemies (&quot;hostes&quot;) following a repeat of the accusations by the emperor. They were both exiled; Nero to Pontia where he was killed or encouraged to commit suicide in AD 31, and Agrippina to the island of Pandateria (the same place her daughter was exiled to).

Suetonius says that while on the island of Pandateria, she lost an eye when she was beaten by a centurion. She would remain on the island until her death in AD 33. Accounts of her death vary. She is said to have died from starvation, but it is not certain whether or not it was self-imposed. Tacitus says food was withheld from her in an effort to make her death seem like a suicide.

==Post mortem==
Her son Drusus was later also exiled on charges of sexual misdemeanors. Sejanus remained powerful until his sudden downfall and summary execution in October AD 31, just after the death of Nero, the exact cause for which remains unclear. Alston suggests that Sejanus may have been acting in Tiberius&#x27; favor to remove Germanicus&#x27; family from power, noting that Agrippina and Nero&#x27;s brother Drusus were left in exile even after Sejanus&#x27; death.

The deaths of Agrippina&#x27;s older sons elevated her youngest son Caligula to the position of successor and he became &quot;princeps&quot; when Tiberius died in AD 37. Drusus the Younger&#x27;s son Tiberius Gemellus was summoned to Capri by his grandfather Tiberius, where he and Caligula were made joint-heirs. When Caligula assumed power he made Gemellus his adopted son, but Caligula soon had Gemellus killed for plotting against him. According to Philo, Caligula&#x27;s pretended reason was a conspiracy.

After he became emperor, Caligula took on the role of a dutiful son and brother in a public show of &quot;pietas&quot; (&quot;piety&quot;). He went out to the islands of Pontia and Pandateria in order to recover the remains of Agrippina and Nero. It was not easy to recover Nero&#x27;s bones as they were scattered and buried. Moreover, he had a stormy passage; however, the difficulty in his task made his devotion seem even greater. The ashes were brought to Ostia, from where they were carried up the Tiber and brought to the Campus Martius, from where equestrians placed them on briers to join the ashes of Germanicus in the mausoleum of Augustus. The move was reminiscent of when Agrippina carried the ashes of her husband just over 17 years earlier. Agrippina&#x27;s funerary urn still survives ().

The tablet made of marble reads: 
 &quot;OSSA
 AGRIPPINAE M AGRIPPAE F
 DIVI AVG NEPTIS VXORIS
 GERMANICI CAESARIS
 MATRIS C CAESARIS AVG
 GERMANICI PRINCIPIS&quot;

which translates as &quot;Bones of Agrippina; daughter of Marcus Agrippa, granddaughter of Divus Augustus, wife of Germanicus Caesar, mother of Princeps Gaius Caesar Germanicus&quot;.

==Personality==
Agrippina was fiercely independent, a trait she shared with her mother. Dio described her as having ambitions to match her pedigree. However, Anthony A. Barrett notes that Agrippina was fully aware that a woman in ancient Rome could not hold power in her own right. Instead, Agrippina followed the model of Livia in promoting the careers of her children.

She and her daughter, Agrippina the Younger, are both described as being equally ambitious for their sons. Whereas the elder Agrippina&#x27;s son failed to become emperor, the younger Agrippina&#x27;s son, also named Nero, succeeds. In a contrast, Tacitus has Agrippina the Elder merely standing on a bridge waving the soldiers passing by, whereas her daughter eclipses her by presiding over a military tribunal and accepting gifts from foreign ambassadors.

Tacitus also records serious tension between Agrippina and Livia. He describes Livia as having visited &quot;stepmotherly provocations&quot; on Agrippina. He says of Agrippina: &quot;were it not that through her moral integrity and love for her husband she converted an otherwise ungovernable temper to the good&quot; (Tacitus, &quot;Annals&quot; 1.33). Despite being sympathetic to her as a victim of imperial oppression, he uses expressions like &quot;excitable&quot;, &quot;arrogant&quot;, &quot;proud&quot;, &quot;fierce&quot;, &quot;obstinate&quot;, and &quot;ambitious&quot; to describe Agrippina. His comments are echoed by other sources.

==Historiography==
Historian Lindsay Powell says Agrippina enjoyed a normal marriage and continued to show her devotion to Germanicus after his death. He says she was regarded by the Roman people as, quoting Tacitus, &quot;the glory of the country, the sole surviving offspring of Augustus, the solitary example of the good old times.&quot;

Alston cautions against accepting the stories of Agrippina&#x27;s feud with Sejanus at face value, as these accounts reflect a tradition hostile to Tiberius and Sejanus. They may have been circulated by Agrippina&#x27;s supporters or they may have emerged after Sejanus&#x27; fall in AD 31. He adds: &quot;These stories are plausible, though not certain to be true.&quot;

===Suetonius===

Augustus was proud of Agrippina. Suetonius claims that Augustus wrote her a letter praising her intellect and directing her education. Suetonius also records that Augustus, who held strict views on self-restraint and respectable speech, cautioned Agrippina not to speak &quot;offensively&quot;. When she next appears, she is being chastised by Tiberius in Greek for making irritating remarks, and the tone of the Greek verse quoted by Tiberius suggests that she should have heeded the advice of her grandfather not to speak offensively.

===Tacitus===

The &quot;Annals&quot; of Tacitus is a history of the Julio-Claudian dynasty beginning with the death of Augustus. In it, he portrays women as having a profound influence on politics. The women of the imperial family in particular are depicted by Tacitus as having a notable prominence in the public sphere as well as possessing a ferocity and ambition with which they pursue it. Tacitus presents them as living longer than the imperial men and thus being more wise as they advance in age. Among the most broad of his portrayals is that of Agrippina. He emphasizes their role in connecting genetically back to Augustus, a significant factor in the marriages of the emperors and princes of the dynasty. The Annals repeatedly has Agrippina competing for influence with Tiberius simply because she is related to Augustus biologically.

Tacitus presents Agrippina as being kindred to aristocratic males, and has her reversing gender roles, which showcases her assumption of male &quot;auctoritas&quot; (&quot;authority&quot;) with metaphors of her dressing and undressing. In an example of Agrippina assuming &quot;auctoritas&quot;, he says: 

Using the above epithet, &quot;(femina) ingens animi&quot; (&quot;..[a woman], great for her courage&quot;), he assigns a haughty attitude to Agrippina that compels her to explore the affairs of men. He records her as having reversed the natural order of things when she quelled the mutiny of the Rhine in AD 14. In so doing, he describes her as having usurped her husband&#x27;s power, a power rightfully belonging only to a general.

==Portraiture==
Portraits of Roman women from the Julio-Claudian dynasty display a freer hair treatment than those of traditional Roman men and are more keen on the sensitivity of recording on different textures. These changes in style served to make reproducing them more popular in the mid-first-century AD. Reproductions of her image would continue to be made into that period. In the portrait, she is given a youthful face despite the fact that she lived to middle age. Agrippina&#x27;s hair is a mass of curls that covers both sides of her head and is long going down to her shoulders. Her portraiture can be contrasted with that of Livia who had a more austere Augustan hairstyle.

There are three different periods during the first-century AD when portraits were created for Agrippina: at the time of her marriage to Germanicus (which made her the mother of a potential emperor); when her son Caligula came into power in AD 37, and collected her ashes from the island of Pandateria for relocation to the Mausoleum of Augustus; and at the time of Claudius&#x27; marriage to Agrippina the Younger, who wanted to connect himself to the lineage of Augustus by evoking Agrippina&#x27;s image. Coins and inscriptions cannot act as a method of discerning her age, because her hairstyle remains unchanged in all the representations.

The easiest phase of portraits to identify are those dating to the time of Caligula, when a fair abundance of coins were minted with an image of his mother on them. It is a posthumous portrait of her with idealized features. In the phase following Claudius&#x27; marriage, her features are made to more closely resemble those of her daughter. The goal was to strengthen Agrippina the Younger&#x27;s connection with her mother. Finally, the portraits of her dating to the time of Tiberius are still idealized, but not as much as those from the period of Caligula&#x27;s reign. Images of Agrippina from this period are the most lifelike.

==Cultural depictions==
Agrippina is one of the few women from the Roman imperial period whose story was recounted in later centuries as an example of moral character. Her journey to deposit the ashes of her husband was popular with eighteenth century painters, including William Turner, Gavin Hamilton, and Benjamin West whose painting &quot;Agrippina Landing at Brundisium with the Ashes of Germanicus&quot; (1768) began the trend.

She is also remembered in &quot;De Mulieribus Claris&quot;, a collection of biographies of historical and mythological women by the Florentine author Giovanni Boccaccio, composed in 136162. It is notable as the first collection devoted exclusively to biographies of women in Western literature. Other notable works of which include:
*&quot;Agrippina Mourning over the ashes of Germanicus&quot; (1775), an etching by Scottish painter Alexander Runciman.
*&quot;The Caesars&quot; (1968), a television series by Philip Mackie for Granada TV. She was played by Caroline Blakiston.
*&quot;I, Claudius&quot; (1976), a television series by Jack Pulman for the BBC. She was played by Fiona Walker.

==See also==
*Julio-Claudian family tree
*Gaius Silius

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229413" start="1" end="9" title="Agrippina the Elder" label="Vipsania"/>
<link wikidata="Q229413" start="11" end="30" title="Agrippina the Elder" label="Agrippina the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="41" end="46" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="130" end="152" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="178" end="202" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="235" end="248" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="250" end="258" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259" start="289" end="304" title="Julia the Elder" label="Julia the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q313735" start="319" end="325" title="Lucius Caesar" label="Lucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q298162" start="330" end="342" title="Gaius Caesar" label="Gaius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="488" end="498" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="528" end="536" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268376" start="762" end="768" title="Julii Caesares" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="1021" end="1026" title="Caligula" label="Gaius"/>
<link wikidata="Q453845" start="1493" end="1515" title="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso (consul 7 BC)" label="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="1634" end="1641" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q770847" start="1713" end="1734" title="Mausoleum of Augustus" label="Mausoleum of Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313737" start="1836" end="1856" title="Drusus Julius Caesar" label="Drusus Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q469701" start="1943" end="1948" title="Livia" label="Livia"/>
<link wikidata="Q370363" start="2035" end="2039" title="Nero Julius Caesar" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q165448" start="2044" end="2057" title="Drusus Caesar" label="Drusus Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="2111" end="2129" title="Praetorian prefect" label="Praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q120015" start="2130" end="2151" title="Lucius Aelius Sejanus" label="Lucius Aelius Sejanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133295" start="2367" end="2373" title="Ponza" label="Pontia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085906" start="2410" end="2420" title="Pandateria" label="Pandateria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760158" start="2564" end="2569" title="Nomen gentilicium" label="nomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="2574" end="2582" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="2655" end="2679" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q152626" start="2700" end="2706" title="Attica (wife of Agrippa)" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q232090" start="2717" end="2735" title="Vipsania Agrippina" label="Vipsania Agrippina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259" start="2764" end="2769" title="Julia the Elder" label="Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="2811" end="2826" title="Julia Agrippina" label="Julia Agrippina"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2898" end="2903" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="2996" end="3017" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148209" start="3191" end="3202" title="Rhodiapolis" label="Rhodiapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="3355" end="3363" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q295228" start="3482" end="3495" title="Sextus Pompey" label="Sextus Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="3500" end="3511" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q396808" start="3742" end="3750" title="princeps" label="princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q315492" start="3847" end="3872" title="Marcus Claudius Marcellus (Julio-Claudian dynasty)" label="Marcus Claudius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259" start="4057" end="4072" title="Julia the Elder" label="Julia the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704729" start="4140" end="4159" title="tribunician power" label="tribunicia potestas"/>
<link wikidata="Q313735" start="4617" end="4623" title="Lucius Caesar" label="Lucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q298162" start="4658" end="4663" title="Gaius Caesar" label="Gaius"/>
<link wikidata="Q739680" start="4783" end="4798" title="Ludi Saeculares" label="Ludi Saeculares"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="4834" end="4845" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q75207" start="4950" end="4961" title="Pax Augusta" label="Pax Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q232090" start="5338" end="5356" title="Vipsania Agrippina" label="Vipsania Agrippina"/>
<link wikidata="Q91343480" start="5358" end="5373" title="Vipsania (wife of Haterius)" label="Vipsania Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111991" start="5375" end="5392" title="Vipsania (wife of Varus)" label="Vipsania Marcella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171665" start="5397" end="5416" title="Vipsania (wife of Lepidus)" label="Vipsania Marcellina"/>
<link wikidata="Q152626" start="5454" end="5478" title="Pomponia Caecilia Attica" label="Pomponia Caecilia Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q180807" start="5483" end="5505" title="Claudia Marcella Major" label="Claudia Marcella Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q325906" start="5572" end="5588" title="Postumus Agrippa" label="Postumus Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q236459" start="5730" end="5747" title="Julia the Younger" label="Julia the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="5784" end="5806" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="5910" end="5918" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="5978" end="5986" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="6015" end="6025" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="6035" end="6040" title="Caligula" label="Gaius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="6125" end="6129" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="6236" end="6244" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="6379" end="6387" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q476078" start="6629" end="6634" title="aurei" label="aurei"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="6651" end="6658" title="denarius" label="denarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q342512" start="7336" end="7358" title="Tiberius Claudius Nero (father of Tiberius Caesar)" label="Tiberius Claudius Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q370363" start="7675" end="7693" title="Nero Julius Caesar" label="Nero Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165448" start="7695" end="7715" title="Drusus Caesar" label="Drusus Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="7840" end="7848" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="7882" end="7903" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q241036" start="7905" end="7919" title="Julia Drusilla" label="Julia Drusilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q237629" start="7925" end="7938" title="Julia Livilla" label="Julia Livilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265861" start="8141" end="8153" title="Batonian War" label="Batonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="8384" end="8398" title="cursus honorum" label="cursus honorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q564358" start="9577" end="9583" title="Annals (Tacitus)" label="Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="10324" end="10329" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="10402" end="10408" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q453845" start="10495" end="10517" title="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso (consul 7 BC)" label="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="10983" end="10990" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="11276" end="11286" title="Brundisium" label="Brundisium"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="11359" end="11369" title="praetorian guard" label="praetorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q313737" start="11551" end="11569" title="Drusus Julius Caesar" label="Drusus the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q770847" start="11729" end="11750" title="Mausoleum of Augustus" label="Mausoleum of Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20054045" start="12068" end="12082" title="Richard Alston (classicist)" label="Richard Alston"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="12669" end="12687" title="Praetorian Prefect" label="Praetorian Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q120015" start="12688" end="12695" title="Sejanus" label="Sejanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q949076" start="13112" end="13133" title="Great Cameo of France" label="Great Cameo of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="13577" end="13583" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="14018" end="14037" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365614" start="14062" end="14069" title="pontiff" label="priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486690" start="14322" end="14330" title="Palatine" label="Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173292" start="15928" end="15933" title="Capri" label="Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q201385" start="15941" end="15954" title="Bay of Naples" label="Bay of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="16602" end="16613" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100314" start="16664" end="16673" title="Clementia" label="Clementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q470825" start="16698" end="16706" title="Amicitia" label="Amicitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q370363" start="17579" end="17583" title="Nero Julius Caesar" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133295" start="17952" end="17958" title="Ponza" label="Pontia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085906" start="18052" end="18062" title="Pandateria" label="Pandateria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="18109" end="18118" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="18638" end="18655" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q319410" start="19172" end="19189" title="Tiberius Gemellus" label="Tiberius Gemellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643299" start="19590" end="19596" title="pietas" label="pietas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171297" start="19945" end="19950" title="Ostia (Rome)" label="Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242839" start="20013" end="20027" title="Campus Martius" label="Campus Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q112369832" start="20799" end="20817" title="Anthony A. Barrett" label="Anthony A. Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="21261" end="21268" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28737" start="21407" end="21424" title="military tribunal" label="military tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q564358" start="21806" end="21812" title="Annals (Tacitus)" label="Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="23207" end="23212" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q758675" start="24385" end="24395" title="auctoritas" label="auctoritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="26060" end="26081" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="27222" end="27236" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="William Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496436" start="27238" end="27252" title="Gavin Hamilton (artist)" label="Gavin Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q313498" start="27258" end="27271" title="Benjamin West" label="Benjamin West"/>
<link wikidata="Q49355179" start="27293" end="27353" title="Agrippina Landing at Brundisium with the Ashes of Germanicus" label="Agrippina Landing at Brundisium with the Ashes of Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169267" start="27417" end="27437" title="De Mulieribus Claris" label="De Mulieribus Claris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="27517" end="27527" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="27535" end="27553" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="27801" end="27809" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719989" start="27818" end="27836" title="Alexander Runciman" label="Alexander Runciman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720918" start="27845" end="27856" title="The Caesars (TV series)" label="The Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184008" start="27894" end="27907" title="Philip Mackie" label="Philip Mackie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="27912" end="27922" title="Granada TV" label="Granada TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044984" start="27942" end="27960" title="Caroline Blakiston" label="Caroline Blakiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q135096" start="27969" end="27980" title="I, Claudius (TV series)" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157292" start="28018" end="28029" title="Jack Pulman" label="Jack Pulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="28038" end="28041" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451126" start="28061" end="28073" title="Fiona Walker" label="Fiona Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q520835" start="28090" end="28116" title="Julio-Claudian family tree" label="Julio-Claudian family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14852482" start="28118" end="28130" title="Gaius Silius" label="Gaius Silius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1557" wikidata="Q154732" url="?curid=1557" title="Agrippina the Younger">
<text>Julia Agrippina (6 November AD 15 – 23 March AD 59), also referred to as Agrippina the Younger, was Roman empress from AD 49 to 54, the fourth wife and niece of emperor Claudius, and the mother of Nero.

Agrippina was one of the most prominent women in the Julio-Claudian dynasty. She was the great-granddaughter of Augustus (the first Roman emperor) and the daughter of the Roman general Germanicus and Agrippina the Elder. Her father, Germanicus, was the nephew and heir apparent of the second emperor, Tiberius. Agrippina&#x27;s brother Caligula became emperor in AD 37. After Caligula was assassinated in AD 41, Germanicus&#x27; brother Claudius took the throne. Agrippina married Claudius in AD 49.

Agrippina has been described by modern and ancient sources as ruthless, ambitious, domineering and using her powerful political ties to influence the affairs of the Roman state, even managing to successfully maneuver her son Nero into the line of succession. Claudius eventually became aware of her plotting, but died in AD 54 under suspicious circumstances, potentially poisoned by Agrippina herself. She exerted significant political influence in the early years of her son&#x27;s reign, but eventually fell out of favor with him and was killed in AD 59. Physically, Agrippina was described as a beautiful and reputable woman; and, according to Pliny the Elder, had a double canine in her upper right jaw, which was regarded as a sign of good fortune in Ancient Rome.

==Family==
Agrippina was the first daughter and fourth living child of Agrippina the Elder and Germanicus.

She had three elder brothers, Nero Caesar, Drusus Caesar, and the future emperor Caligula, and two younger sisters, Julia Drusilla and Julia Livilla. Agrippina&#x27;s two eldest brothers and her mother were victims of the intrigues of the Praetorian Prefect Lucius Aelius Sejanus.

She was the namesake of her mother. Agrippina the Elder was remembered as a modest and heroic matron, who was the second daughter and fourth child of Julia the Elder and the statesman Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa. The father of Julia the Elder was the emperor Augustus, and Julia was his only natural child from his second marriage to Scribonia, who had close blood relations with Pompey the Great and Lucius Cornelius Sulla.

Germanicus, Agrippina&#x27;s father, was a very popular general and politician. His mother was Antonia Minor and his father was the general Nero Claudius Drusus. He was Antonia Minor&#x27;s first child. Germanicus had two younger siblings: Livilla and Claudius, making the pair Agrippina&#x27;s aunt and uncle, respectively. Not only would Claudius later serve as Roman emperor, he would also go on to take Agrippina, his own niece, as his wife.

Antonia Minor was a daughter to Octavia the Younger by her second marriage to triumvir Mark Antony, and Octavia was the second eldest sister and full-blooded sister of Augustus. Germanicus&#x27; father, Drusus the Elder, was the second son of the Empress Livia Drusilla by her first marriage to praetor Tiberius Nero, and was the emperor Tiberius&#x27;s younger brother and Augustus&#x27;s stepson.

In the year AD 9, Augustus ordered Tiberius to adopt Germanicus, who happened to be Tiberius&#x27;s nephew, as his son and heir. Germanicus was a favourite of Augustus, who hoped that he would succeed Tiberius, who was Augustus&#x27;s adopted son and heir and then emperor following Augustus&#x27; death in AD 14. This in turn meant that Tiberius was also Agrippina&#x27;s adoptive grandfather in addition to her paternal great-uncle.

==Birth and early life==

Agrippina was born on 6 November in AD 15, or possibly AD 14, at Oppidum Ubiorum, a Roman outpost on the Rhine River located in present-day Cologne, Germany. A second sister Julia Drusilla was born on 16 September AD 16, also in Germany.

Agrippina&#x27;s place of birth is disputed, with Cologne being seen as a likely place considering how Agrippina would favor the city and the Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium being established at her prompting there.

Suetonius however claims that both of Germanicus&#x27;s eldest daughters were born in Trier in Gaul.

As a small child, Agrippina travelled with her parents throughout Germany until she and her siblings (apart from Caligula) returned to Rome to live with and be raised by their paternal grandmother Antonia. Her parents departed for Syria in AD 18 to conduct official duties, and, according to Tacitus, the third and youngest sister was born en route on the island of Lesbos, namely Julia Livilla, probably on 18 March. In October of AD 19, Germanicus died suddenly in Antioch (present-day Antakya, Turkey).

Germanicus&#x27; death caused much public grief in Rome, and gave rise to rumours that he had been murdered by Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso and Munatia Plancina on the orders of Tiberius, as his widow Agrippina the Elder returned to Rome with his ashes. Agrippina the Younger was thereafter supervised by her mother, her paternal grandmother Antonia Minor, and her great-grandmother, Livia. She lived on the Palatine Hill in Rome.

==Marriage to Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus==

After her thirteenth birthday in AD 28, Tiberius arranged for Agrippina to marry her paternal first cousin once removed Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and ordered the marriage to be celebrated in Rome. Domitius came from a distinguished family of consular rank. Through his mother Antonia Major, Domitius was a great nephew of Augustus, first cousin to Claudius, and first cousin once removed to Agrippina and Caligula. He had two sisters; Domitia Lepida the Elder and Domitia Lepida the Younger. Domitia Lepida the Younger was the mother of the Empress Valeria Messalina.

Antonia Major was the elder sister to Antonia Minor, and the first daughter of Octavia Minor and Mark Antony. Domitius, who was, according to Suetonius, &quot;in every aspect of his life detestable,&quot; served as consul in AD 32. Agrippina and Domitius lived between Antium and Rome. Not much is known about the relationship between them.

==Reign of Caligula==
=== Public role and political intrigues ===

Tiberius died on 16 March AD 37, and Agrippina&#x27;s only surviving brother, Caligula, became the new emperor. Being the emperor&#x27;s sister gave Agrippina some influence.

Agrippina and her younger sisters Julia Drusilla and Julia Livilla received various honours from their brother, which included but were not limited to

* receiving the rights of the Vestal Virgins, such as the freedom to view public games from the upper seats in the stadium;
* being honoured with a new type of coinage, depicting images of Caligula and his sisters on opposite faces;
* having their names added to motions, including loyalty oaths (e.g., &quot;I will not value my life or that of my children less highly than I do the safety of the Emperor and his sisters&quot;) and consular motions (e.g., &quot;Good fortune attend to the Emperor and his sisters)&quot;.

Around the time that Tiberius died, Agrippina had become pregnant. Domitius had acknowledged the paternity of the child. On 15 December AD 37, in the early morning, in Antium, Agrippina gave birth to a son. Agrippina and Domitius named their son Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, after Domitius&#x27; recently deceased father. This child would grow up to become the emperor Nero. Nero was Agrippina&#x27;s only natural child. Suetonius states that Domitius was congratulated by friends on the birth of his son, whereupon he replied &quot;I don&#x27;t think anything produced by me and Agrippina could possibly be good for the state or the people&quot;.

Caligula and his sisters were accused of having incestuous relationships. On 10 June AD 38, Drusilla died, possibly of a fever, rampant in Rome at the time. Caligula was particularly fond of Drusilla, claiming to treat her as he would his own wife, even though Drusilla had a husband. Following her death, Caligula showed no special love or respect toward the surviving sisters and was said to have gone insane.

In AD 39, Agrippina and Livilla, with their maternal cousin, Drusilla&#x27;s widower Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, were involved in a failed plot to murder Caligula, a plot known as the &quot;Plot of the Three Daggers&quot;, which was to make Lepidus the new emperor. Lepidus, Agrippina and Livilla were accused of being lovers. Not much is known concerning this plot and the reasons behind it. At the trial of Lepidus, Caligula felt no compunction about denouncing them as adulteresses, producing handwritten letters discussing how they were going to kill him. The three were found guilty as accessories to the crime.

=== Exile ===
Lepidus was executed. According to the fragmentary inscriptions of the Arval Brethren, Agrippina was forced to carry the urn of Lepidus&#x27; ashes back to Rome. Agrippina and Livilla were exiled by their brother to the Ponza, in Pontine Islands, an archipelago of small volcanic islands about 70 miles away from Rome.

Caligula sold their furniture, jewellery, slaves and freedmen. In January of AD 40, Domitius died of edema (dropsy) at Pyrgi. Lucius had gone to live with his second paternal aunt Domitia Lepida the Younger after Caligula had taken his inheritance away from him.

Caligula, his wife Milonia Caesonia and their daughter Julia Drusilla were murdered on 24 January AD 41. Agrippina&#x27;s paternal uncle, Claudius, brother of her father Germanicus, became the new Roman emperor.

==Reign of Claudius==

===Return from exile===

Claudius lifted the exiles of Agrippina and Livilla. Livilla returned to her husband, while Agrippina was reunited with her estranged son. After the death of her first husband, Agrippina tried to make shameless advances on the future emperor Galba. He showed no interest, being devoted to his wife Aemilia Lepida. On one occasion, Galba&#x27;s mother-in-law gave Agrippina a public reprimand and a slap in the face before a whole bevy of married women.

Claudius had Lucius&#x27; inheritance reinstated. Lucius became more wealthy despite his youth shortly after Gaius Sallustius Crispus Passienus divorced Lucius&#x27; aunt, Domitia Lepida the Elder (Lucius&#x27; first paternal aunt) so that Crispus could marry Agrippina. They married, and Crispus became a step-father to Lucius. Crispus was an influential, wealthy and powerful man who served twice as consul. He was the adopted grandson and biological great-great-nephew of the historian Sallust. Little is known about their relationship, but Crispus soon died and left his estate to Nero.

During the first years his reign, Claudius was married to the Empress Valeria Messalina. Messalina was Agrippina&#x27;s paternal second cousin. Among the victims of Messalina&#x27;s intrigues were Agrippina&#x27;s surviving sister Livilla, who was charged with adultery with Seneca the Younger. Although Agrippina was very influential at this time, she kept a low profile and stayed away from the imperial palace and the court of the emperor.

Messalina considered Agrippina&#x27;s son a threat to her son&#x27;s position and sent assassins to strangle Lucius during his siesta. The assassins left after they saw a snake beneath Lucius&#x27; pillow, considering it a bad omen. It was, however, only a sloughed-off snake-skin. By Agrippina&#x27;s order, the serpent&#x27;s skin was enclosed in a bracelet that the young Lucius wore on his right arm.

In AD 47, Crispus died. At his funeral, a rumour spread that Agrippina had poisoned Crispus to gain his estate. After being widowed a second time, Agrippina was left very wealthy. Later that year, Messalina and Britannicus attended the performance of the Troy Pageant at the Secular Games, where Agrippina was also present with Lucius. Agrippina and Lucius received greater applause from the audience than Messalina and Britannicus did. Many people began to show pity and sympathy to Agrippina, due to the unfortunate circumstances of her life.

===Marriage to Claudius===
Messalina was executed in AD 48 for conspiring with Gaius Silius to overthrow her husband. Around this time, Agrippina became the mistress to one of Claudius&#x27; advisers, the Greek freedman Marcus Antonius Pallas. After ending his marriage, Claudius considered remarrying for the fourth time and his advisers began discussing which noblewoman he should marry. Claudius had a reputation that he was easily persuaded; but it has been suggested that the Senate may have pushed for the marriage between Agrippina and Claudius to end the feud between the Julian and Claudian branches. This feud dated back to Agrippina&#x27;s mother&#x27;s actions against Tiberius after the death of Germanicus. Another reason was to bring in Agrippina&#x27;s son, Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, as a candidate for the succession. His prestige as the descendent of Augustus and Germanicus would have helped the survival of Claudius&#x27; regime.

Claudius was said to have made references to her in his speeches: &quot;my daughter and foster child, born and bred, in my lap, so to speak&quot;. When Claudius decided to marry her, he persuaded a group of senators that the marriage should be arranged in the public interest. In Roman society, an uncle (Claudius) marrying his niece (Agrippina) was considered incestuous and immoral.

Agrippina and Claudius married on New Year&#x27;s Day in AD 49 and the marriage was met with widespread disapproval. Agrippina&#x27;s marriage to Claudius was not based on love, but powerpossibly being a part of her plan to make her son Lucius the new emperor. Shortly after marrying Claudius, Agrippina eliminated her rival Lollia Paulina by persuading Claudius to charge Paulina with allegations of black magic use. Claudius stipulated that Paulina did not receive a hearing and her property was confiscated. She left Italy, but Agrippina was unsatisfied. Allegedly on Agrippina&#x27;s orders, a tribune forced Lollia Paulina to commit suicide.

In the months leading up to her marriage to Claudius, Agrippina&#x27;s maternal second cousin, the praetor Lucius Junius Silanus Torquatus, was betrothed to Claudius&#x27; daughter Claudia Octavia. This betrothal was broken off in AD 48, when Agrippina, scheming with the consul Lucius Vitellius the Elder, the father of the future emperor Aulus Vitellius, falsely accused Silanus of incest with his sister Junia Calvina. Agrippina did this hoping to secure a marriage between Octavia and her son. Consequently, Claudius broke off the engagement and forced Silanus to resign from public office.

Silanus committed suicide on the day that Agrippina married her uncle, and Calvina was exiled from Italy in early AD 49. Calvina was called back from exile after the death of Agrippina. Towards the end of AD 54, Agrippina would order the murder of Silanus&#x27; eldest brother Marcus Junius Silanus Torquatus without Nero&#x27;s knowledge, so that he would not seek revenge against her over his brother&#x27;s death.

===Empress===
Agrippina became empress in AD 49 upon marrying her uncle Claudius. She also became stepmother to Claudia Antonia, Claudius&#x27; daughter and only child from his second marriage to Aelia Paetina; and to the young Claudia Octavia and Britannicus, Claudius&#x27; children with Valeria Messalina. Agrippina removed or eliminated anyone from the palace or the imperial court whom she thought was loyal and dedicated to the memory of the late Messalina. She also eliminated or removed anyone whom she considered was a potential threat to her position and the future of her son, one of her victims being Lucius&#x27; second paternal aunt and Messalina&#x27;s mother Domitia Lepida the Younger.

Griffin describes how Agrippina &quot;had achieved this dominant position for her son and herself by a web of political alliances,&quot; which included Claudius chief secretary and bookkeeper Pallas, his doctor Xenophon, and Afranius Burrus: the head of the Praetorian Guard (the imperial bodyguard), who owed his promotion to Agrippina. Neither ancient nor modern historians of Rome have doubted that Agrippina had her eye on securing the throne for Nero from the very day of the marriageif not earlier. Dio Cassius observation seems to bear that out: &quot;As soon as Agrippina had come to live in the palace she gained complete control over Claudius.&quot;

In AD 49, Agrippina was seated on a dais at a parade of captives when their leader the Celtic King Caratacus bowed before her with the same homage and gratitude as he accorded the emperor. In AD 50, Agrippina was granted the honorific title of Augusta. She was third Roman woman (after Livia Drusilla and Antonia Minor) and only the second living Roman woman (the first being Livia) to receive this title.

In her capacity as Augusta, Agrippina quickly became a trusted advisor to Claudius, and by AD 54, she exerted a considerable influence over the decisions of the emperor. Statues of her were erected in many cities across the Empire and her face appeared on official Roman coins unambiguously, a first for a living empress. In the Senate, her followers were advanced with public offices and governorships. She listened to the Senate from behind the scenes. According to Cassius Dio, Agrippina was often present with Claudius in public, seated on her own platform, when he was transacting government businesses or receiving foreign ambassadors. Pliny the Elder writes that he saw her seated beside the emperor during mock naval combats, wearing a golden cloak. Tacitus claims that she boasted being a &quot;partner in the empire&quot;. However, this privileged position caused resentment among the senatorial class and the imperial family.

Also that year, Claudius founded a Roman colony and called the colony &quot;Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensis&quot; or &quot;Agrippinensium&quot;, today known as Cologne, after Agrippina who was born there. This was the only Roman colony to be named after a Roman woman. In AD 51, she was given a &quot;carpentum:&quot; a ceremonial carriage usually reserved for priests such as the Vestal Virgins and sacred statues. That same year she secured the appointment of Sextus Afranius Burrus as the head of the Praetorian Guard, replacing the previous head of the Praetorian Guard, Rufrius Crispinus.

She assisted Claudius in administering the empire and became very wealthy and powerful. Ancient sources claim that Agrippina successfully influenced Claudius into adopting her son and making him his successor. Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus was adopted by his great maternal uncle and stepfather in AD 50. Lucius&#x27; name was changed to &quot;Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus Germanicus&quot; and he became Claudius&#x27;s adopted son, heir and recognized successor. Agrippina and Claudius betrothed Nero to his step sister Claudia Octavia, and Agrippina arranged to have Seneca the Younger return from exile to tutor the future emperor. Claudius chose to adopt Nero because of his Julian and Claudian lineage.

Agrippina deprived Britannicus of his heritage and further isolated him from his father and succession for the throne in every way possible. For instance, in AD 51, Agrippina ordered the execution of Britannicus&#x27; tutor Sosibius. Sosibus had confronted her, outraged by Claudius&#x27; adoption of Nero and his choice of Nero as successor over his own son Britannicus.

Nero and Octavia were married on 9 June AD 53. Claudius later regretted marrying Agrippina and adopting Nero and began to favor Britannicus, preparing him for the throne. These actions gave Agrippina a motive to allegedly eliminate Claudius. Ancient sources say she poisoned Claudius on 13 October AD 54 with a plate of deadly mushrooms at a banquet, thus enabling Nero to quickly take the throne as emperor. Accounts vary wildly with regard to this private incident, and according to more modern sources, it is possible that Claudius died of natural causes, being 63 years old. In the aftermath of Claudius&#x27;s death, Agrippina, who initially kept the death secret, tried to consolidate power by immediately ordering that the palace and the capital be sealed. After all the gates were blockaded and exit of the capital forbidden, she introduced Nero first to the soldiers and then to the senators as emperor.

==Reign of Nero==

===Relationship with Nero===

Nero was raised to emperor and Agrippina was named a priestess of the cult of the deified Claudius. She now attempted to use her son&#x27;s youth to participate in the rule of the Roman Empire. She enjoyed imperial prerogatives: being allowed to visit the senate meetings from behind a curtain, and appearing as a partner to her son in the official coinage and statues. The historian Tacitus depicts her as attempting a diarchy with her son when she demanded that the Praetorian Guard pledge their loyalty to her. She was also said to have tried to participate in her son&#x27;s meeting with Armenian ambassadors until Seneca and Burrus persuaded Nero to stop her.
In year one of Nero&#x27;s reign, Agrippina began losing influence over Nero when he began to have an affair with the freed woman Claudia Acte, which Agrippina strongly disapproved of and violently scolded him for. Agrippina began to support Britannicus in her possible attempt to make him emperor, or to threaten Nero. The panicking emperor decided on whether to eliminate his mother or his step-brother. Soon, Nero had Britannicus secretly poisoned during his own banquet in February AD 55. The power struggle between Agrippina and her son had begun. 

Between AD 56 and 58, Agrippina became very watchful and critical of her son. In AD 56, Agrippina was forced out of the palace by her son to live in the imperial residence. However, Agrippina retained some degree of influence over her son for several more years, and they are considered the best years of Nero&#x27;s reign. But, as their relationship grew more hostile, Nero gradually began to deprive his mother of honours and power, and even removed her Roman and German bodyguards. Nero even threatened his mother that he would abdicate the throne and would go to live on the Greek Island of Rhodes, a place where Tiberius had lived after divorcing Julia the Elder. Pallas also was dismissed from the court. The fall of Pallas and the opposition of Burrus and Seneca to Agrippina contributed to her scaling down of authority. In mid AD 56, she was forced out of everyday and active participation in the governance of Rome.

While Agrippina lived in her residence or when she went on short visits to Rome, Nero sent people to annoy her. Although living in Misenum, she was always hailed as &quot;Augusta&quot;, and Agrippina and Nero would see each other on short visits. In late AD 58, Agrippina and a group of soldiers and senators were accused of attempting to overthrow Nero, and it was said they planned to move with Gaius Rubellius Plautus. In addition, she revealed Nero&#x27;s relationship with Poppaea Sabina.

===Death and aftermath===
The circumstances that surround Agrippina&#x27;s death are uncertain due to historical contradictions and anti-Nero bias. However, ancient accounts agree that Nero had her murdered following an unsuccessful attempt on her life on a boat.

====Tacitus&#x27;s account====
According to Tacitus, in AD 58, Nero became involved with the noble woman Poppaea Sabina. She taunted him for being a &quot;mummy&#x27;s boy&quot;. She also convinced him of the autonomy of any other emperor. With the reasoning that a divorce from Octavia and a marriage to Poppaea was not politically feasible with Agrippina alive, Nero decided to kill Agrippina. Yet, Nero did not marry Poppaea until AD 62, calling into question this motive. Additionally, Suetonius reveals that Poppaea&#x27;s husband, Otho, was not sent away by Nero until after Agrippina&#x27;s death in AD 59, making it highly unlikely that already married Poppaea would be pressing Nero. Some modern historians theorise that Nero&#x27;s decision to kill Agrippina was prompted by her plot to replace him with either Gaius Rubellius Plautus (Nero&#x27;s maternal second cousin) or Britannicus (Claudius&#x27; biological son).

Tacitus claims that Nero considered poisoning or stabbing her, but felt these methods were too difficult and suspicious, so he settled on – after the advice of his former tutor and freedman Anicetus – building a self-sinking boat. Though aware of the plot, Agrippina embarked on this boat and was nearly crushed by a collapsing lead ceiling only to be saved by the side of a couch breaking the ceiling&#x27;s fall. Though the collapsing ceiling missed Agrippina, it crushed her attendant who was outside by the helm.

The boat failed to sink as a result of the collapse of the lead ceiling, so the crew then sank the boat, but Agrippina swam to shore. Her friend Acerronia Polla was attacked by oarsmen while still in the water, and was either bludgeoned to death or drowned, since she was exclaiming that she was Agrippina, in the hope of being saved. Agrippina was met at the shore by crowds of admirers. News of Agrippina&#x27;s survival reached Nero so he asked Seneca and Burrus for the advice. After a moment of silence, they recommended Anicetus to carry out the act, since the Praetorians were loyal to the children of Germanicus. So Nero sent Anicetus, the trierach Herculeius, and the marine centurion Obaritus, as well as an &quot;armed and menacing column&quot; to kill her.

After surrounding the villa, which scared away Agrippina&#x27;s supporters, they eventually made their way to the bedroom. After the last slave girl departed her side, (whom she asked &quot;Are you too deserting me?&quot;), Agrippina was surrounded in her bed and struck in the head with a cudgel, before proffering her womb, crying out &quot;Stab my belly!&quot; and finally dying after experiencing many fatal wounds to that area. This narrative is clearly presented similarly to that of Julius Caesar, and her last act being to ensure violence upon her womb implies it was a symbolic act against her womb&#x27;s only progeny: the man who had ordered her death.

====Suetonius&#x27;s account====
Suetonius says that Agrippina&#x27;s &quot;over-watchful&quot; and &quot;over-critical&quot; eye that she kept over Nero drove him to murdering her. After months of attempting to humiliate her by depriving her of her power, honour, and bodyguards, he also expelled her from the Palatine, followed by the people he sent to &quot;pester&quot; her with lawsuits and &quot;jeers and catcalls&quot;.

When he eventually turned to murder, he first tried poison, three times in fact. She prevented her death by taking the antidote in advance. Afterwards, he rigged up a machine in her room which would drop her ceiling tiles onto her as she slept, but she once again escaped death after she received word of the plan. Nero&#x27;s final plan was to get her in a boat which would collapse and sink.

He sent her a friendly letter asking to reconcile and inviting her to celebrate the Quinquatrus at Baiae with him. He arranged an &quot;accidental&quot; collision between her galley and one of his captains. When returning home, he offered her his collapsible boat, as opposed to her damaged galley.

The day after the boat sank, Nero received word of her survival from her freedman Agermus. Panicking, Nero ordered a guard to &quot;surreptitiously&quot; drop a blade behind Agermus and Nero immediately had him arrested on a charge of attempted murder. Nero ordered the assassination of Agrippina. He made it look as if Agrippina had committed suicide after her plot to kill Nero had been uncovered.

Suetonius says that after Agrippina&#x27;s death, Nero examined Agrippina&#x27;s corpse and discussed her good and bad points. Nero also believed Agrippina would haunt him after her death.

====Cassius Dio&#x27;s account====
The tale of Cassius Dio is also somewhat different. It starts again with Poppaea and Seneca as the motive behind the murder. Nero designed a ship that would open at the bottom while at sea. Then he pretended to reconcile with Agrippina and put her aboard on the vessel. Once the bottom of the ship opened up, she fell into the water. However, the sailors ended up killing Acerronia Polla instead and Agrippina swam to shore. Pretending to ignore the conspiracy, she sent Nero a letter informing of her well-being, so Nero sent Anicetus to kill her. Her reputed last words, uttered as the assassin was about to strike, were &quot;Strike here, Anicetus, strike here, for this bore Nero&quot;. 

Nero then told the Senate that Agrippina had plotted to kill him and committed suicide.

====Burial====
After Agrippina&#x27;s death, Nero viewed her corpse and, according to some, commented how beautiful she was. Her body was cremated that night on a dining couch. At his mother&#x27;s funeral, Nero was witless, speechless and rather scared. When the news spread that Agrippina had died, the Roman army, senate, and various people sent him letters of congratulations that he had been saved from his mother&#x27;s plots.

====Aftermath====
During the remainder of Nero&#x27;s reign, Agrippina&#x27;s grave was not covered or enclosed. Her household later on gave her a modest tomb in Misenum. Nero would have his mother&#x27;s death on his conscience. He felt so guilty he would sometimes have nightmares of her, even seeing his mother&#x27;s ghost and getting Persian magicians to ask her for forgiveness. Years before she died, Agrippina had visited astrologers to ask about her son&#x27;s future. The astrologers had rather accurately predicted that her son would become emperor and would kill her. She replied, &quot;Let him kill me, provided he becomes emperor,&quot; according to Tacitus.

===== Agrippina&#x27;s alleged victims =====
* 47
** &quot;Passienus Crispus&quot;: Agrippina&#x27;s 2nd husband, poisoned (Suet.).
* 49
** &quot;Lollia Paulina&quot;: as she was a rival for Claudius&#x27; hand in marriage as proposed by the freedman Callistus (Tac. &amp; Dio).
** &quot;Lucius Silanus&quot;: betrothed to Octavia, Claudius&#x27; daughter, before his marriage of Agrippina. He committed suicide on their wedding day.
** &quot;Sosibius&quot;: Britannicus&#x27; tutor, executed for plotting against Nero.
** &quot;Calpurnia&quot;: banished (Tac.) and/or executed (Dio) because Claudius had commented on her beauty.
* 53
** &quot;Statilius Taurus&quot;: forced to commit suicide because Agrippina wanted his gardens (Tac.).
* 54
** &quot;Claudius&quot;: her husband, poisoned (Tac., Sen., Juv., Suet., Dio).
** &quot;Domitia Lepida&quot;: mother of Messalina, executed (Tac.).
** &quot;Marcus Junius Silanus&quot;: a potential rival to Nero, poisoned (Pliny, Tac., Dio).
** &quot;Cadius Rufus&quot;: executed on the charge of extortion.
** &quot;Tiberius Claudius Narcissus&quot;: Because of the competition with Agrippina.
* 55
** &quot;Britannicus&quot;: Claudius&#x27; son, poisoned (Juv.).
** &quot;Junia Silana&quot;: Agrippina&#x27;s friend turned enemy. Unsuccessfully accused Agrippina of conspiracy against Nero, and was exiled (Tac.).

==Legacy and cultural references==
===Memoirs===
Agrippina left memoirs of her life and the misfortunes of her family, which Tacitus used when writing his &quot;Annals&quot;, but they have not survived.

=== In music and literature ===
She is remembered in &quot;De Mulieribus Claris&quot;, a collection of biographies of historical and mythological women by the Florentine author Giovanni Boccaccio, composed in 136162. It is notable as the first collection devoted exclusively to biographies of women in western literature.

*&quot;Octavia&quot;, a Roman tragedy written during the Flavian period
*&quot;Agrippina: Trauerspiel&quot; (1665), a German baroque tragedy by Daniel Casper von Lohenstein
*G.F. Handel&#x27;s 1709 opera &quot;Agrippina&quot; with a libretto by Vincenzo Grimani
*&quot;Empress of Rome&quot; (1978), a novel by Robert DeMaria (Vineyard Press edition, 2001, )
*Agrippina is considered to be the founder of Cologne and is still symbolised there today by the robe of the virgin of the Cologne triumvirate. In the sculpture programme of the Cologne town hall tower, a figure by Heribert Calleen was dedicated to Agrippina on the ground floor.

=== In film, television, and radio ===
* The 1911 Italian film &quot;Agrippina&quot;
*&quot;Mio Figlio Nerone &quot; (1956) played by Gloria Swanson 
*&quot;I, Claudius&quot; (1976) played by Barbara Young (here called Agrippinilla).
*&quot;Caligula&quot; (1979) and also &quot;Messalina, Messalina&quot; (1977) played by Lori Wagner.
*&quot;Caligula and Messalina&quot; (1981) played by Françoise Blanchard.
*&quot;A.D.&quot; (1985 miniseries) played by Ava Gardner.
*&quot;Boudica&quot; (2003) played by Frances Barber.
*&quot;&quot; (2005) played by Laura Morante.
*&quot;Ancients Behaving Badly&quot; (2009), History Channel documentary. Episode &quot;Nero&quot;.
*&quot;Roman Empire&quot; (2016), Netflix, played by Teressa Liane.
* Agrippina the Younger was portrayed by Betty Lou Gerson in the August 31, 1953, episode of the CBS radio program &quot;Crime Classics&quot; that was entitled &quot;Your Loving Son, Nero.&quot; The episode chronicles the killing of Agrippina by her son Nero who was portrayed by William Conrad.
*Horrible Histories – The Movie (2019) Agrippina is portrayed by Kim Catrall

==Historiography==

===Ancient===
Most ancient Roman sources are quite critical of Agrippina the Younger. Tacitus considered her vicious and had a strong disposition against her. Other sources are Suetonius and Cassius Dio.

===Modern===
* Girod, Virginie, &quot;Agrippine, sexe, crimes et pouvoir dans la Rome impériale &quot;, Paris, Tallandier, 2015, 300 p.
* Minaud, Gérard, &quot;Les vies de 12 femmes d&#x27;empereur romain – Devoirs, Intrigues &amp; Voluptés &quot;, Paris, L&#x27;Harmattan, 2012, ch. 3, &quot; La vie d&#x27;Agrippine, femme de Claude&quot;, pp. 65–96.
* E. Groag, A. Stein, L. Petersen, &quot;Prosopographia Imperii Romani saeculi I, II et III&quot;, Berlin, 1933
* H. H. Scullard, &quot;From the Gracchi to Nero: History of Rome from 133 B.C. to A.D. 68&quot;, London, 19825
* Guglielmo Ferrero, &quot;The Women of the Caesars&quot; (1911)
* Barrett, Anthony A., Agrippina: Sex, Power and Politics in the Early Roman Empire, Yale University Press, New Haven, 1996.
* Annelise Freisenbruch, &quot;The first ladies of Rome&quot;
* 
* 
* McDaniel, W. B. &quot;Bauli the Scene of the Murder of Agrippina&quot;. &quot;The Classical Quarterly&quot;, Vol. 4, No. 2 (April 1910)
* Salmonson, Jessica Amanda. (1991) &quot;The Encyclopedia of Amazons&quot;. Paragon House. pp. 4–5.
* Donna Hurley, Agrippina the Younger (Wife of Claudius).
* L. Foubert, &quot;Agrippina. Keizerin van Rome&quot;, Leuven, 2006.
* Opera by G. F. Handel: &quot;Agrippina&quot;

==See also==
*List of unsolved murders

==Notes==
*
*Tacitus, &quot;Annales xii.1–10, 64–69, xiv.1–9&quot;
*Suetonius, &quot;De vita Caesarum&quot; – &quot;Claudius v.44&quot; and &quot;Nero vi.5.3, 28.2, 34.1–4&quot;
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="0" end="15" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Julia Agrippina"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="73" end="94" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q105279704" start="100" end="113" title="Roman empress" label="Roman empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="169" end="177" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="197" end="201" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="257" end="279" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="316" end="324" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="336" end="349" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="389" end="399" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229413" start="404" end="423" title="Agrippina the Elder" label="Agrippina the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="505" end="513" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="540" end="548" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1352" end="1367" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q542946" start="1375" end="1388" title="Hyperdontia" label="double canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1461" end="1473" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="1571" end="1581" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q370363" start="1614" end="1625" title="Nero (son of Germanicus)" label="Nero Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165448" start="1627" end="1640" title="Drusus Caesar" label="Drusus Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="1665" end="1673" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q241036" start="1700" end="1714" title="Julia Drusilla" label="Julia Drusilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q237629" start="1719" end="1732" title="Julia Livilla" label="Julia Livilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q120015" start="1842" end="1863" title="Lucius Aelius Sejanus" label="Lucius Aelius Sejanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259" start="2016" end="2031" title="Julia the Elder" label="Julia the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="2050" end="2074" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q233444" start="2197" end="2206" title="Scribonia (wife of Augustus)" label="Scribonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="2243" end="2259" title="Pompey the Great" label="Pompey the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="2264" end="2286" title="Lucius Cornelius Sulla" label="Lucius Cornelius Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q229836" start="2384" end="2397" title="Antonia Minor" label="Antonia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="2429" end="2449" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="Nero Claudius Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q234665" start="2529" end="2536" title="Livilla (sister of Claudius)" label="Livilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="2541" end="2549" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q125740" start="2653" end="2666" title="list of Roman emperors" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q229483" start="2768" end="2787" title="Octavia the Younger" label="Octavia the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="2823" end="2834" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="2939" end="2955" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="Drusus the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q469701" start="2991" end="2996" title="Livia" label="Livia"/>
<link wikidata="Q342512" start="3039" end="3052" title="Tiberius Claudius Nero (father of Tiberius Caesar)" label="Tiberius Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="3074" end="3082" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="3703" end="3708" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="3738" end="3745" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q241036" start="3772" end="3786" title="Julia Drusilla" label="Julia Drusilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="3887" end="3894" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048" start="3979" end="4013" title="Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium" label="Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="4057" end="4066" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="4143" end="4148" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="4152" end="4156" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="4390" end="4395" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q237629" start="4540" end="4553" title="Julia Livilla" label="Julia Livilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="4626" end="4633" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80561" start="4647" end="4654" title="Antakya" label="Antakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q453845" start="4777" end="4799" title="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso (consul 7 BC)" label="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso"/>
<link wikidata="Q277544" start="4804" end="4820" title="Munatia Plancina" label="Munatia Plancina"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="5068" end="5081" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q351503" start="5257" end="5284" title="Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (consul 32)" label="Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="5381" end="5394" title="Consul" label="consular rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q233704" start="5415" end="5428" title="Antonia Major" label="Antonia Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q433381" start="5574" end="5598" title="Domitia Lepida the Elder" label="Domitia Lepida the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q268964" start="5603" end="5629" title="Domitia Lepida the Younger" label="Domitia Lepida the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q229871" start="5688" end="5705" title="Valeria Messalina" label="Valeria Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010710" start="5977" end="5983" title="Antium" label="Antium"/>
<link wikidata="Q241036" start="6327" end="6341" title="Drusilla (sister of Caligula)" label="Julia Drusilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q237629" start="6346" end="6359" title="Livilla (sister of Caligula)" label="Julia Livilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="6475" end="6488" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q256048" start="7851" end="7863" title="Lollia Paulina" label="his own wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q878550" start="7892" end="7899" title="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (executed by Caligula)" label="husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q878550" start="8114" end="8137" title="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (executed by Caligula)" label="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q716908" start="8729" end="8743" title="Arval Brethren" label="Arval Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q844829" start="8888" end="8903" title="Pontine Islands" label="Pontine Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="9079" end="9084" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q240928" start="9261" end="9277" title="Milonia Caesonia" label="Milonia Caesonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235586" start="9297" end="9311" title="Julia Drusilla (daughter of Caligula)" label="Julia Drusilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="9412" end="9422" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="9745" end="9750" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072619" start="9801" end="9815" title="Aemilia Lepida" label="Aemilia Lepida"/>
<link wikidata="Q718165" start="10066" end="10100" title="Gaius Sallustius Crispus Passienus" label="Gaius Sallustius Crispus Passienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170" start="10446" end="10453" title="Sallust" label="Sallust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="10824" end="10842" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q739680" start="11674" end="11687" title="Secular Games" label="Secular Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q313115" start="11819" end="11830" title="Britannicus" label="Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q285517" start="12024" end="12036" title="Gaius Silius (lover of Messalina)" label="Gaius Silius"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="12156" end="12164" title="freedman" label="freedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q955856" start="12165" end="12187" title="Pallas (freedman)" label="Marcus Antonius Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q510193" start="12525" end="12531" title="Julia gens" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q385338" start="12536" end="12544" title="Claudia gens" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q229413" start="12596" end="12609" title="Agrippina the Elder" label="mother&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q256048" start="13610" end="13624" title="Lollia Paulina" label="Lollia Paulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q690768" start="13686" end="13697" title="black magic" label="black magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="14032" end="14039" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16108799" start="14040" end="14071" title="Lucius Junius Silanus Torquatus" label="Lucius Junius Silanus Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q231262" start="14114" end="14129" title="Claudia Octavia" label="Claudia Octavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q351491" start="14212" end="14238" title="Lucius Vitellius the Elder" label="Lucius Vitellius the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="14273" end="14288" title="Aulus Vitellius" label="Aulus Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q453044" start="14340" end="14353" title="Junia Calvina" label="Junia Calvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233616" start="14806" end="14837" title="Marcus Junius Silanus (consul 46)" label="Marcus Junius Silanus Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q255410" start="15059" end="15074" title="Claudia Antonia" label="Claudia Antonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q238448" start="15143" end="15156" title="Aelia Paetina" label="Aelia Paetina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="15318" end="15332" title="Royal court" label="imperial court"/>
<link wikidata="Q268964" start="15622" end="15648" title="Domitia Lepida" label="Domitia Lepida the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="16156" end="16167" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="16399" end="16405" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q335073" start="16411" end="16420" title="Caratacus" label="Caratacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282711" start="16556" end="16563" title="Augusta (honorific)" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q469701" start="16598" end="16603" title="Livia" label="Livia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229836" start="16617" end="16630" title="Antonia Minor" label="Antonia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570643" start="17143" end="17149" title="Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431232" start="17433" end="17451" title="Naumachia" label="mock naval combats"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="17819" end="17826" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="18040" end="18053" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q453916" start="18121" end="18143" title="Sextus Afranius Burrus" label="Sextus Afranius Burrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="18163" end="18179" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321555" start="18234" end="18251" title="Rufrius Crispinus" label="Rufrius Crispinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="18596" end="18600" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="18820" end="18838" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19653" end="19669" title="Mushroom poisoning" label="deadly mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="20680" end="20687" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="20716" end="20723" title="diarchy" label="diarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="20764" end="20780" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="20915" end="20921" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q453916" start="20926" end="20932" title="Sextus Afranius Burrus" label="Burrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q256439" start="21091" end="21103" title="Claudia Acte" label="Claudia Acte"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="22111" end="22117" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259" start="22168" end="22183" title="Julia the Elder" label="Julia the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q942138" start="22840" end="22863" title="Rubellius Plautus" label="Gaius Rubellius Plautus"/>
<link wikidata="Q230716" start="22921" end="22935" title="Poppaea Sabina" label="Poppaea Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="23693" end="23702" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="23740" end="23744" title="Otho" label="Otho"/>
<link wikidata="Q942138" start="24030" end="24047" title="Rubellius Plautus" label="Rubellius Plautus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617448" start="24324" end="24332" title="Anicetus (freedman)" label="Anicetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622572" start="24797" end="24812" title="Acerronia Polla" label="Acerronia Polla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="25912" end="25925" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486690" start="26398" end="26406" title="Palatine" label="Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q290097" start="27010" end="27015" title="Baiae" label="Baiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="27849" end="27860" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q355409" start="28398" end="28408" title="last words" label="last words"/>
<link wikidata="Q401231" start="29215" end="29222" title="Misenum" label="Misenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="29392" end="29398" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="29483" end="29493" title="astrologer" label="astrologer"/>
<link wikidata="Q544399" start="30944" end="30956" title="Junia Silana" label="Junia Silana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169267" start="31350" end="31370" title="De Mulieribus Claris" label="De Mulieribus Claris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="31450" end="31460" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="31468" end="31486" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q646990" start="31621" end="31628" title="Octavia (play)" label="Octavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="31671" end="31678" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q66942" start="31758" end="31786" title="Daniel Casper von Lohenstein" label="Daniel Casper von Lohenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q397041" start="31824" end="31833" title="Agrippina (opera)" label="Agrippina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247746" start="31859" end="31875" title="Vincenzo Grimani" label="Vincenzo Grimani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606882" start="32322" end="32331" title="Agrippina (film)" label="Agrippina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236186" start="32345" end="32362" title="Nero&amp;#x27;s Mistress" label="Mio Figlio Nerone"/>
<link wikidata="Q229232" start="32387" end="32401" title="Gloria Swanson" label="Gloria Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q135096" start="32410" end="32421" title="I, Claudius (TV series)" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859422" start="32445" end="32458" title="Barbara Young (actress)" label="Barbara Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q217685" start="32494" end="32502" title="Caligula (film)" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855332" start="32531" end="32551" title="Messalina, Messalina" label="Messalina, Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086413" start="32641" end="32660" title="Françoise Blanchard" label="Françoise Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q278193" start="32669" end="32673" title="A.D. (miniseries)" label="A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="32708" end="32719" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949360" start="32728" end="32735" title="Boudica (2003 film)" label="Boudica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478514" start="32759" end="32773" title="Frances Barber" label="Frances Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q542061" start="32806" end="32819" title="Laura Morante" label="Laura Morante"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635234" start="32828" end="32851" title="Ancients Behaving Badly" label="Ancients Behaving Badly"/>
<link wikidata="Q27856747" start="32928" end="32940" title="Roman Empire (TV series)" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q24067576" start="32974" end="32987" title="Teressa Liane" label="Teressa Liane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998128" start="33030" end="33046" title="Betty Lou Gerson" label="Betty Lou Gerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="33086" end="33089" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185176" start="33110" end="33124" title="Crime Classics" label="Crime Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q505831" start="33269" end="33283" title="William Conrad" label="William Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33286" end="33316" title="Horrible Histories: The Movie – Rotten Romans" label="Horrible Histories – The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q209175" start="33350" end="33361" title="Kim Cattrall" label="Kim Catrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q252051" start="34055" end="34069" title="Howard Hayes Scullard" label="H. H. Scullard"/>
<link wikidata="Q689713" start="34167" end="34184" title="Guglielmo Ferrero" label="Guglielmo Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q112369832" start="34232" end="34251" title="Anthony A. Barrett" label="Barrett, Anthony A."/>
<link wikidata="Q13563192" start="34563" end="34588" title="Jessica Amanda Salmonson" label="Salmonson, Jessica Amanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="34801" end="34813" title="G. F. Handel" label="G. F. Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q397041" start="34821" end="34830" title="Agrippina (opera)" label="Agrippina"/>
<link wikidata="Q85781020" start="34852" end="34876" title="List of unsolved murders (before the 20th century)" label="List of unsolved murders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1558" wikidata="Q4743373" url="?curid=1558" title="American Chinese cuisine">
<text>American Chinese cuisine is a cuisine derived from Chinese cuisine that was developed by Chinese Americans. The dishes served in many North American Chinese restaurants are adapted to American tastes and often differ significantly from those found in China.

== History ==

Chinese immigrants arrived in the United States seeking employment as gold miners and railroad workers. As larger groups arrived, laws were put in place preventing them from owning land. They mostly lived together in communities known as Chinatowns. Here the immigrants started their small businesses, including restaurants and laundry services. Early American Chinese food tended to be homogeneous, needing to adapt to local ingredients and catering to an Americanized taste. &quot;It was like if all the Americans in China were from a small town 100 miles outside of Los Angeles. Very underrepresented.&quot;

By the 19th century, the Chinese Americans in San Francisco operated sophisticated and sometimes luxurious restaurants patronized mainly by Chinese. The restaurants in smaller towns (mostly owned by Chinese immigrants) served food based on what their customers requested, anything ranging from pork chop sandwiches and apple pie, to beans and eggs. Many of these small-town restaurant owners were self-taught family cooks who improvised on different cooking methods using whatever ingredients were available.

These smaller restaurants were responsible for developing American Chinese cuisine, where the food was modified to suit a more American palate. First catering to miners and railroad workers, they established new eateries in towns where Chinese food was completely unknown, adapting local ingredients and catering to their customers&#x27; tastes. Even though the new flavors and dishes meant they were not strictly Chinese cuisine, these Chinese restaurants have been cultural ambassadors to Americans.

Chinese restaurants in the United States began during the California Gold Rush (1848–1855), which brought 20,000–30,000 immigrants across from the Canton (Guangdong) region of China. The first Chinese restaurant in America is debated. Some say it was Macau and Woosung, while others cite Canton Restaurant. Both unphotographed establishments were founded in 1849 in San Francisco. Either way, these and other such restaurants were central features in the daily lives of immigrants. They provided a connection to home, particularly for the many bachelors who did not have the resources or knowledge to cook for themselves. In 1852, the ratio of male to female Chinese immigrants was a 18:1. These restaurants served as gathering places and cultural centers for the Chinese community. By 1850, there were five Chinese restaurants in San Francisco. Soon after, significant amounts of food were being imported from China to America&#x27;s west coast.

The trend spread steadily eastward with the growth of the American railways, particularly to New York City. The Chinese Exclusion Act allowed merchants to enter the country, and in 1915, restaurant owners became eligible for merchant visas. This fueled the opening of Chinese restaurants as an immigration vehicle. The merchant status was based on the use of rotating managers. The restaurants would operate as a partnership among many people, rotating different partners through the management responsibilities and establishing them as merchants to earn the exemption.

By the early decades of the 20th century, Chinese restaurants had brought new culinary ingredients to towns and cities across the United States, including soy sauce, sesame oil, bean sprouts, water chestnuts, dried mushrooms, fried noodles, Oolong tea and almond cookies. Bok choi, then called &quot;Pak choi&quot;, was sometimes called &quot;Chinese Romaine&quot;. Napa cabbage was then called &quot;Chinese cabbage&quot;. In those years, it was commonplace for prosperous American families, especially on the West Coast, to employ Chinese cooks as domestic servants. For example, cookbook author and TV personality James Beard grew up in Portland, Oregon where his parents employed a Chinese cook, Jue-Let, who Beard credited as a major culinary influence, and spoke of with great affection. In 1915, a manual was published in San 
Francisco, instructing Chinese immigrants how to cook for American families. 

Pekin Noodle Parlor, established in 1911, is the oldest operating Chinese restaurant in the country. , the United States had 46,700 Chinese restaurants.

Along the way, cooks adapted southern Chinese dishes and developed a style of Chinese food not found in China, such as chop suey. Restaurants (along with Chinese laundries) provided an ethnic niche for small businesses at a time when Chinese people were excluded from most jobs in the wage economy by ethnic discrimination or lack of language fluency. By the 1920s, this cuisine, particularly chop suey, became popular among middle-class Americans. However, after World War II it began to be dismissed for not being &quot;authentic&quot;, though it continued to be popular.

In 1955, the Republic of China (having itself retreated to Taiwan) evacuated the Dachen Islands in the face of the encroaching Communists. Many who evacuated to Taiwan later moved to the United States as they lacked strong social networks and access to opportunity in Taiwan. Chefs from the Dachen Islands had a strong influence on American Chinese food.

Beginning in the 1950s, Taiwanese immigrants replaced Cantonese immigrants as the primary labor force in American Chinese restaurants. These immigrants expanded American-Chinese cuisine beyond Cantonese cuisine to encompass dishes from many different regions of China as well as Japanese-inspired dishes.

Chinese-American restaurants played a key role in ushering in the era of take-out and delivery food in the United States. In New York City, delivery was pioneered in the 1970s by Empire Szechuan Gourmet Franchise, which hired Taiwanese students studying at Columbia University to do the work. Chinese American restaurants were among the first restaurants to use picture menus in the US.

Taiwanese immigration largely ended in the 1990s due to an economic boom and democratization in Taiwan. From the 1990s onward, immigrants from China once again made up the majority of cooks in American Chinese restaurants. There has been a consequential component of Chinese emigration of illegal origin, most notably Fuzhou people from Fujian and Wenzhounese from Zhejiang in mainland China, specifically destined to work in Chinese restaurants in New York City, beginning in the 1980s.

Adapting Chinese cooking techniques to local produce and tastes has led to the development of American Chinese cuisine. Many of the Chinese restaurant menus in the US are printed in Chinatown, Manhattan, which has a strong Chinese-American demographic.

Late 20th-century tastes have been more accommodating to the local residents. By this time, it had become evident that Chinese restaurants no longer catered mainly to Chinese customers.

In 2011, the Smithsonian National Museum of American History displayed some of the historical background and cultural artifacts of American Chinese cuisine in its exhibit entitled, &quot;Sweet &amp; Sour: A Look at the History of Chinese Food in the United States&quot;.

==Differences from other regional cuisines in China==
Many of the foods that Americans call &quot;Chinese food&quot; were created in America, including fortune cookies, crab rangoon, and General Tso&#x27;s chicken. American Chinese food builds from styles and food habits brought from the southern province of Guangdong, often from the Toisan district of Toisan, the origin of most Chinese immigration before the closure of immigration from China in 1924. These Chinese families developed new styles and used readily available ingredients, especially in California. The type of Chinese-American cooking served in restaurants was different from the foods eaten in Chinese-American homes. Of the various regional cuisines in China, Cantonese cuisine has been the most influential in the development of American Chinese food.

American Chinese food typically features different types and greater quantities of meat than traditional Chinese cuisine. Another major difference between Chinese and American-Chinese cuisine is in the use of vegetables. Salads containing raw or uncooked ingredients are rare in traditional Chinese cuisine. An increasing number of American Chinese restaurants, including some upscale establishments, have started to offer these items in response to customer demand. While cuisine in China makes frequent use of Asian leaf vegetables, like bok choy and gai-lan, American Chinese cuisine makes use of some ingredients not native to and very rarely used in China, for example, Western broccoli () instead of Chinese broccoli (gai-lan, ). (Occasionally, Western broccoli is also referred to as &quot;&quot; in Cantonese () in order to distinguish the two.)

Chinese ingredients considered &quot;exotic&quot; in North America have become more available over time, including fresh fruits and vegetables which previously had been rare. For example, edible snow pea pods have become widely available, while the less-known &quot;dau miu&quot; (also called &quot;pea sprouts&quot;, &quot;pea pod stems&quot;, or &quot;pea shoots&quot;) are also appearing on menus, and even in supermarkets in North America.

American-Chinese food also has had a reputation for high levels of MSG to enhance flavor. In recent years, market forces and customer demand have encouraged many restaurants to offer &quot;MSG Free&quot; or &quot;No MSG&quot; menus, or to omit this ingredient on request.

Egg fried rice in American Chinese cuisine is also prepared differently, with more soy sauce added for more flavor whereas the traditional egg fried rice uses less soy sauce. Some food styles, such as dim sum, were also modified to fit American palates, such as added batter for fried dishes and extra soy sauce.

Both Chinese and American-Chinese cooking utilize similar methods of preparation, such as stir frying, pan frying, and deep frying, which are all easily done using a wok.

Ming Tsai, the owner of the Blue Ginger restaurant in Wellesley, Massachusetts, and host of PBS culinary show &quot;Simply Ming&quot;, said that American Chinese restaurants typically try to have food representing 3–5 regions of China at one time, have chop suey, or have &quot;fried vegetables and some protein in a thick sauce&quot;, &quot;eight different sweet and sour dishes&quot;, or &quot;a whole page of 20 different chow meins or fried rice dishes&quot;. Tsai said &quot;Chinese-American cuisine is &#x27;dumbed-down&#x27; Chinese food. It&#x27;s adapted... to be blander, thicker and sweeter for the American public&quot;.

Most American Chinese establishments cater to non-Chinese customers with menus written in English or containing pictures. If separate Chinese-language menus are available, they typically feature such items as liver, chicken feet, or other meat dishes that might deter American customers (such as offal). In Chinatown, Manhattan, some restaurants are known for having a &quot;phantom&quot; menu with food preferred by ethnic Chinese, but believed to be disliked by non-Chinese Americans.


==Dishes==

===Menu items not found in China===
Dishes that often appear on American Chinese restaurant menus include:
* Almond chicken — chicken breaded in batter containing ground almonds, fried and served with almonds and onions.
* Chicken and broccoli — similar to beef and broccoli, but with chicken instead of beef.
* Chinese chicken salad — usually containing sliced or shredded chicken, uncooked leafy greens, carrots, cucumbers, crispy noodles (or fried wonton skins) and sesame dressing. Some restaurants serve the salad with mandarin oranges.
* Chop suey — connotes &quot;assorted pieces&quot; in Chinese. It is usually a mix of vegetables and meat in a brown sauce but can also be served in a white sauce.
* Crab rangoon — fried wonton skins stuffed with (usually) artificial crab meat (surimi) and cream cheese.
* Fortune cookie — invented in California as a Westernized version of the Japanese &quot;omikuji senbei&quot;, fortune cookies have become sweetened and found their way to many American Chinese restaurants.
* Fried wontons — somewhat similar to crab rangoon, a filling, (most often pork), is wrapped in a wonton skin and deep fried.
* General Tso&#x27;s chicken — chunks of chicken that are dipped in batter, deep fried, and seasoned with ginger, garlic, sesame oil, scallions, and hot chili peppers. Believed to be named after Qing dynasty statesman and military leader Zuo Zongtang, often referred to as General Tso.
* Mongolian beef — fried beef with scallions or white onions in a spicy and often sweet brown sauce. 
* Pepper steak — sliced steak, green bell peppers, tomatoes, and white or green onions stir fried with salt, sugar, and soy sauce. Bean sprouts are a less common addition.
* Royal beef—deep-fried sliced beef, doused in a wine sauce and often served with steamed broccoli.
* Sesame chicken — boned, marinated, battered, and deep-fried chicken which is then dressed with a translucent red or orange, sweet and mildly spicy sauce, made from soy sauce, corn starch, vinegar, chicken broth, and sugar, and topped with sesame seeds.

* Sushi — despite being served in the Japanese and American styles, some American Chinese restaurants serve various types of sushi, usually on buffets.
* Sweet roll — yeast rolls, typically fried, covered in granulated sugar or powdered sugar. Some variants are stuffed with cream cheese or icing.
* Wonton strips — these deep-fried strips of dough are commonly offered as complimentary appetizers, along with duck sauce and hot mustard, or with soup when ordering take-out.

====Other American Chinese dishes====
&quot;Dau miu&quot; is a Chinese vegetable that has become popular since the early 1990s, and now not only appears on English-language menus, usually as &quot;pea shoots&quot;, but is often served by upscale non-Asian restaurants as well. Originally it was only available during a few months of the year, but it is now grown in greenhouses and is available year-round.

===Versions of dishes also found in China===

* Beijing beef — in China, this dish uses &quot;gai lan&quot; (Chinese broccoli) rather than American broccoli.
* Beef and broccoli — flank steak cut into small pieces, stir-fried with broccoli, and covered in a dark sauce made with soy sauce and oyster sauce and thickened with cornstarch.
* Cashew chicken — stir-fried tender chicken pieces with cashew nuts.
* Chow mein — literally means &quot;stir-fried noodles&quot;. Chow mein consists of fried crispy noodles with bits of meat and vegetables. It can come with chicken, pork, shrimp or beef.
* Egg foo young — Chinese-style omelet with vegetables and meat, usually served with a brown gravy. While some restaurants in North America deep-fry the omelet, versions found in Asia are more likely to fry in the wok.
* Egg roll — while spring rolls have a thin, light beige crispy skin that flakes apart, and is filled with mushrooms, bamboo, and other vegetables inside, the American-style egg roll has a thicker, chewier, dark brown bubbly skin stuffed with cabbage and usually bits of meat or seafood (such as pork or shrimp), but no egg. In some regions, a filling of shredded and dried celery replaces cabbage, resulting in a more greenish tinge to the filling.
* Fried rice — fried-rice dishes are popular offerings in American Chinese food due to the speed and ease of preparation and their appeal to American tastes.
:Fried rice is generally prepared with rice cooled overnight, allowing restaurants to put leftover rice to good use (freshly cooked rice is actually less suitable for fried rice).
:The Chinese-American version of this dish typically uses more soy sauce than the versions found in China.
:Fried rice is offered with different combinations of meat (pork, chicken and shrimp are the most popular) and vegetables.
* Ginger beef () — tender beef cut in chunks, mixed with ginger and Chinese mixed vegetables.
* Ginger fried beef () — tender beef cut in strings, battered, deep fried, then re-fried in a wok mixed with a sweet sauce, a variation of a popular Northern Chinese dish.
* Hulatang — a traditional Chinese soup with hot spices, often called &quot;spicy soup&quot; on menus.
* Hot and sour soup — the North American soups tend to have starch added as a thickener.
* Kung Pao chicken — a spicy Sichuan dish that is served with peanuts, scallions, and Sichuan peppers. Some versions in North America may include zucchini and bell peppers.
* Lo mein (&quot;stirred noodles&quot;) — frequently made with eggs and flour, making them chewier than a recipe simply using water. Thick, spaghetti-shaped noodles are pan fried with vegetables (mainly bok choy and Chinese cabbage or napa) and meat. Sometimes this dish is referred to as chow mein (which literally means &quot;stir-fried noodles&quot; in Cantonese).
* Mei fun — noodles usually simmered in broth with other ingredients such as fish balls, beef balls or slices of fishcake.
* Moo shu pork — the original version uses more typically Chinese ingredients (including wood ear fungi and daylily buds) and thin flour pancakes, while the American version often uses vegetables more familiar to Americans, and thicker pancakes. This dish is quite popular in Chinese restaurants in the United States, but not as popular in China.
* Orange chicken — chopped, battered, fried chicken with a sweet orange flavored chili sauce that is thickened and glazed. The traditional version consists of stir-fried chicken in a light, slightly sweet soy sauce flavored with dried orange peels.
* Wonton soup — In most American Chinese restaurants, only wonton dumplings in broth are served, while versions found in China may come with noodles. (In Guangdong, it can be a full meal in itself, consisting of thin egg noodles and several pork and prawn wontons in a pork or chicken soup broth or noodle broth). Especially in takeout restaurants, wonton are often made with thicker dough skins, to withstand the rigors of delivery.

==Regional variations==

===New York City===
The New York metropolitan area is home to the largest Chinese population outside of Asia, which also constitutes the largest metropolitan Asian-American group in the United States and the largest Asian-national metropolitan diaspora in the Western Hemisphere. The Chinese-American population of the New York City metropolitan area was an estimated 893,697 as of 2017.

Given the New York metropolitan area&#x27;s continuing status as by far the leading gateway for Chinese immigrants to the United States, all popular styles of every Chinese regional cuisine have commensurately become ubiquitously accessible in New York City, including Hakka, Taiwanese, Shanghainese, Hunanese, Szechuan, Cantonese, Fujianese, Xinjiang, Zhejiang, and Korean Chinese cuisine. Even the relatively obscure Dongbei style of cuisine indigenous to Northeast China is now available in Flushing, Queens, as well as Mongolian cuisine and Uyghur cuisine.

====Kosher preparation====

Kosher preparation of Chinese food is also widely available in New York City, given the metropolitan area&#x27;s large Jewish and particularly Orthodox Jewish populations.

The perception that American Jews eat at Chinese restaurants on Christmas Day is documented in media. The tradition may have arisen from the lack of other open restaurants on Christmas Day, the close proximity of Jewish and Chinese immigrants to each other in New York City, and the absence of dairy foods combined with meat.

Kosher Chinese food is usually prepared in New York City, as well as in other large cities with Orthodox Jewish neighborhoods, under strict rabbinical supervision as a prerequisite for Kosher certification.

===Los Angeles County===
Chinese populations in Los Angeles represent at least 21 of the 34 provincial-level administrative units of China, along with the largest population of Taiwanese-born immigrants outside of Taiwan, making greater Los Angeles home to a diverse population of Chinese people in the United States.

Chinese-American cuisine in the Greater Los Angeles area is concentrated in Chinese ethnoburbs rather than traditional Chinatowns. The oldest Chinese ethnoburb is Monterey Park, considered to be the nation&#x27;s first suburban Chinatown.

Although Chinatown in Los Angeles is still a significant commercial center for Chinese immigrants, the majority are centered in the San Gabriel Valley which is the one of the largest concentration of Asian-Americans in the country, stretching from Monterey Park into the cities of Alhambra, San Gabriel, Rosemead, San Marino, South Pasadena, West Covina, Walnut, City of Industry, Diamond Bar, Arcadia, and Temple City.

The Valley Boulevard corridor is the main artery of Chinese restaurants in the San Gabriel Valley. Another hub with a significant Chinese population is Irvine (Orange County). More than 200,000 Chinese Americans live in the San Gabriel Valley alone, with over 67% being foreign-born. The valley has become a brand-name tourist destination in China, although droughts in California are creating a difficult impact upon its water security and existential viability. Of the ten cities in the United States with the highest proportions of Chinese Americans, the top eight are located in the San Gabriel Valley, making it one of the largest concentrated hubs for Chinese Americans in North America.

Some regional styles of Chinese cuisine include Beijing, Chengdu, Chongqing, Dalian, Hangzhou, Hong Kong, Hunan, Mongolian hot pot, Nanjing, Shanghai, Shanxi, Shenyang, Wuxi, Xinjiang, Yunnan, and Wuhan.

Food blogger David R. Chan has visited more than 8000 Chinese restaurants, including hundreds around his home in Los Angeles.

===San Francisco Bay Area===
Since the early 1990s, many American Chinese restaurants influenced by California cuisine have opened in the San Francisco Bay Area. The trademark dishes of American Chinese cuisine remain on the menu, but there is more emphasis on fresh vegetables, and the selection is vegetarian-friendly.

This new cuisine has exotic ingredients like mangos and portobello mushrooms. Brown rice is often offered as an alternative to white rice.

Some restaurants substitute grilled wheat flour tortillas for the rice pancakes in mushu dishes. This occurs even in some restaurants that would not otherwise be identified as California Chinese, both the more Westernized places and the more authentic places. There is a Mexican bakery that supplies some restaurants with thinner tortillas made for use with mushu. Mushu purists do not always react positively to this trend.

In addition, many restaurants serving more native-style Chinese cuisines exist, due to the high numbers and proportion of ethnic Chinese in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Restaurants specializing in Cantonese, Sichuanese, Hunanese, Northern Chinese, Shanghainese, Taiwanese, and Hong Kong traditions are widely available, as are more specialized restaurants such as seafood restaurants, Hong Kong-style diners and cafes, also known as &quot;Cha chaan teng&quot; (), dim sum teahouses, and hot pot restaurants. Many Chinatown areas also feature Chinese bakeries, boba milk tea shops, roasted meat, vegetarian cuisine, and specialized dessert shops.

Chop suey is not widely available in San Francisco, and the area&#x27;s chow mein is different from Midwestern chow mein.

===Boston===
Chinese cuisine in Boston results from a combination of economic and regional factors, in association with the wide Chinese academic scene. The growing Boston Chinatown accommodates Chinese-owned bus lines shuttling an increasing number of passengers to and from the numerous Chinatowns in New York City, and this has led to some exchange between Boston Chinese cuisine and that in New York.

A large immigrant Fujianese immigrant population has made a home in Boston, leading to Fuzhou cuisine being readily available there. An increasing Vietnamese population has also had an influence on Chinese cuisine in Greater Boston.

In addition, innovative dishes incorporating chow mein and chop suey as well as locally farmed produce and regionally procured seafood are found in Chinese as well as non-Chinese food in and around Boston. The selection of Chinese bakery products has increased markedly in the 21st century, although the range of choices in New York City remains supreme.

Joyce Chen introduced northern Chinese (Mandarin) and Shanghainese dishes to Boston in the 1950s, including Peking duck, moo shu pork, hot and sour soup, and potstickers, which she called &quot;Peking Ravioli&quot; or &quot;Ravs&quot;. Her restaurants were frequented by early pioneers of the ARPANET, as well as celebrities such as John Kenneth Galbraith, James Beard, Julia Child, Henry Kissinger, Beverly Sills, and Danny Kaye. A former Harvard University president called her eating establishment &quot;not merely a restaurant, but a cultural exchange center&quot;. In addition, her single-season PBS national television series &quot;Joyce Chen Cooks&quot; popularized some dishes which could be made at home, and she often encouraged using substitute ingredients when necessary.

===Philadelphia===
The evolving American Chinese cuisine scene in Philadelphia has similarities with the situation in both New York City and Boston. As with Boston, Philadelphia is experiencing significant Chinese immigration from New York City, to the north, and from China, the top country of birth by a significant margin for a new arrivals there .

There is a growing Fujianese community in Philadelphia as well, and Fuzhou cuisine is readily available in the Philadelphia Chinatown. Also, emerging Vietnamese cuisine in Philadelphia is contributing to evolution in local Chinese cuisine, with some Chinese-American restaurants adopting Vietnamese influences or recipes.

=== Washington, D.C. ===
Although Washington, D.C.&#x27;s Chinese community has not achieved as high of a local profile as that in other major cities along the Mid-Atlantic United States, it is now growing, and rapidly so, due to the gentrification of DC&#x27;s Chinatown and the status of Washington, D.C., as the capital of the United States. The growing Chinese community in D.C. and its suburbs has revitalized the influence of Chinese cuisine in the area.

Washington, D.C.&#x27;s population is 1% Chinese, making them the largest single Asian ancestry in the city. However, the Chinese community in the DC area is no longer solely concentrated in the area of Chinatown, which is about 15% Chinese and 25% Asian, but is mostly concentrated throughout various towns in suburban Maryland and Northern Virginia. The largest concentration of Chinese and Taiwanese in the D.C. area is in Rockville, Maryland, in Montgomery County.

A popular dish localized in Chinese American carryouts across the DMV region consists of whole fried chicken wings served with mumbo sauce, a sweet, tangy ketchup-based condiment.

In D.C. proper, there are Chinese-owned restaurants specializing in both Chinese American and authentic Chinese cuisine. Regional variations of Chinese cuisine that restaurants in D.C. specialize in include Shanghainese cuisine, Cantonese cuisine, Uyghur cuisine, Mongolian cuisine, and Sichuan cuisine. In the suburbs of D.C. in Maryland and Virginia, many of which have a much higher Chinese population than D.C., regional variations present aside from the ones previously mentioned include Hong Kong cuisine, Hunan cuisine, Shaanxi cuisine, Taiwanese cuisine, and Yunnan cuisine.

===Puerto Rico===
===Hawaii===
Hawaiian-Chinese food developed somewhat differently from Chinese cuisine in the continental United States.

Owing to the diversity of Pacific ethnicities in Hawaii and the history of the Chinese influence in Hawaii, resident Chinese cuisine forms a component of the cuisine of Hawaii, which is a fusion of different culinary traditions. Some Chinese dishes are typically served as part of plate lunches in Hawaii.

The names of foods are different as well, such as &quot;Manapua&quot;, from the Hawaiian contraction of &quot;Mea ono pua&#x27;a&quot; or &quot;delicious pork item&quot; from the dim sum &quot;bao&quot;, though the meat is not necessarily pork.

===Other regions===
* Chow mein sandwich — sandwich of chow mein and gravy (Southeastern Massachusetts and Rhode Island)
* Chop suey sandwich — sandwich of chicken chop suey on a hamburger bun (North Shore of Massachusetts)
* St. Paul sandwich — egg foo young patty in plain white sandwich bread (St. Louis, Missouri)
* Springfield-style cashew chicken — a style of cashew chicken that combines breaded deep-fried chicken, cashew nuts, and oyster sauce (Springfield, Missouri)
* War/wor sue gai (boneless almond chicken) — bite-sized Southern-style fried chicken with yellow sauce (Columbus, Ohio)
* Yaka mein — Chinese-Creole food found in New Orleans that evolved from beef noodle soup

==Chain restaurants==

* China Coast — closed in 1995; owned by General Mills Corporation, formerly 52 locations throughout the United States
* Leeann Chin — Minnesota and North Dakota; owned at one time by General Mills Corp.
* Manchu Wok — throughout the United States and Canada, as well as Guam, Korea and Japan
* Panda Express — throughout North America (including Canada and Mexico), plus locations in Asia and the Middle East
* Pei Wei Asian Diner — throughout the United States; formerly a subsidiary of P.F. Chang&#x27;s
* P. F. Chang&#x27;s China Bistro — throughout the United States; featuring California-Chinese fusion cuisine
* Pick Up Stix — California, Arizona, and Nevada
* Stir Crazy — Illinois, Missouri, Wisconsin, Minnesota, New York, Florida, Indiana, Texas, and Ohio

==Popular culture==
Many American films (for example: &quot;The Godfather&quot;; &quot;Ghostbusters&quot;; &quot;The Lost Boys&quot;; &quot;The Naked Gun&quot;; &quot;Crossing Delancey&quot;; &quot;Paid in Full&quot;; and &quot;Inside Out&quot;) involve scenes where Chinese take-out food is eaten from oyster pails. A consistent choice of cuisine in all these cases, however, might just be an indicator of its popularity. A running gag in &quot;Dallas&quot; is Cliff Barnes&#x27; fondness for inexpensive Chinese take-out food, as opposed to his nemesis J. R. Ewing frequenting fine restaurants.

Among the numerous American television series and films that feature Chinese restaurants as a setting include &quot;A Christmas Story&quot;, &quot;Seinfeld&quot; (particularly the episode &quot;The Chinese Restaurant&quot;), &quot;Sex and the City&quot;, &quot;Big Trouble in Little China&quot;, &quot;South Park&quot;, &quot;Year of the Dragon&quot;, &quot;Lethal Weapon 4&quot;, &quot;Mickey Blue Eyes&quot;, &quot;Booty Call&quot;, &quot;Rush Hour 2&quot;, and &quot;Men in Black 3&quot;. In most cases, it is not an actual restaurant but a movie set that typifies the stereotypical American Chinese eatery, featuring &quot;paper lanterns and intricate woodwork&quot;, with &quot;numerous fish tanks and detailed [red] wallpaper [with gold designs]&quot; and &quot;golden dragons&quot;, plus &quot;hanging ducks in the window&quot;.

== Cultural impact ==

=== Impact on United States ===
Chinese American cuisine provides an option for Americans to taste Chinese food, which is adapted to both Chinese and American flavors. It allows people in America to learn more about Chinese traditional culture and customs. In this process, Chinese Americans have developed a new cuisine which is different from &quot;traditional Chinese food,&quot; and contribute to the food diversity in America. Through running their own restaurants or eateries, first-generation Chinese immigrants eliminated discrimination against them and gained sufficient income to send the next generations to universities or colleges. For Chinese Americans, American Chinese cuisine has already become part of their childhood memories and life, which also would be a bridge between Chinese and American cultures. For example, Panda Express and P.F. Chang&#x27;s, two of the most famous American Chinese restaurants in the United States that have become the symbol of American Chinese cuisine and have gained appreciation from many Americans.

In addition, American Chinese cuisine brought some new ingredients and cooking methods to the United States, such as stir-frying and steaming. Thus, many restaurants in the United States started to combine existing dishes with Chinese cooking techniques and flavors, which promoted the development of fusion cuisine. Introduction of Chinese food also triggered people&#x27;s curiosity about more Asian food, such as Japanese, Thai and Singaporean food, and led to a prevalence of Asian cuisine.

Authenticity

American Chinese food is often criticized for lacking authenticity or called ‘fake’ Chinese food. The criticism stems from their different characteristics such as taste, ingredients, and preparation of the food. “Traditions that seem timeless and ancient are in fact being constantly modified and reinvented within any given historical context,” so what may be authentic in a given time may not be in another. However, some argue that it represents a new yet authentic Chinese cuisine. While distinct from traditional regional Chinese cuisine, it’s a fusion of American and Chinese flavors as it is a product of Chinese immigrants who have “adapted to their social environments, developed new identities, and formed new cultural sensibilities.” What started as a way for Chinese immigrants to eat familiar foods later transformed into a cultural blend of their traditional recipes and their adapted way of life facing the U.S. economy.

Authenticity in Restaurants

Articles have stated that authenticity involves “more than food; ambiance, music, serving style (...) come into play”. Restaurants’ authenticity is often not fixed, but rather based on communication, symbols, and changing ideas. Some argue that ethnic restaurants, such as Chinese restaurants, help immigrants feel connected culturally. According to researchers “relationship (guanxi) surfaces as a key expression of what makes a culinary experience authentic”, aligning with the idea that publicity, reputation and relationship factoring in for Chinese in terms of public relations. This suggests that social connections and reputations contribute towards how authenticity is perceived in the culinary context. However, past studies argue that the concept of authenticity is simply a marketing ploy to attract non-chinese customers rather than a true reflection of the culture. In other words, the concept of authenticity has often been examined from the perspective of the tourist seeking an authentic experience.

Nutritional Concerns

The adaptation of Chinese cuisine to American tastes has also shifted its nutritional content. Many have claimed that these modifications have made it less healthy, as the dishes now contain higher levels of sodium, fat, and oil. This has influenced some to perceive the ‘Americanization’ of the cuisine to have contributed to the reduced nutritional value. For example, the Orange Chicken at Panda Express contains 22 grams of fat, exceeding the recommended daily intake of 20 grams. Similarly, the Kung Pao Chicken contains 21 grams of fat, which also surpasses the dietary guidelines. However, it is possible to customize the meals to fit an individual’s nutritional needs.

MSG Panic

In the 1980s, a popular food seasoning known as monosodium glutamate (MSG) became the subject of health concerns leading up to the “MSG panic.” A report from Dr. Robert Ho Man Kwok in a medical journal describing the symptoms he experienced after dining at a Chinese restaurant, contributed to the growing concerns about MSG. Media coverage amplified these concerns which popularized the term “Chinese Restaurant Syndrome,” despite MSG being a widely used seasoning in a range of foods. In response to a heightened public concern, researchers hastily conducted studies that framed the issue towards Chinese cuisine rather than the seasoning MSG, though it has been claimed as the initial linkage.

Sociologist Stanley Cohen defined the fear surrounding MSG in which “a condition, episode, person, or group of persons emerges to become defined as a threat to societal values and interests.” Some researchers characterize the fear of MSG in Chinese cuisine as a &quot;moral panic”, and claim it was influenced by historical xenophobia toward Chinese Americans and immigrants, contributing to the stigmatization of Chinese cuisine as being of lower quality or unhealthy due to its MSG content. 

=== Impact on China ===
Although some Chinese people will regard American Chinese food as inauthentic food and less likely to have it, or they will not recognize American Chinese cuisine, in recent years, some American Chinese food restaurants have opened in some cities of China, such as Beijing and Shanghai. P.F. Chang&#x27;s, a restaurant chain specialized in American Chinese food, opened a new restaurant in Shanghai, China. The CEO of this chain Michael Osanloo revealed his positive attitude towards the future of opening more chain restaurants in China because he believed that Chinese people would like to try something new. 

Many owners of the American Chinese restaurants opened in the cities of China are Chinese Americans. Their primary target customers were people from foreign countries and students who have had study abroad experiences. However, many native Chinese people, especially younger generations have a greater willingness to try American Chinese food. Yinhao Xu, the owner of Americanized Chinese eatery-Bamboo Chinese Fast Food in Beijing, said that he was surprised that some younger generations without overseas experiences have a higher level of acceptance of American-style Chinese cuisine. The reason for that is cultural impact; many American Chinese cuisines appear in American shows or films, such as &quot;Friends&quot; and &quot;The Big Bang Theory&quot;, which leads young people in China to want to try American Chinese food.

=== Impact to other countries ===

==== South Korea ====
Woktionary, an American Chinese restaurant opened in Seoul, South Korea, provides authentic American Chinese food, such as Chow mein and Mongolian beef. Meanwhile, the head chef Kim also added new flavors to some of the dishes.

At the same time, Panda Express also opened a restaurant in Seoul, South Korea. The CEO of the company indicated that many Korean customers were already expecting for their opening.

==== Japan ====
The first Panda Express in Japan was opened in November 2016 in Kawasaki. It is dedicated to providing the original taste of American Chinese food to Americans in Japan. It offers similar menus in Japan compared to Panda Express restaurants in the United States, such as Orange Chicken, Beijing Beef, and Fortune cookies. Nevertheless, the restaurant also tries to implement localization by offering a limited dish only in Japan: Sweet and Pungent Shrimp.

==== United Kingdom ====

Chinese food and American Chinese cuisine has become a staple food in British Cuisine as early as the 19th century with the first arrivals of Chinese immigrants to the UK. In an 2009 survey, over 80% of participants enjoy Chinese cuisine. British Chinese cuisine can be distinguished by its partnering with the British classic chips. American Chinese characteristics come inspired by the fried dishes like Rangoons and Chop Suey.

==See also==
* American cuisine
* Australian Chinese cuisine
* British Chinese cuisine
* Canadian Chinese cuisine
* Chinese bakery products
* Chinese cuisine
* Chinese Latin American cuisine
* Fortune Cookie
* Fusion cuisine
* Indian Chinese cuisine
* List of Chinese restaurants
* New Zealand Chinese cuisine
* Oyster pail
== Citations ==
==References and further reading==

===Studies===
* 
* Free download: 
* 
* 

===Cookbooks===
* Sara Bosse, Onoto Watanna, with an Introduction by Jacqueline M. Newman. &quot;Chinese-Japanese Cook Book.&quot; (1914; reprinted, Bedford, MA: Applewood Books, 2006). . .
* Eileen Yin-Fei Lo and Alexandra Grablewski. &quot;The Chinese Kitchen: Recipes, Techniques and Ingredients, History, and Memories from America&#x27;s Leading Authority on Chinese Cooking.&quot; (New York: William Morrow, 1999). .

==External links==

* &quot;Chinese food in America History&quot; (The Food Timeline) The Food Timeline: history notes--restaurants, chefs &amp; foodservice
* Imogen Lim Restaurant Menu Collection: American menus. Vancouver Island University Library.
* Harley J. Spiller Collection of Chinese Restaurant Menus University of Toronto, Scarborough Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4743373" start="0" end="24" title="American Chinese cuisine" label="American Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778821" start="30" end="37" title="cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="51" end="66" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="89" end="106" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q868580" start="149" end="167" title="Chinese restaurant" label="Chinese restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724177" start="274" end="292" title="Chinese emigration" label="Chinese immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q11157865" start="512" end="522" title="Chinatowns in the United States" label="Chinatowns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="602" end="618" title="Laundry#Chinese laundries in North America" label="laundry services"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056333" start="911" end="945" title="Chinese Americans in San Francisco" label="Chinese Americans in San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q860985" start="1180" end="1189" title="pork chop" label="pork chop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068034" start="1205" end="1214" title="apple pie" label="apple pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="1957" end="1977" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="2046" end="2052" title="Canton Province, China" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="2834" end="2844" title="West Coast of the United States" label="west coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q30941369" start="2940" end="2953" title="Chinese Americans in New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073716" start="2959" end="2980" title="Chinese Exclusion Act" label="Chinese Exclusion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="3573" end="3582" title="soy sauce" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q212317" start="3584" end="3594" title="sesame oil" label="sesame oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057052" start="3596" end="3608" title="bean sprouts" label="bean sprouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q932664" start="3610" end="3625" title="Eleocharis dulcis" label="water chestnuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q654236" start="3627" end="3642" title="Edible mushroom" label="dried mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221627" start="3644" end="3657" title="fried noodles" label="fried noodles"/>
<link wikidata="Q231587" start="3659" end="3669" title="Oolong tea" label="Oolong tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q82330310" start="3674" end="3688" title="Chinese almond biscuit" label="almond cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q165178" start="3690" end="3698" title="Bok choi" label="Bok choi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360268" start="3784" end="3796" title="Napa cabbage" label="Napa cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="3929" end="3939" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399476" start="4035" end="4046" title="James Beard" label="James Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="4058" end="4074" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356259" start="4331" end="4350" title="Pekin Noodle Parlor" label="Pekin Noodle Parlor"/>
<link wikidata="Q269100" start="4604" end="4613" title="chop suey" label="chop suey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="5106" end="5125" title="Kuomintang&amp;#x27;s retreat to Taiwan" label="retreated to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753346" start="5141" end="5155" title="Dachen Islands" label="Dachen Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="5609" end="5626" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="5979" end="5998" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724177" start="6377" end="6395" title="Chinese emigration" label="Chinese emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988158" start="6428" end="6441" title="Fuzhou Americans" label="Fuzhou people"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="6447" end="6453" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q710218" start="6458" end="6469" title="Wenzhounese" label="Wenzhounese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="6475" end="6483" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q658274" start="6750" end="6754" title="menu" label="menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q866332" start="6781" end="6801" title="Chinatown, Manhattan" label="Chinatown, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30941369" start="6822" end="6838" title="Chinese Americans in New York City" label="Chinese-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="7053" end="7100" title="Smithsonian National Museum of American History" label="Smithsonian National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q782794" start="7464" end="7479" title="Fortune cookie" label="fortune cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298630" start="7481" end="7493" title="Crab Rangoon" label="crab rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q839206" start="7499" end="7525" title="General Tso&amp;#x27;s chicken" label="General Tso&amp;#x27;s chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="7622" end="7631" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q164904" start="7648" end="7654" title="Toisan" label="Toisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="7725" end="7758" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="closure of immigration from China"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8014" end="8040" title="Chinese cuisine#Regional cuisines" label="regional cuisines in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="8042" end="8059" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9266" start="8357" end="8362" title="Salad" label="Salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q20134" start="8654" end="8668" title="leaf vegetable" label="leaf vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q165178" start="8676" end="8684" title="bok choy" label="bok choy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677369" start="8689" end="8696" title="gai-lan" label="gai-lan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47722" start="8819" end="8827" title="broccoli" label="broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422840" start="9186" end="9194" title="snow pea" label="snow pea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179678" start="9503" end="9506" title="Monosodium glutamate" label="MSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133722" start="9709" end="9723" title="Yeung Chow Fried Rice" label="Egg fried rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q339836" start="9910" end="9917" title="dim sum" label="dim sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="10113" end="10124" title="stir frying" label="stir frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073916" start="10126" end="10136" title="pan frying" label="pan frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="10142" end="10153" title="deep frying" label="deep frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q208364" start="10189" end="10192" title="wok" label="wok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864668" start="10195" end="10204" title="Ming Tsai" label="Ming Tsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q533317" start="10249" end="10273" title="Wellesley, Massachusetts" label="Wellesley, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="10287" end="10290" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521008" start="10311" end="10322" title="Simply Ming" label="Simply Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q269100" start="10448" end="10457" title="chop suey" label="chop suey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470283" start="11038" end="11043" title="liver (food)" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q41384" start="11045" end="11057" title="chicken feet" label="chicken feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="11125" end="11130" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q866332" start="11136" end="11156" title="Chinatown, Manhattan" label="Chinatown, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q118901115" start="11439" end="11453" title="Almond chicken" label="Almond chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q119198843" start="11553" end="11573" title="Chicken and broccoli" label="Chicken and broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100723" start="11642" end="11663" title="Chinese chicken salad" label="Chinese chicken salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q20134" start="11722" end="11734" title="green vegetables" label="leafy greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q125337" start="11854" end="11869" title="mandarin orange" label="mandarin orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q269100" start="11874" end="11883" title="Chop suey" label="Chop suey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298630" start="12038" end="12050" title="Crab rangoon" label="Crab rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q553905" start="12059" end="12065" title="wonton" label="wonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="12106" end="12110" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q815740" start="12117" end="12123" title="surimi" label="surimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q426337" start="12129" end="12141" title="cream cheese" label="cream cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q782794" start="12145" end="12159" title="Fortune cookie" label="Fortune cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="12174" end="12184" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069592" start="12232" end="12239" title="omikuji" label="omikuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q198788" start="12240" end="12246" title="senbei" label="senbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q553905" start="12352" end="12365" title="Fried wontons" label="Fried wontons"/>
<link wikidata="Q839206" start="12478" end="12504" title="General Tso&amp;#x27;s chicken" label="General Tso&amp;#x27;s chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="12629" end="12641" title="chili pepper" label="chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="12671" end="12683" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q230200" start="12714" end="12726" title="Zuo Zongtang" label="Zuo Zongtang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899667" start="12764" end="12778" title="Mongolian beef" label="Mongolian beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104577" start="12866" end="12878" title="Pepper steak" label="Pepper steak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057052" start="12995" end="13006" title="Bean sprout" label="Bean sprout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456014" start="13138" end="13152" title="Sesame chicken" label="Sesame chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="13394" end="13399" title="Sushi" label="Sushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q426337" start="13667" end="13679" title="cream cheese" label="cream cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919604" start="13802" end="13812" title="duck sauce" label="duck sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677369" start="14370" end="14377" title="gai lan" label="gai lan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47722" start="14424" end="14432" title="broccoli" label="broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q64358326" start="14436" end="14453" title="Beef and broccoli" label="Beef and broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165995" start="14456" end="14467" title="flank steak" label="flank steak"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="14555" end="14564" title="soy sauce" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q780827" start="14569" end="14581" title="oyster sauce" label="oyster sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393961" start="14601" end="14611" title="cornstarch" label="cornstarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048739" start="14615" end="14629" title="Cashew chicken" label="Cashew chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="14670" end="14680" title="cashew nut" label="cashew nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q964107" start="14685" end="14694" title="Chow mein" label="Chow mein"/>
<link wikidata="Q192874" start="14730" end="14736" title="noodle" label="noodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505233" start="14872" end="14885" title="Egg foo young" label="Egg foo young"/>
<link wikidata="Q20129" start="14902" end="14908" title="omelet" label="omelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4103048" start="15091" end="15099" title="Egg roll" label="Egg roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q715525" start="15108" end="15119" title="spring roll" label="spring roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="15207" end="15213" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076874" start="15541" end="15551" title="Fried rice" label="Fried rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563074" start="16109" end="16120" title="Ginger beef" label="Ginger beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563074" start="16203" end="16220" title="Ginger Fried Beef" label="Ginger fried beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935553" start="16375" end="16383" title="Hulatang" label="Hulatang"/>
<link wikidata="Q711494" start="16478" end="16495" title="Hot and sour soup" label="Hot and sour soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q549713" start="16567" end="16583" title="Kung Pao chicken" label="Kung Pao chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q691365" start="16594" end="16601" title="Sichuan cuisine" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q756800" start="16651" end="16666" title="Sichuan peppers" label="Sichuan peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q281385" start="16740" end="16747" title="Lo mein" label="Lo mein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360268" start="16973" end="16977" title="Napa cabbage" label="napa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17108" end="17115" title="Rice vermicelli#Mainland China" label="Mei fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q240164" start="17134" end="17142" title="Simmering" label="simmered"/>
<link wikidata="Q275068" start="17146" end="17151" title="broth" label="broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q705369" start="17183" end="17192" title="fish ball" label="fish ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238238" start="17195" end="17204" title="beef ball" label="beef ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q594675" start="17219" end="17227" title="fishcake" label="fishcake"/>
<link wikidata="Q987686" start="17231" end="17243" title="Moo shu pork" label="Moo shu pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q10422716" start="17318" end="17326" title="Cloud ear fungus" label="wood ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q156275" start="17337" end="17344" title="daylily" label="daylily"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366437" start="17578" end="17592" title="Orange chicken" label="Orange chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q553905" start="17827" end="17838" title="Wonton soup" label="Wonton soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="18309" end="18335" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969666" start="18443" end="18457" title="Asian Americans in New York City" label="Asian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="18529" end="18537" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="18545" end="18563" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q30941369" start="18569" end="18585" title="Chinese in New York City" label="Chinese-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q30941369" start="18918" end="18931" title="Chinese in New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q709287" start="18943" end="18948" title="Hakka cuisine" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q707908" start="18950" end="18959" title="Taiwanese cuisine" label="Taiwanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366617" start="18961" end="18973" title="Shanghai cuisine" label="Shanghainese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156889" start="18975" end="18983" title="Hunan cuisine" label="Hunanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q691365" start="18985" end="18993" title="Szechuan cuisine" label="Szechuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="18995" end="19004" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156995" start="19006" end="19015" title="Fujianese cuisine" label="Fujianese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25696283" start="19017" end="19025" title="Xinjiang cuisine" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156999" start="19027" end="19035" title="Zhejiang cuisine" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431807" start="19041" end="19063" title="Korean Chinese cuisine" label="Korean Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006930" start="19093" end="19100" title="Northeastern Chinese cuisine" label="Dongbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="19132" end="19147" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058775" start="19168" end="19184" title="Flushing, Queens" label="Flushing, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156753" start="19197" end="19214" title="Mongolian cuisine" label="Mongolian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25696283" start="19219" end="19233" title="Uyghur cuisine" label="Uyghur cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="19264" end="19270" title="Kashrut" label="Kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869724" start="19383" end="19389" title="Jews in New York City" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="19407" end="19422" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="19501" end="19514" title="Christmas" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908617" start="19731" end="19761" title="Milk and meat in Jewish law" label="dairy foods combined with meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="19904" end="19909" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="20020" end="20031" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="20323" end="20347" title="Greater Los Angeles area" label="Greater Los Angeles area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404345" start="20375" end="20384" title="ethnoburb" label="ethnoburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q202509" start="20410" end="20419" title="Chinatown" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555601" start="20540" end="20549" title="Chinatown, Los Angeles" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363753" start="20663" end="20681" title="San Gabriel Valley" label="San Gabriel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q927213" start="20779" end="20792" title="Monterey Park, California" label="Monterey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q752681" start="20812" end="20820" title="Alhambra, California" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q953437" start="20822" end="20833" title="San Gabriel, California" label="San Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q910851" start="20835" end="20843" title="Rosemead, California" label="Rosemead"/>
<link wikidata="Q850869" start="20845" end="20855" title="San Marino, California" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q852581" start="20857" end="20871" title="South Pasadena, California" label="South Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q494728" start="20873" end="20884" title="West Covina, California" label="West Covina"/>
<link wikidata="Q850979" start="20886" end="20892" title="Walnut, California" label="Walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q927094" start="20894" end="20910" title="City of Industry, California" label="City of Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q768449" start="20912" end="20923" title="Diamond Bar, California" label="Diamond Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q534536" start="20925" end="20932" title="Arcadia, California" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864144" start="20938" end="20949" title="Temple City, California" label="Temple City"/>
<link wikidata="Q805858" start="20956" end="20981" title="Valley Boulevard" label="Valley Boulevard corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="21104" end="21110" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="21112" end="21125" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058413" start="21310" end="21332" title="droughts in California" label="droughts in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973735" start="21374" end="21388" title="water security" label="water security"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="21695" end="21702" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="21704" end="21711" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="21713" end="21722" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="21724" end="21730" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="21732" end="21740" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="21742" end="21751" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="21753" end="21758" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="21760" end="21768" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="21779" end="21786" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="21788" end="21796" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="21798" end="21804" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="21806" end="21814" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42651" start="21816" end="21820" title="Wuxi" label="Wuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="21822" end="21830" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="21832" end="21838" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="21844" end="21849" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131282237" start="21865" end="21878" title="David R. Chan" label="David R. Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026802" start="22079" end="22097" title="California cuisine" label="California cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="22117" end="22139" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="22346" end="22351" title="mango" label="mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q227690" start="22357" end="22376" title="portobello mushroom" label="portobello mushroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066624" start="22379" end="22389" title="Brown rice" label="Brown rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674257" start="22428" end="22438" title="white rice" label="white rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642411" start="22489" end="22497" title="tortilla" label="tortilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q987686" start="22524" end="22529" title="mu shu" label="mushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642411" start="22771" end="22779" title="tortilla" label="tortilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036629" start="23252" end="23284" title="Hong Kong-style Western cuisine" label="Hong Kong-style diners and cafes"/>
<link wikidata="Q137746" start="23306" end="23320" title="Cha chaan teng" label="Cha chaan teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q339836" start="23331" end="23338" title="dim sum" label="dim sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q846849" start="23354" end="23361" title="hot pot" label="hot pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054613" start="23409" end="23425" title="Chinese bakery products" label="Chinese bakeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q715858" start="23427" end="23440" title="boba milk tea" label="boba milk tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q844314" start="23448" end="23460" title="siu mei" label="roasted meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326339" start="23462" end="23480" title="Chinese Buddhist cuisine" label="vegetarian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q269100" start="23514" end="23523" title="Chop suey" label="Chop suey"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="23551" end="23564" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="23614" end="23624" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="23669" end="23675" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="23774" end="23782" title="academic" label="academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009855" start="23802" end="23818" title="Chinatown, Boston" label="Boston Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100180" start="23832" end="23855" title="Chinatown bus lines" label="Chinese-owned bus lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q30941369" start="23926" end="23953" title="Chinese Americans in New York City" label="Chinatowns in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914034" start="24061" end="24070" title="Fujianese people" label="Fujianese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511014" start="24130" end="24144" title="Fuzhou cuisine" label="Fuzhou cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="24190" end="24200" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="24260" end="24274" title="Greater Boston" label="Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q964107" start="24322" end="24331" title="chow mein" label="chow mein"/>
<link wikidata="Q269100" start="24336" end="24345" title="chop suey" label="chop suey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435464" start="24357" end="24371" title="farm-to-table" label="locally farmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="24404" end="24411" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054613" start="24500" end="24523" title="Chinese bakery products" label="Chinese bakery products"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297425" start="24633" end="24643" title="Joyce Chen (chef)" label="Joyce Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q404973" start="24741" end="24752" title="Peking duck" label="Peking duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q987686" start="24754" end="24766" title="moo shu pork" label="moo shu pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q711494" start="24768" end="24785" title="hot and sour soup" label="hot and sour soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q640769" start="24791" end="24802" title="potstickers" label="potstickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="24926" end="24933" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q186042" start="24966" end="24988" title="John Kenneth Galbraith" label="John Kenneth Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399476" start="24990" end="25001" title="James Beard" label="James Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q214477" start="25003" end="25014" title="Julia Child" label="Julia Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="25016" end="25031" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q235517" start="25033" end="25046" title="Beverly Sills" label="Beverly Sills"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="25052" end="25062" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="25073" end="25091" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="25234" end="25237" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="25484" end="25496" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724177" start="25624" end="25643" title="Chinese emigration" label="Chinese immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q30941369" start="25649" end="25662" title="Chinese in New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099025" start="25882" end="25904" title="Chinatown, Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q826059" start="25921" end="25939" title="Vietnamese cuisine" label="Vietnamese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="26128" end="26144" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="26254" end="26280" title="Mid-Atlantic United States" label="Mid-Atlantic United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="26328" end="26342" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404065" start="26346" end="26365" title="Chinatown (Washington, D.C.)" label="DC&amp;#x27;s Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="26409" end="26437" title="list of capitals in the United States" label="capital of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="26867" end="26873" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="26876" end="26884" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="26889" end="26906" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q327022" start="26982" end="27001" title="Rockville, Maryland" label="Rockville, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="27006" end="27023" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="27092" end="27095" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="DMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q108798661" start="27121" end="27140" title="fried chicken" label="fried chicken wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935368" start="27153" end="27164" title="mumbo sauce" label="mumbo sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366617" start="27414" end="27434" title="Shanghainese cuisine" label="Shanghainese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="27436" end="27453" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25696283" start="27455" end="27469" title="Uyghur cuisine" label="Uyghur cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156753" start="27471" end="27488" title="Mongolian cuisine" label="Mongolian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q691365" start="27494" end="27509" title="Sichuan cuisine" label="Sichuan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036629" start="27700" end="27717" title="Hong Kong cuisine" label="Hong Kong cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156889" start="27719" end="27732" title="Hunan cuisine" label="Hunan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16545189" start="27734" end="27749" title="Shaanxi cuisine" label="Shaanxi cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q707908" start="27751" end="27768" title="Taiwanese cuisine" label="Taiwanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q859283" start="27774" end="27788" title="Yunnan cuisine" label="Yunnan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="27903" end="27928" title="continental United States" label="continental United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="27957" end="27964" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516701" start="28010" end="28037" title="Chinese immigration to Hawaii" label="Chinese influence in Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295586" start="28089" end="28106" title="cuisine of Hawaii" label="cuisine of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="28119" end="28125" title="fusion cuisine" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496403" start="28212" end="28223" title="plate lunch" label="plate lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q122828168" start="28294" end="28301" title="Manapua" label="Manapua"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="28392" end="28396" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105519" start="28506" end="28524" title="Chow mein sandwich" label="Chow mein sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109860" start="28560" end="28586" title="Southeastern Massachusetts" label="Southeastern Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="28591" end="28603" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q269100" start="28607" end="28625" title="Chop suey sandwich" label="Chop suey sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056656" start="28678" end="28689" title="North Shore (Massachusetts)" label="North Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="28693" end="28706" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591284" start="28710" end="28727" title="St. Paul sandwich" label="St. Paul sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505233" start="28730" end="28743" title="egg foo young" label="egg foo young"/>
<link wikidata="Q21080963" start="28765" end="28779" title="sandwich bread" label="sandwich bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="28781" end="28800" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048739" start="28804" end="28836" title="Cashew chicken" label="Springfield-style cashew chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q108798661" start="28892" end="28905" title="fried chicken" label="fried chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="28907" end="28917" title="cashew nut" label="cashew nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q780827" start="28924" end="28936" title="oyster sauce" label="oyster sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="28938" end="28959" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28963" end="28978" title="Almond chicken#almond boneless chicken" label="War/wor sue gai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="29066" end="29080" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047029" start="29084" end="29093" title="Yaka mein" label="Yaka mein"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="29125" end="29136" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q697498" start="29155" end="29171" title="beef noodle soup" label="beef noodle soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099635" start="29198" end="29209" title="China Coast" label="China Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="29237" end="29250" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515716" start="29317" end="29328" title="Leeann Chin" label="Leeann Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747622" start="29402" end="29412" title="Manchu Wok" label="Manchu Wok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358690" start="29491" end="29504" title="Panda Express" label="Panda Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160898" start="29608" end="29627" title="Pei Wei Asian Diner" label="Pei Wei Asian Diner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360181" start="29705" end="29736" title="P. F. Chang&amp;#x27;s China Bistro" label="P. F. Chang&amp;#x27;s China Bistro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190707" start="29815" end="29827" title="Pick Up Stix" label="Pick Up Stix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617528" start="29864" end="29874" title="Stir Crazy (restaurant)" label="Stir Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="30024" end="30037" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q108745" start="30051" end="30063" title="Ghostbusters" label="Ghostbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q506403" start="30077" end="30090" title="The Lost Boys" label="The Lost Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476442" start="30104" end="30117" title="The Naked Gun" label="The Naked Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350449" start="30131" end="30148" title="Crossing Delancey" label="Crossing Delancey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392216" start="30162" end="30174" title="Paid in Full (2002 film)" label="Paid in Full"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144664" start="30192" end="30202" title="Inside Out (2015 film)" label="Inside Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116369" start="30267" end="30278" title="oyster pail" label="oyster pail"/>
<link wikidata="Q168708" start="30410" end="30416" title="Dallas (1978 TV series)" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979041" start="30426" end="30438" title="Cliff Barnes" label="Cliff Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q145391" start="30511" end="30518" title="archenemy" label="nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30519" end="30530" title="J. R. Ewing" label="J. R. Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q556933" start="30678" end="30695" title="A Christmas Story" label="A Christmas Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="30709" end="30717" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722574" start="30756" end="30778" title="The Chinese Restaurant" label="The Chinese Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35791" start="30793" end="30809" title="Sex and the City" label="Sex and the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q859494" start="30823" end="30850" title="Big Trouble in Little China" label="Big Trouble in Little China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="30864" end="30874" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q471932" start="30888" end="30906" title="Year of the Dragon (film)" label="Year of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q429397" start="30920" end="30935" title="Lethal Weapon 4" label="Lethal Weapon 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756554" start="30949" end="30965" title="Mickey Blue Eyes" label="Mickey Blue Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q845157" start="30979" end="30989" title="Booty Call" label="Booty Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q830208" start="31003" end="31014" title="Rush Hour 2" label="Rush Hour 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q327713" start="31032" end="31046" title="Men in Black 3" label="Men in Black 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030906" start="31106" end="31115" title="Set construction" label="movie set"/>
<link wikidata="Q844314" start="31363" end="31376" title="Siu mei" label="hanging ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="31773" end="31797" title="Chinese cuisine" label="traditional Chinese food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="32071" end="32088" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358690" start="32258" end="32271" title="Panda Express" label="Panda Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360181" start="32276" end="32293" title="P. F. Chang&amp;#x27;s" label="P.F. Chang&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="32891" end="32899" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="32901" end="32905" title="Thai cuisine" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q136726" start="32910" end="32921" title="Singaporean cuisine" label="Singaporean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11619980" start="33503" end="33527" title="Chinese regional cuisine" label="regional Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="33536" end="33542" title="Fusion cuisine" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516704" start="33597" end="33615" title="History of Chinese Americans" label="Chinese immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366437" start="35365" end="35379" title="Orange chicken" label="Orange Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358690" start="35383" end="35396" title="Panda Express" label="Panda Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q549713" start="35490" end="35506" title="Kung Pao chicken" label="Kung Pao Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q179678" start="35727" end="35747" title="monosodium glutamate" label="monosodium glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="36645" end="36656" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="36701" end="36711" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="37161" end="37168" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="37173" end="37181" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360181" start="37183" end="37200" title="P. F. Chang&amp;#x27;s" label="P.F. Chang&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="38217" end="38224" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539" start="38241" end="38260" title="The Big Bang Theory" label="The Big Bang Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="38451" end="38456" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="38458" end="38469" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358690" start="38836" end="38849" title="Panda Express" label="Panda Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="38853" end="38858" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q164234" start="38890" end="38898" title="Kawasaki, Kanagawa" label="Kawasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366437" start="39097" end="39111" title="Orange chicken" label="Orange Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q782794" start="39131" end="39145" title="Fortune cookie" label="Fortune cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q40578" start="39755" end="39771" title="Cuisine of the United States" label="American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749863" start="39774" end="39800" title="Australian Chinese cuisine" label="Australian Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373989" start="39803" end="39826" title="British Chinese cuisine" label="British Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029863" start="39829" end="39853" title="Canadian Chinese cuisine" label="Canadian Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054613" start="39856" end="39879" title="Chinese bakery products" label="Chinese bakery products"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="39882" end="39897" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752071" start="39900" end="39930" title="Chinese Latin American cuisine" label="Chinese Latin American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q782794" start="39933" end="39947" title="Fortune Cookie" label="Fortune Cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="39950" end="39964" title="Fusion cuisine" label="Fusion cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963561" start="39967" end="39989" title="Indian Chinese cuisine" label="Indian Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127295" start="39992" end="40019" title="List of Chinese restaurants" label="List of Chinese restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q122144009" start="40022" end="40049" title="New Zealand Chinese cuisine" label="New Zealand Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116369" start="40052" end="40063" title="Oyster pail" label="Oyster pail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025676" start="40188" end="40201" title="Winnifred Eaton (writer)" label="Onoto Watanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063515" start="40227" end="40247" title="Jacqueline M. Newman" label="Jacqueline M. Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q91871070" start="40648" end="40665" title="The Food Timeline" label="The Food Timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="40891" end="40912" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1559" wikidata="Q2713837" url="?curid=1559" title="Ahenobarbus">
<text>Ahenobarbus (Latin, &#x27;red-beard&#x27;, literally &#x27;bronze-beard&#x27;), also spelled Aenobarbus or Ænobarbus, may refer to:

* Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (disambiguation), Romans
* Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (disambiguation), Romans
* Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, birth name of Nero, Roman emperor 54–68
* Frederick Barbarossa, known in Latin as &quot;Fridericus Ænobarbus&quot;, Holy Roman Emperor 1155–1190

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2713837" start="0" end="11" title="Ahenobarbus" label="Ahenobarbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q387257" start="135" end="179" title="Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (disambiguation)" label="Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11689772" start="190" end="234" title="Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (disambiguation)" label="Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="245" end="272" title="Nero" label="Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="316" end="336" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1560" wikidata="Q46798" url="?curid=1560" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani">
<text>Ahmad Shāh Durrānī (; ), also known as Ahmad Shāh Abdālī (), was the first ruler and founder of the Durrani Empire. He is often regarded as the founder of modern Afghanistan.

Throughout his reign, Ahmad Shah fought over fifteen major military campaigns. Nine of them being centered in India, three in Khorasan, and three in Afghan Turkestan. Having rarely lost a battle, historians widely recognize Ahmad Shah as a brilliant military leader and tactician, typically being compared to rulers such as Mahmud of Ghazni, Babur, and as well as Nader Shah. Historian Hari Ram Gupta refers to Ahmad Shah as the &quot;greatest general of Asia of his time&quot;, as well as one of the greatest conquerors in Asian history.

==Name and title==
His birth name was Ahmad Khan, born into the Abdali tribe. After his accession to power in 1747, he became known as Ahmad Shah. His tribe also changed the name from Abdali, instead becoming the Durrani. Afghans often call him &quot;Ahmad Shāh Bābā&quot;, meaning &quot;Ahmad Shah the Father&quot;.

In historical sources, his tribes name is interchangeably used between Abdali and Durrani, with other common names for him being Ahmad Shah Abdali.

==Early life==
Ahmad Shah was born between 1720 and 1722 in either Herat, Afghanistan, or Multan, Pakistan. Sources are disputed on where he was born. Modern scholarship came to the consensus that Ahmad Shah was born in Multan, but this is disputed by Nejatie, who states that the majority of sources from Ahmad Shah&#x27;s time state that he was born in Herat, rather than Multan, including the Tarikh-i Ahmad Shahi, a primary source commissioned by Ahmad Shah.

His father, Zaman Khan, was the emir of Herat. Zaman Khan had died in 1721, leading to Ahmad Shah being raised alongside his brother Zulfiqar Khan in Shindand and Farah. In the mid-1720s, Zulfiqar Khan was invited to rule Herat. Nothing else is heard of Ahmad Shah until 1731–1732, when Zulfiqar Khan was defeated by Nader Shah, forcing both Zulfiqar Khan and Ahmad Shah to flee to Kandahar, where they remained political prisoners of Hussain Hotak.

After Nader Shah conquered Kandahar, Ahmad Shah and Zulfiqar Khan were freed. Ahmad Shah spent much of his early life in the service of Nader Shah. Accompanying him on his invasion of India, Ahmad Shah was later resettled in Mazandaran alongside his brother. Iranica states that Ahmad Shah may have become the governor of Mazandaran. After the death of his brother, Ahmad Shah enlisted in the Afsharid military in 1742. Some sources suggest that it was only Zulfiqar Khan that left for Mazandaran, while Ahmad Shah remained in Nader Shah&#x27;s service as an officer.

During Nader Shah&#x27;s invasion of India, Ahmad Shah personally commanded a regiment of Durrani tribesmen. Ahmad Shah&#x27;s forces committed massacres and sacked Delhi alongside Nader Shah&#x27;s forces in 1739. According to legend, Nizam ul-Mulk, the Mughal governor of Hyderabad, who was an expert in physiognomy, predicted that Ahmad Shah would become king. Nader Shah took notice of this and also believed in the prophecy, supposedly clipping a piece of Ahmad Shah&#x27;s ears, and remarking &quot;When you become a king, this will remind you of me&quot;. Nader Shah also requested that Ahmad Shah be generous with his descendants. Nejatie is skeptical of the account.

In 1744, Ahmad Shah was promoted to a personal staff of Nader Shah. In a campaign against the Ottomans, Ahmad Shah distinguished himself and was allowed to raise a contingent of 3–4,000 Durrani tribesmen by Nader Shah. Ahmad Shah&#x27;s contingent became one of Nader Shah&#x27;s most trusted, utilizing them to shatter the power of his other commanders due to his perception that they were planning to rebel or kill him.

===Death of Nader Shah===
In June 1747, Nader Shah was convinced that his personal guard intended to assassinate him. As a result, he summoned Ahmad Shah and other loyal commanders. Nader Shah ordered Ahmad Shah to assemble his Durrani regiments, and to arrest his personal guard. If the personal guard resisted, Ahmad Shah was given permission to kill them all. He was ordered to do this at first light. Nader Shah then chose to sleep with his favorite wife, but did so outside the royal tent, where the same guards he accused of treachery presumed night duty, while Ahmad Shah with his regiments were established at the defenses of the camp.

News of Nader Shah&#x27;s plan leaked, with the conspirators being forced to act. Four conspirators entered the royal enclosure and entered Nader Shah&#x27;s tent, assassinating him. Chaos ensued following the assassination, and plans to coverup by the conspirators failed. They resorted to pillaging the royal enclosure while news of Nader Shah&#x27;s death rapidly spread. The next morning, the royal guard attacked Ahmad Shah&#x27;s forces, who despite being heavily outnumbered, drove the Persians and Qizilbash off. Ahmad Shah then entered the tent of Nader Shah, taking the Koh-i-Noor diamond and a signet ring from his body.

==Return to Kandahar==

Having driven off the Persians and Qizilbash, Ahmad Shah departed for Kandahar with his regiments, and his Uzbek ally, Hajji Bi Ming. Ahmad Shah first settled the dispute of leadership, asserting himself as the leader of Durrani tribesmen by forcing the former leader to step down. Ahmad Shah also killed &#x27;Abd al-Ghani Khan, his uncle and the governor of Kandahar to secure complete power over the Durrani regiments. With the dispute over leadership concluded, Ahmad Shah&#x27;s forces grew to 6,000 Afghans.

Following this, Ahmad Shah moved through Khabushan, advancing to Kashmar. While on-route, Ahmad Shah accumulated supplies for his army and proceeded toward Torbat-e Heydarieh, where they received news that Adel Shah had sent a force to halt the Afghans. As a result, Ahmad Shah led his forces to Tun and then Farah, where they defeated an army sent by Adel Shah. With Farah under his control, the Afghans proceeded to Grishk, and then Kandahar.

While on-route to Kandahar, Ahmad Shah recovered a military convoy that contained the annual tribute from Sindh. The value of the treasure is disputed, but it&#x27;s given within an estimate of 3,000,000–260,000,000 rupees. The convoy was escorted by Mohammad Taqi Khan Shirazi, a disgruntled former officer of Nader Shah, and Nasir Khan, the governor of Kabul and Peshawar. Taqi Khan joined Ahmad Shah and divided the wealth, while Nasir Khan refused and was imprisoned. Later, he was ransomed on the conditions of an annual tribute of 500,000 rupees, and that he would enter Ahmad Shah&#x27;s suzerainty. The army of Ahmad Shah grew to over 18,000 men, also including war elephants.

===Accession and coronation===

Upon reaching Kandahar, Ahmad Shah established camp in Naderabad and prepared to be crowned as King. According to legend, Ahmad Shah declared a Jirga, summoning all tribal leaders who unanimously selected Ahmad Shah as king. A piece of wheat or barley was then placed on Ahmad Shah&#x27;s turban. Singh cites this account, despite there being no contemporary evidence to suggest this occurred.

In reality, Ahmad Shah was brought to power through a nine-man military council. Ahmad Shah&#x27;s accession was further disputed by Jamal Khan, the leader of the Barakzai tribe. The Barakzai were the most powerful clan of the Durranis centered in the Kandahar and Helmand regions. The dispute over accession continued until an agreement was made where Jamal Khan would submit to Ahmad Shah as king, while Ahmad Shah would make Jamal Khan and his descendants Wazir. With an agreement reached, Sabir Shah, Ahmad Shah&#x27;s advisor, took a piece of greenery or stalk and attached it to Ahmad Shah&#x27;s cap, officially crowning him. Scholars state that Ahmad Shah&#x27;s rise to power was effectively a military coup, rather than an election.

Following his accession, Ahmad Shah adopted the epithet &quot;Durr-i Durrān&quot;, meaning &quot;Pearl of Pearls&quot;, also changing the name of his tribe from Abdali to Durrani.

==Reign as Shah (1747–1772)==
===Administration===
At the beginning of his rule, Ahmad Shah&#x27;s empire consisted of Kandahar, Helmand, and Farah. The Hazaras of Bala Murghab and the Khanate of Kalat ruled by Nasir Khan also rested under Afghan suzerainty.

However, Ahmad Shah had no administrative experience, nor did much of his closest advisors. As a result, he chose to adopt a government style similar to the Mughals and Safavids, with his main idea of a government based on an absolute monarchy. A tribal council ruled in hand with Ahmad Shah as well, serving as a form of cabinet. However, Ahmad Shah had made the positions of his cabinet hereditary, thus making it difficult to dismiss advisors without causing conflict. Their roles, however, were mostly purely de-jure, and tasks were delegated to subordinates.

The civil service of the empire was dominated by the Qizilbash, as most of the Durrani elite were illiterate. The Qizilbash also significantly formed the major part of Ahmad Shah&#x27;s bodyguard, counterbalancing other Durrani leaders and tribes. The complications and effectively divided government made the administration difficult to function, and caused ethnic tension between the Qizilbash and tribal council of Ahmad Shah.

Further complications erupted in Ahmad Shah&#x27;s administration over exempting his own tribe from taxation. Other Afghan tribes and ethnicities were discontent from such, as they were also devoid of being allowed to serve in the administration of the empire. This was further exasperated by Ahmad Shah when he gave the right of revenue collection to the highest bidder. The victors of these auctions, typically members of Ahmad Shah&#x27;s own tribe, were completely free in taxing as much as they wished. While members of the Durrani tribe rapidly became rich, some landholders were forced into complete debt, forcing many to sell their lands or flee the kingdom, likely being bought up by the Durranis who had driven them to bankruptcy.

Ahmad Shah envisioned himself as the successor of Nader Shah. Instead of establishing a capable administration, Ahmad Shah focused on wars and military campaigns to supply his treasury, with any downturns easily being covered by the treasures of war. Throughout his reign, he rarely spent his time in Kandahar, the capital of his empire, and instead pursued military campaigns, returning only to restore stability after conflict. By the end of his reign, Ahmad Shah committed to over fifteen military campaigns, Nine of them being centered in India, three in Khorasan, and three in Afghan Turkestan.

===Objectives===
Afghanistan was a relatively poor country. As a result, Ahmad Shah, following in the footsteps of conquerors before him such as Mahmud of Ghazni, and invaded India to plunder and obtain wealth. Relating as well from Muhammad of Ghor, Ahmad Shah invaded India to also establish his own political dominance, as the power vacuum following the decline of the Mughal Empire allowed him to repeat extensive campaigns, while also reviving the prominence of Afghans in India. Furthermore, by institutionalizing the casus belli of holy war, Ahmad Shah was able to direct the majority of his campaigns toward India.

Moreover, Ahmad Shah saw invasions as the proper way to propagate his strength. The Afghan chiefs and nobility initially saw him as an upstart, and as a result, Ahmad Shah sought victories to legitimize himself and to bring the nobility under him.

==Military campaigns==
===Campaign to Kabul (1747)===
Weeks after Ahmad Shah&#x27;s accession, Nasir Khan, the governor of Kabul, Ghazni, and Peshawar revolted against him. Ahmad Shah previously imprisoned Nasir Khan and ransomed him for an annual tribute of 500,000 rupees, and while Nasir Khan was attempting to raise this amount, the Ghilzai tribes refused to pay their taxes toward the Durranis, and only wished to do so to their Mughal sovereign, Muhammad Shah. With a growing Ghilzai revolt, Nasir Khan declared his independence from Durrani suzerainty and began raising an army of Uzbeks and Hazaras, while also frantically asking Muhammad Shah for aid.

In Autumn of 1747, Ahmad Shah began his campaign against Nasir Khan. Appointing his nephew Luqman Khan as the regent in Kandahar while he left on campaign, Ahmad Shah marched his army toward Ghazni only to be halted at Qalati Ghilji by his former allies, the Tokhi Ghilzai. Ahmad Shah stormed the fortress of Qalat, bringing the Tokhis to submission and annexing their lands over the following decades. Ahmad Shah continued to Ghazni, defeating the governor established there and conquering it with little opposition.

Before advancing on Kabul, Ahmad Shah garnered the support of the Suleimankhel tribes in the region, while Taqi Khan managed to procure the defection of the Qizilbash garrison in Kabul, so that once the Afghan army would arrive, they&#x27;d hand over the city. The acceptance of these terms forced Nasir Khan to flee to Peshawar, and when Ahmad Shah arrived at Kabul in October 1747, the Qizilbash handed over the Bala Hissar fortress. Ahmad Shah awarded the Qizilbash by giving them districts in Chindawol and Murad Khani.

===First invasion of India (1747–1748)===

With Kabul under his control, Ahmad Shah dispatched his Commander-in-chief, Jahan Khan, toward Peshawar with the intention of advancing as far as Attock. Jahan Khan quickly overran Jalalabad, and Nasir Khan was unable to create a significant defense at the Khyber Pass, forcing him to flee. The Afghan armies approached Peshawar, prompting many Pashtun tribes to declare for them, such as the Yusufzai, Afridi, and Khattak. With Nasir Khan overwhelmed, he completely withdrew from Peshawar and fled to Delhi. 

Shah Nawaz Khan, the Mughal governor of the Punjab, opened correspondence with the Afghans after they had seized Peshawar. Shah Nawaz, having toppled his brother from power to assume control over the Punjab itself, was opposed by the Mughal emperor Muhammad Shah, who refused to recognize him as governor. As a result, the Afghans promised Shah Nawaz the position of governor of the Punjab if he accepted Durrani suzerainty. Shah Nawaz accepted this before the Mughal vizier promised to confirm him as governor if he opposed the Afghan invasion instead, which Shah Nawaz accepted.

The betrayal saw Ahmad Shah dispatch Sabir Shah to try and convince Shah Nawaz once again. However, after diplomatically insulting Shah Nawaz, Sabir Shah was imprisoned and executed, and Shah Nawaz began marching against the Afghan army. Ahmad Shah crossed the Ravi River on 10 January, and established himself at the Shalimar Gardens, outside of Lahore. The armies of Shah Nawaz and Ahmad Shah began battle on 11 January, and as the battle began, the Afghan regiments of Shah Nawaz&#x27;s army defected. Despite commanding a much larger army then the Afghans, the Mughals were utterly defeated, and Shah Nawaz fled to Delhi.

With the defeat of the Mughals, the Afghans entered Lahore, plundering and massacring the city. Thousands were also conscripted into the Afghan army, while the Mughals began mobilizing a larger army. Ahmad Shah left Lahore on 19 February with his army, beginning to advance on Delhi. The Afghans captured Sirhind and pressed the advance, outmaneuvering Mughal forces until they were caught at Manupur, where they battled. The Afghan army pressed the attack until a catastrophe occurred in the form that the ammunition stores of the Afghan army caught fire and exploded, incinerating 1,000 men, and forcing a complete withdrawal from the battlefield. The Mughals did not pursue the Afghan army due to the death of Mughal emperor Muhammad Shah, and turmoil in the camp.

Withdrawing to Lahore, Ahmad Shah became aware that his nephew, Luqman Khan, who had been left as regent in Kandahar while he embarked on campaign, had revolted. Ahmad Shah immediately returned to Afghanistan, and marched on Kandahar. The revolt was quickly quelled, and Ahmad Shah spent the summer of 1748 preparing for his second invasion of India. The timing was significant for Ahmad Shah, as Qamar-ud-Din, a significant commander for the Mughals at Manupur, had been killed, while the Mughal emperor Muhammad Shah&#x27;s death saw him succeeded by Bahadur Shah, who largely focused on pleasure-seeking. Ahmad Shah also wished to avenge his defeat.

===Second invasion of India (1748)===

In November 1748, Ahmad Shah began his second invasion of India. Moin-ul-Mulk, the new governor of the Punjab, urgently requested reinforcement from the Mughals in Delhi. Moin-ul-Mulk, wishing to not fight the Afghans on open plains, remained on the defensive at Sodhra, as an on-going power struggle with the Mughal ex-governor of Kabul, Nasir Khan, threatened his position. As a result, Jahan Khan was able to raid the countryside, including the Chaj Doab, while a party of Sikhs raided Lahore.

Ahmad Shah advanced to Kopra, and engaged in skirmishes with Moin-ul-Mulk&#x27;s army. Overwhelmed with the rising power of the Sikhs and the Afghan invasion, Moin-ul-Mulk opened negotiation, ceding the revenues of Gujrat, Aurangabad, Sialkot, and Pasrur, which all amounted to revenues worth 1.4 million rupees yearly. Ahmad Shah returned to Afghanistan following the treaty, crossing through Peshawar, Dera Ismail Khan, and Dera Ghazi Khan. The regions of Dera Ismail Khan and Dera Ghazi Khan fell as he returned to Afghanistan, confirming the former tribal chiefs as governors in the region under his suzerainty.

===First Khorasan campaign (1749–1751)===
Between 1749 and 1750, after his second invasion of India, Ahmad Shah launched his first campaign into Khorasan. Intent on conquering Herat, Ahmad Shah besieged the city for a long period of time until it finally fell in late 1750.

With the fall of Herat, Ahmad Shah continued his campaign into Khorasan, invading the Afsharids and besieging Mashhad, where he remained until November 1750. Attempts to storm the city by the Afghans were unsuccessful, and Lee and Gupta state that Shahrokh Shah surrendered to Ahmad Shah personally so he could raise the siege. Shahrokh Shah accepted Afghan suzerainty, paying large tribute and releasing members of Ahmad Shah&#x27;s family.

Noelle however, states that Ahmad Shah lifted the siege on 10 November, and was intent on returning years later. Shahrokh Shah had released a son of Ahmad Shah, possibly being Timur Shah Durrani, or Ahmad Shah&#x27;s youngest son, Sanjar Mirza.

Nonetheless, after the siege of Mashhad, Ahmad Shah advanced to Nishapur, which was ruled by the Qara Bayat Amirdom. He besieged the city and demanded its surrender, which the governor, Jafar Khan, refused despite only having a few thousand men as garrison. Ahmad Shah ordered the walls to be breached, utilizing cannons, which the Afghans surged through. However, the defenders of the city had established defenses and a trap, which the Afghans fell into. Close-quarters combat began after, in which Jafar Khan was killed. His nephew, Abbas Quli, took command of the garrison and repulsed the Afghan forces, inflicting horrific casualties unto them, including some 12,000 dead, and thousands more wounded.

With his army seriously weakened, Ahmad Shah ordered a retreat to Herat. The harsh winter weather killed thousands while the Afghans retreated, and Ahmad Shah was forced to leave behind much of his baggage, including his artillery and food supplies. When the Afghans reached the Hari Rud river, it was completely frozen. Attempting to cross it caused much of the ice to break, killing even more men and sweeping away pack animals for the army.

Upon the armies return to Herat, Ahmad Shah faced an assassination conspiracy from Darwish Ali Khan Hazara, Ahmad Shah&#x27;s governor of Herat. The conspiracy was quickly quelled and Darwish Ali was imprisoned, where in his stead, Ahmad Shah appointed Timur Shah as the new governor.

===Third invasion of India (1751–1752)===

Possibly due to Ahmad Shah&#x27;s struggle in Khorasan, Moin-ul-Mulk failed to pay the agreed tribute to Ahmad Shah from his second invasion on the revenues of Gujrat, Aurangabad, Sialkot, and Pasrur. Inducing Ahmad Shah to invade again, he began in November 1751, leading his forces to invade the Punjab. Moin-ul-Mulk immediately sent 900,000 rupees forward as tribute, which Ahmad Shah seized and continued his march. With the advance guard under Jahan Khan, Ahmad Shah led his forces through Rohtas, Gujrat, and Shahdara. Jahan Khan&#x27;s forces pillaged the countryside while skirmishes began with Moin-ul-Mulk, who raised his own force to meet the Afghans in battle. The advance of Ahmad Shah triggered mass panic in Lahore, with many fleeing to Delhi or Jammu for safety.

In January 1752, Ahmad Shah forded the Ravi in secrecy at Ghazipur, before advancing on Lahore. Jahan Khan began advancing on Lahore as well, initially being driven out of Faiz Bagh, and instead establishing himself at the Shalimar gardens. Moin-ul-Mulk immediately dashed back to Lahore, to which the Afghans laid siege for over four months. Receiving no aid from the Mughals, or any other nobles, Moin-ul-Mulk settled for a pitched battle with the Afghans outside of Lahore.

On 6 March, after a fierce battle, Moin-ul-Mulk was defeated and surrendered to Ahmad Shah, who received him in person. Impressed by the efforts of Moin-ul-Mulk in his resistance, Ahmad Shah instated him as the governor of Lahore under his suzerainty. Lahore was however, plundered and slaughtered. Following this, Ahmad Shah drafted a peace treaty with Moin-ul-Mulk, officiating the annexation of the Punjab including Multan and Lahore, and as far as Sirhind to the Durrani Empire. The Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah signed the treaty on 3 April 1752, ending Mughal rule in the Punjab.

Having conquered the Punjab, Ahmad Shah also dispatched his general, Shah Pasand Khan, with 15,000 men to Kashmir, which was embroiled in civil war. Supporting the deposed governor, Mir Muqim, Afghan forces quickly occupied Srinagar and established complete control in the province.

===Turkestan (1751–1768)===
At the start of Ahmad Shah&#x27;s reign, he had held friendly relations with the ruler of the Maimana Khanate, Hajji Bi, who had assumed control over the Chahar Wilayat. Coming into conflict against Hazara Bi, the ruler of Qataghan, Hajji Bi lost control over Balkh to the Qataghanids. In 1751, Hajji Bi, with a delegation of amirs, traveled to Herat, seeking Ahmad Shah&#x27;s aid to reclaim Balkh. Ahmad Shah accepted the call to arms, forging an alliance with Hajji Bi, and sent thousands of Afghan and Qizilbash men under Allah Khan Turkman. Hajji Bi was also bestowed by Ahmad Shah the titles of governor of Balkh and tax collector.

Not much information is given about the campaign against the Qataghanids. However, by the summer of 1752, the forces of the alliance were victorious, and Balkh was restored to the rule of the Maimana Khanate. While the campaign ensued, a commander of one of the Afghan Qizilbash forces fought with Allah Khan, prompting Mizrab Bi, a son of Hazara Bi, to revolt in 1753. Hajji Bi urgently requested aid from Ahmad Shah again, which he responded with by sending 5,000 men north. After having been restored to Balkh, Hajji Bi pursued a campaign in Qataghan, and with aid from the Afghans, the revolt was defeated. Mizrab Bi was brought to submission, and Badakhshan was subjugated as well.

In 1755–1756, Hajji Bi petitioned Ahmad Shah at Kabul to be made commander-in-chief of forces in Balkh. The request was accepted, stripping Allah Khan of his position. However, Hajji Bi became noted for his abuse of power in the position, triggering an investigation by the Afghans, who sent Allah Khan to oversee the affairs of the region. Allah Khan immediately declared the reports of oppression to be true, and was reinstated as commander-in-chief in Balkh. Ahmad Shah also declared a new governor of Balkh, Nawab Khan Alakozai.

Believing that it was the beginning of the Afghans attempting to assert their own hegemony over all of Turkestan, Hajji Bi began plotting with Izbasar, the ruler of Sheberghan. The two began a rebellion that achieved little, ending in a pardon for both Hajji Bi and Izbasar. In 1761, Rahim Bi Manghit, the ruler of Bukhara, began an invasion of Afghan Turkestan, intent on re-establishing Bukharan suzerainty over the region. Izbazar declared his loyalty to the ruler of Bukhara, and aided in the invasion. Bukharan forces initially overran Aqcha before being defeated by Allah Khan, who built a pyramid with the head of dead Bukharan soldiers. Afghan forces continued to Aqcha, where the Bukharans and Izbasar were defeated again. Aqcha was besieged, while another force of 8,000 Bukharans were sent to Aqcha to relieve the siege, only to be defeated by the combined forces of Allah Khan and Hajji Bi.

Attempts to breach the walls of Aqcha failed, and instead, negotiations began. The Bukharans withdrew across the Amu Darya, while Allah Khan was sent to Sheberghan to bring Izbasar into submission. Izbasar, however, opened negotiation with Nawab Khan, who demanded Allah Khan be put to death due to an enmity between the two. Izbasar complied, executing Allah Khan, receiving a pardon from Nawab Khan as a result.

In 1768, a rebellion in Qataghan and Badakhshan prompted an invasion from Shah Murad Manghit, the next Bukharan ruler. Ahmad Shah sent 6,000 men under Shah Wali Khan to face the rebels. As a result, Shah Murad crossed the Amu Darya, advancing to Qarshi, and threatening to attack Aqcha. In response, Ahmad Shah mobilized an army, affirming his authority in Maimana, Andkhoy, Sheberghan, and Balkh as he advanced. This quickly brought Shah Murad to negotiation, who recognized Afghan control over Balkh, with the amirs of the Chahar Wilayat also submitting tribute to the Durranis. To further avoid a battle with the Afghans, Shah Murad surrendered the cloak of Muhammad after Ahmad Shah had demanded it. With the cloak, Ahmad Shah created a shrine known as the Kirka Sharif, which was built next to his tomb.

===Second Khorasan campaign (1754–1755)===

In 1754, Ahmad Shah began preparing for a second campaign to Khorasan. During this time, Nishapur was besieged by Alam Khan, a former Afsharid viceroy. When Ahmad Shah began his invasion, Alam Khan&#x27;s army completely dispersed, forcing his withdrawal to Sabzevar.

Beginning his campaign in May 1754, Ahmad Shah departed from Herat with his army and advanced toward Tun. Ahmad Shah dispatched Jahan Khan and Nasir Khan, the ruler of the Khanate of Kalat, to devastate the countryside. Following this, the Afghan forces marched against the governor of Tabas, Ali Murad Khan, who assembled his own army and met the Afghans in battle. Singh describes the battle that took place as one of the most bloodiest battles in Persian history. Ammunition failed to gain any clear advantage for both sides, forcing both armies to draw swords and began clashing. The battle remained indecisive until Ali Murad Khan was killed, and the remaining Persian army was completely routed. 

With the Persians defeated, Tabas and Tun were conquered in between June and July 1754 by the Afghans. Ahmad Shah then led his forces to Mashhad, arriving before the city on 23 July. A long siege protracted until the Afsharids finally submitted to Ahmad Shah on 1 December 1754. On the 4th, Ahmad Shah&#x27;s name was read in the sermon, acknowledging his sovereignty over the Afsharids. With their victory, the Durranis annexed territories of Torshiz, Bakharz, Jam, Khaf, and Turbat-e Haidari from the Afsharids. On 9 May 1755, Shahrokh Shah was officially re-instated as ruler over Mashhad, effectively as a Durrani protectorate. Following this, Ahmad Shah began his march on Nishapur in the spring of 1755, while Shah Pasand Khan was dispatched toward Mazandaran against the Qajars.

During the siege of Mashhad, The Camesgazak Kurd contingent of Alam Khan&#x27;s forces completely defected to the Afghans, killing Alam Khan as well after dragging him from Sabzevar, which was conquered.

On 17 June 1755, the Afghan armies arrived at Nishapur, resulting in Abbas Quli&#x27;s immediate submission. Abbas Quli sought to be pardoned for giving resistance during Ahmad Shah&#x27;s first campaign. Not long after, however, Nishapur raised in rebellion due to news that Shah Pasand Khan had been defeated by the Qajars. The gates of the city were closed on Ahmad Shah&#x27;s troops, prompting the Afghans to begin a one-week siege. During the siege, Ahmad Shah lacked important siege equipment, which he solved by having every mounted soldier carry kilograms of gunmetals. As the siege began, Ahmad Shah&#x27;s Armenian cannon makers melted down the metal the soldiers had carried, forging a large cannon. The first shot of the cannon blasted through the city walls, and caused havoc in the city through houses and bazaars.

The weapon forced the submission of the cities elders, and they opened the gates of the city despite Abbas Quli&#x27;s opposition. The city was then subsequently plundered, with the populace of the city spared if they went to mosques and didn&#x27;t take anything with them. Afghan forces went to houses and tore down the defenses, razing significant portions of the city. Following the victory at Nishapur, Ahmad Shah defeated the Qajars and advanced further by sacking the cities of Tun and Tabas, instilling massacres in their cities.

Abbas Quli was initially taken by Ahmad Shah until he had earned his favor. Abbas Quli married one of Ahmad Shah&#x27;s daughters, while Ahmad Shah married Abbas Quli&#x27;s sister. With the arrangements, Abbas Quli was allowed to return to Nishapur as governor of the city. He would remain close to Ahmad Shah throughout his life.

===Fourth invasion of India (1756–1757)===
Moin-ul-Mulk governed the Punjab until his death in November 1753, and was succeeded by Mughlani Begum. In March 1756, Mughal vizier Imad ul-Mulk imprisoned and replaced her with Adina Beg. Mughlani Begum pleaded Ahmad Shah to lead another invasion, promising wealth.

Due to the tyrannies of Imad ul-Mulk, several nobles such as Najib ud-Daula, a chief of Rohilkand, and the new Mughal emperor Alamgir II, pleaded for Ahmad Shah to invade. Ahmad Shah accepted the invitations and began his fourth invasion in November 1756, leaving Peshawar on the 15th, and crossing Attock on the 26th with an army of 80,000 men. He reached Lahore on 20 December, seizing the city with little resistance. Ahmad Shah garnered tribute from the city before continuing his march, crossing the Sutlej river on 10 January at Ludhiana, while the advance guard under his general, Jahan Khan, seized Sirhind, Karnal, and Panipat.

The Marathas, who had signed a treaty to protect the Mughals from foreign invasions in 1752, assembled a contingent of 3,400 men under Antaji Mankeshwar, battling the Afghans at Narela. The Maratha forces, however, were defeated and forced to withdraw with losses of 100 men. Following the defeat of the Marathas, Najib ud-Daula defected to the Afghans, with Imad ul-Mulk surrendering not long after. Jahan Khan continued his advance to Luni and besieged Shahdara on 17 January, with the Jama Masjid in Delhi reading Ahmad Shah&#x27;s name in the Khutbah as a sign of sovereignty. The Afghan forces continued advancing on Delhi, arriving before the city on 28 January.

Meeting with Alamgir at the Fatehpuri Mosque, Ahmad Shah led a grand entry into Delhi, which was marked with a gun salute. However many inhabitants of the city had already fled or hidden, with the streets completely deserted. Many people barricaded themselves in their houses. Ahmad Shah&#x27;s name was also inserted in the Khutbah for other mosques. Initially, the Afghan army was ordered not to sack the city.

Alamgir was placed under house arrest, and houses outside the city of Delhi were ravaged. On the 29th, the bazaars of the city were sacked and Jahan Khan&#x27;s soldiers extracted tribute from Feroz Shah Kotla, a large fortress in Delhi. On 30 January, Ahmad Shah minted coins in his name. He further married Hazrat Begum, a daughter of Alamgir, whilst also marrying his son, Timur Shah Durrani, to another daughter of Alamgir.

Ahmad Shah then ordered all Hindus to wear distinctive marks on their head, as well as forbidding non-Muslims from wearing the turban. Extortionate demands were also placed upon the Mughal nobility. The Mughal nobility refused, to which Ahmad Shah dispatched his own tax collectors, demanding additional tribute. Those suspected of concealing valuables were subjected to torture, including foot whipping. Many thousands died or were crippled as a result, while others resorted to suicide. Additionally, a tax was imposed on every household in Delhi.

Imad ul-Mulk was forced to hand over gold and ornaments valued at 10 million rupees, and another 300,000 gold coins. Intizam-ud-Daulah was summoned, and many of his assets were confiscated, including over 10 million rupees and 100 of his wives. Unable to produce the required wealth, Intizam admitted that his father had buried a fortune, which the Afghans uncovered. The Afghans recovered over 15 million rupees in cash, along with various goods, including 200 golden candles that were the size of a man. The treasure also included diamonds, rubies, pearls, and emeralds.

After the sacking, Ahmad Shah campaigned against the Jats. Suraj Mal, the ruler of the Jats, initially submitted to Ahmad Shah, but refused to send asylum seekers from the sacking of Delhi, resulting in conflict. An Afghan force was sent to Faridabad, seizing the fortress and razing it. However, a Jat raid under Jawahar Singh defeated the Afghans, massacring them. Ahmad Shah, in response, laid siege to Ballabhgarh, while Jahan Khan and Najib ud-Daula were dispatched to loot the surrounding regions. They advanced toward Mathura, while Jawahar Singh met them for battle at Chaumuhan. The battle that ensued left between 10 and 12,000 dead on both sides combined, with an innumerable amount of men wounded as well. Jawahar Singh, however, alongside Antaji Mankeshwar, reinforced Ballabhgarh. The cannon fire of the Afghans completely broke the defenses of the fortress, forcing Jawahar to withdraw in the night, with Afghan forces seizing the city on 4 March. An expedition under Abdus Samad Khan, another one of Ahmad Shah&#x27;s generals, nearly arrested Jawahar Singh through ambush, but Jawahar ultimately evaded capture.

Toward the end of February 1757, the Afghan forces arrived at and attacked Mathura. The city, despite being inhabited overwhelmingly by non-combatants, mainly pilgrims due to the Hindu Holi festival, was attacked and the inhabitants were massacred by the Afghans. The Afghan forces slaughtered and defiled the bodies of Hindu ascetics by humiliating them with slaughtered cows. Temples of the city were razed, and the images of idols were destroyed. Jahan Khan furthered the massacre by rewarding a bounty of five rupees for every Hindu head, resulting in the death of thousands of men, women, and children. The Muslims of the city were subjected to the attack as well. Following his massacre at Mathura, Jahan Khan continued his campaign, with the city of Vrindavan being attacked and its inhabitants massacred on 6 March. The Tarikh-I-Husain Shahi establishes the idol destruction in line with iconoclasm, remarking: &quot;Idols were broken and kicked about like polo-balls by the Islamic heroes.&quot;

Ahmad Shah, following Jahan Khan, attacked the city of Gokul on 16 March, which was inhabited by Naga Sadhus, a Hindu Bhakti sect. The Afghans attacked the city where a battle ensued, resulting in the death of 2,000 men for both sides. Jugal Kishor, a diplomat from the Bengal Subah, informed Ahmad Shah that there was nothing of value in Gokul. Ahmad Shah ordered a withdrawal, sparing the city from a sacking.

On 21 March, Jahan Khan arrived before Agra with 15,000 men, besieging the city. Civilians from the town received Jahan Khan and his army, promising 500,000 rupees in tribute. However, after failing to raise the amount, Afghan forces entered the city, plundering it and massacring over 2,000. The Afghan forces attempted to seize the citadel but failed due to the defense of Mirza Saifullah, the garrison commander. He defended the fort with extensive artillery usage, preventing the Afghans from approaching with cannons. Jahan Khan seized 100,000 rupees in tribute, before withdrawing to Ahmad Shah&#x27;s camp on 24 March after being recalled.

Cholera had broken out in the Afghan camp, killing around 150 men per day, beginning mainly from the polluted Yamuna River which was overwhelmed with bodies. As a result, Ahmad Shah intended to return to Afghanistan, especially to secure the loot from the campaign. The heat as a result from the beginning of the Indian summer also convinced him. As a result, Ahmad Shah began returning for Afghanistan in April 1757, declaring his son, Timur Shah, governor of the Punjab, while Jahan Khan served as his deputy. Sirhind was annexed from the Mughals, while Imad ul-Mulk was re-instated as vizier, with Najib ud-Daula given the office of Mir Bakhshi. Alamgir was permitted to rule Delhi, however as a vassal of the Durrani Empire.

The Afghan invasion had dire consequences for the Mughal Empire, as most of the Mughal army, along with those from the Bengal Subah, were forcibly deployed against the Afghans. Mere months later, the army of the Bengal Subah, weakened due to the Afghan invasion, were utterly defeated at the Battle of Plassey, beginning the rise of British power in India.

The total loot Ahmad Shah carried back to Afghanistan is disputed. Its been estimated from contemporary writers that the Afghans seized 30 to 300 million rupees worth of goods. Over 28,000 elephants, camels, and mules carried Ahmad Shah&#x27;s loot, alongside his 80,000 men, who carried whatever they took, with many of the Afghan cavalry returning on foot, while they loaded loot unto their horses. The massacres done by the Afghans throughout the campaign made the Yamuna River flow red with blood for two weeks.

===Durrani administration of the Punjab (1757–1758)===

Timur Shah, being only eleven years old, saw the Punjab governed mostly by Jahan Khan, who was noted as an experienced warrior, but incapable administrator. He attacked the Sikhs who were celebrating the Diwali festival at Amritsar in 1757, as well as destroying and polluting many Sikh shrines, declaring Jihad. The tyrannies of Jahan Khan resulted in the Sikhs forging an alliance with Adina Beg, who had initially fled during Ahmad Shah&#x27;s fourth invasion.

As a result, Jahan Khan led a campaign against Adina Beg in the Jalandhar Doab, pillaging the region. Adina Beg acquiesced to submitting tribute, but ignored summons to the Afghan court in Lahore. On one such occasion of being summoned, Adina Beg refused to trust Jahan Khan and fled to the Hill states, where he forged an alliance with Vadbhag Singh Sodhi and Jassa Singh Ahluwalia, the leader of the Dal Khalsa.

Jahan Khan dispatched a force under Murad Khan in response, meeting the alliance at the battle of Mahilpur, where the Afghans were defeated, allowing the looting of the Jalandhar Doab. Further dispatches from Lahore were sent to quell the alliance but all were defeated, allowing the Sikhs to plunder the suburbs of Lahore.

Further complications occurred for the Afghans, as a Maratha force led by Raghunath Rao had arrived at Agra in May 1757 by the time Ahmad Shah was crossing the Indus River back to Afghanistan. The Maratha forces completely seized the Ganges Doab, and defeated Najib ud-Daula at the battle of Delhi in September 1757. Alamgir II was retained on the throne as a puppet, and Imad ul-Mulk remained as vizier. Adina Beg thus requested the Marathas to invade the Punjab, which Raghunath Rao accepted.

The Maratha invasion began in February 1758, advancing and reaching Sirhind in March, which was besieged. Abdus Samad Khan, the Afghan governor of Sirhind, fled the city but was eventually captured, with Sirhind being plundered after. The developments at Sirhind alerted Jahan Khan, who raised an army of 2,000 men and scouted far ahead of Lahore, but refused to give battle to the alliance. Upon receiving news that the Marathas were approaching Lahore, he began preparing to return to Afghanistan on 19 April.

Establishing camp at Shahdara, the Afghans retreated across the Ravi, leaving Lahore in lawlessness, and to be captured by the alliance. Afghan rearguard contingents were ambushed by the Marathas, emboldening Jahan Khan and Timur Shah to speed their progress to Afghanistan. Further close encounters at Eminabad saw the Afghans driven to the Chenab below Wazirabad, where they were attacked by the Marathas and Sikhs, who took some two hundred Afghan prisoners. After this encounter, modern scholarship designates the end of the Maratha pursuit. Near contemporary sources state that the Marathas were able to establish themselves at Attock, and possibly even Peshawar.

===Kalat Rebellion (1758)===
With the Maratha conquest of the Punjab, Nasir Khan, the ruler of the Khanate of Kalat, declared his independence from Ahmad Shah. Attempts to conciliate and have Nasir Khan return to Afghan suzerainty failed, prompting Ahmad Shah to dispatch a force under Shah Wali Khan, which was defeated at Pringuez, forcing their retreat to Quetta.

Informed of the defeat, Ahmad Shah raised his own force and marched against Kalat in the summer of 1758. He met Nasir Khan in battle at Mastung, where the forces of Kalat were defeated, prompting Nasir Khan&#x27;s withdrawal to Kalat, which Ahmad Shah besieged. The siege of Kalat continued for forty days to no avail, and numerous storming attempts by the Afghans failed.

Nasir Khan, beleaguered of having been trapped in his capital, opened peace negotiations with the Afghans, apologizing for his rebellion. Ahmad Shah, having no intentions to annex Kalat or to bestow the province unto another governor, reaffirmed Nasir Khan in his position. A treaty was made, stipulating that Nasir Khan would re-enter and recognize the suzerainty of Ahmad Shah, but he would pay no tribute, and would furnish troops when called upon for war paid by the Shah. After the treaty, Ahmad Shah married a cousin of Nasir Khan.

===Fifth invasion of India (1759–1761)===

Preoccupied with the uprising in Kalat, Ahmad Shah was unable to pursue a campaign against the Marathas. He dispatched many of his generals to lead attacks unto them, such as Jahan Khan and Nur ud-Din Bamizai, who were both defeated. In October 1759, Ahmad Shah began his fifth invasion of India. He had been invited by numerous rulers and religious leaders across India, including Shah Waliullah Dehlawi, who wrote to Ahmad Shah pleading for him to save the Muslims of India. Ahmad Shah utilized this in having it declared a jihad by religious leaders in Kandahar. Further invitations were sent by Najib ud-Daula, who wanted India to become a permanent extension of the Afghan empire. Alamgir II sent fervent requests to Ahmad Shah for aid, affirming his loyalty and informing him of the intentions of Imad ul-Mulk, who wished to him. Even Hindu rulers such as Madho Singh, the ruler of Amber, and Vijay Singh, the ruler of Marwar, were discontent over Maratha expansion, and sent letters to Ahmad Shah. Ahmad Shah also wished to avenge the defeat of his son, Timur Shah, and to reclaim the lost territories of the Punjab.

Beginning his invasion, Ahmad Shah split his forces to attack from two sides. Jahan Khan advanced from Kandahar to Kabul, and then through the Khyber Pass with an army of 20,000, while Ahmad Shah led a force of 40,000 through the Bolan Pass. He was further reinforced by Nasir Khan, and other Afghan chiefs. He forded the Indus river on 25 October, 1759. As Ahmad Shah entered the Punjab, Jahan Khan had forced the Maratha forces stationed at Attock to evacuate, pursuing and catching them at Rohtas, where the Maratha army was routed, forcing a withdrawal to as far as Delhi.

As Jahan Khan advanced, Ahmad Shah approached Multan with his army, where the governor completely fled to Lahore, leaving Multan to be captured without resistance. As the Afghan forces began converging on Lahore, the Maratha forces withdrew to Batala, and then Sirhind, with some Maratha detachments being caught and destroyed. At Lahore, Jahan Khan battled with the Sikhs. No clear victor emerged, and the Afghans suffered some 2,000 dead, while Jahan Khan was wounded during the battle.

The approach of Ahmad Shah Durrani caused havoc throughout all of Northern India, and Imad ul-Mulk had Alamgir and Intizam-ud-Daulah murdered as a result, placing Shah Jahan III on the Mughal throne. Ahmad Shah continued advancing through the Punjab, with Jahan Khan seizing Sirhind on 27 November, with both armies uniting at Sirhind in December 1759.

Enraged by the execution of Alamgir, Ahmad Shah began racing toward Delhi. He marched toward Ambala, reaching it on 20 December, and then advanced toward Taraori, beginning a battle against the Marathas. The advance guard of the Afghan army came in clash against the Marathas, and was initially routed, beginning a withdrawal. However, Ahmad Shah, ready to support the battle, dispatched 5,000 men under Shah Pasand Khan. The forces of Imad ul-Mulk in the battle completely fled at the sight of Shah Pasand&#x27;s flag, and the Afghans attacked with muskets. Further detachments of the Afghan army sent by Ahmad Shah brought the battle to an end, with the Maratha force completely surrounded and outmaneuvered, before being destroyed.

Following the battle, Ahmad Shah forded the Yamuna and united with the forces of Najib ud-Daula and numerous other Rohilla leaders at Saharanpur. The combined armies marched toward Delhi, encamping at Luni, some 10 kilometers from the Red Fort of Delhi on the other side of the Yamuna. Dattaji Scindia, the leader of the Maratha forces, returned to Kunjpura following his defeat at Taraori, and began preparing to defend Delhi from the Afghan army. He first sent Imad ul-Mulk to prepare the defenses of the city. However, Imad ul-Mulk completely deserted the Marathas and fled to Suraj Mal.

Dattaji then advanced to Sonipat, attempting to track Ahmad Shah&#x27;s movements, which were made impossible as the Afghans kept their movement confidential by killing every Indian that was found outside their houses. As a result, Dattaji established camp at Barari on 4 January, 1760. On 9 January, Najib ud-Daula began crossing the Yamuna with Ahmad Shah following him, beginning the battle of Barari Ghat. The Maratha forces opposed the advance of the Afghans across the river but were overpowered by musketeers, with much of the Maratha army only armed with spears and swords. Dattaji, attempting to enter the fray himself, was shot either in the eye, or the ribs, causing his death. Further Maratha reinforcements were useless against the Afghan musket fire, forcing the Marathas to withdraw from the field with a thousand dead, and the Afghans victorious.

Having defeated the Marathas at Barari Ghat, Ahmad Shah entered Delhi, with his men plundering the city. Much of the population of the city had already fled, and he took Shah Jahan III under his protection instead of claiming the Mughal throne for himself. Ahmad Shah also placed Yaqub Ali Khan as governor of the city, a nephew of his vizier, Shah Wali Khan, before beginning to march against Suraj Mal.

Leaving Delhi on 27 January, Ahmad Shah besieged Deeg on 7 February, although not committing to the siege seriously. While besieging, he sent a detachment under Jahan Khan which routed a Maratha army on 11 February at Rewari. Following this, Ahmad Shah pursued a Maratha force led by Malhar Rao Holkar, who was stationed at Narnaul. After reaching Rewari, Ahmad Shah was evaded by Holkar, and the Maratha force crossed the Yamuna river on 26—27 February, entering Najib ud-Daula&#x27;s territories. On 28 February, Holkar advanced to Sikandrabad, awaiting for news of the Afghan position. On 1 March 1760, Ahmad Shah dispatched a force of 15,000 under Jahan Khan, Shah Pasand Khan, and Qalandar Khan to halt the Maratha army. On 4 March, the Marathas were caught and completely routed at the battle of Sikandarabad, with many Maratha officers slain. Holkar himself fled for his life to Agra, and then to Bharatpur, meeting Suraj Mal.

With another victory over the Marathas, Ahmad Shah proceeded to Aligarh, which belonged to the Jats, and besieged it. Unable to receive any reinforcement, the fort was surrendered to the Afghans. At Aligarh, Najib ud-Daula advised Ahmad Shah to rest and wait out for the summer and monsoon seasons to pass, especially as the summer had been so catastrophic for the Afghans during the fourth invasion of India. Ahmad Shah accepted, and Najib ud-Daula used this to expel the Marathas from Shikohabad, Phaphund, and Bithoor.

As the Afghans settled in, they resorted to diplomacy to strengthen their position. Ahmad Khan Bangash, although an initial Maratha ally, was appealed to by Shah Wali Khan, Ahmad Shah&#x27;s vizier, as an Afghan brother. Ahmad Khan thus allied with the Durranis and arrived at their camp on 13 April 1760. The Afghans also successfully negotiated with the ruler of Oudh, Shuja ud-Daula, who united with the Durrani camp in July 1760. Ahmad Shah also held friendly relations with the Rajputs, even declaring to them his intention to invade the Deccan in the winter.

As the Durrani negotiations for allies ensued, the Marathas had sent reinforcements under Sadashivrao Bhau, the cousin of the Peshwa, Balaji Baji Rao. The reinforcements also included Vishwasrao, the heir of the Maratha Confederacy, and nearly all significant Maratha commanders. Sadashivrao was described as an ignorant commander with a short temper and pride, ignoring the advice of more senior commanders who had experience in Northern India, and failing to anticipate certain outcomes.

The Maratha force reached Agra on 14 July. Sadashivrao, finding the Yamuna river overflowing, settled on advancing to Delhi. The Marathas advanced to Mathura on 16 July and reached Delhi on 23 July, where it was stormed. The city had fallen to the Marathas, but the citadel held out. On 29 July, Sadashivrao arrived at Delhi where he was called upon by Yaqub Ali to negotiate. Yaqub Ali was allowed to leave the city with his men unharmed to Ahmad Shah&#x27;s camp, with Maratha forces entering the fort on 1 August. 

On 4 August, Suraj Mal and Imad ul-Mulk defected from the Marathas and returned to their posts. Furthermore, the Maratha army lacked food and feed for their horses. The situation became so difficult that Sadashivrao recorded in a letter that there was no food to pay for money, and that the men of the army alongside the horses were fasting. Peace negotiations corresponding from Ahmad Shah and the Marathas had also failed, with both seeking their own extensive demands.

By the end of September 1760, the Maratha camp was overridden with starvation. Ahmad Shah was anxious to return to Afghanistan since his settling at Aligarh, as he never intended to form an Afghan empire based in India. The Marathas left Delhi on 10 October, which Ahmad Shah responded by having his army arrayed across the Yamuna. Sadashivrao, intending to seize Kunjpura, which had vast supplies, arrived before the city on 16 October. The battle of Kunjpura ensued which saw the Marathas victorious and the Afghan governor at Kunjpura, Najabat Khan, alongside Abdus Samad Khan killed. Ahmad Shah was unable to help the defenders of Delhi and Kunjpura due to him being stuck on the other side of the Yamuna.

Ahmad Shah, infuriated at the fall of Kunjpura, began preparing a ford over the flooded Yamuna river at Baghpat. The Afghan forces crossed between 25—26 October, massacring a Maratha detachment at near Sonipat. Another battle at Sambhalka saw the Marathas forced back to their camp now established at Panipat. On 30 October, Ahmad Shah reached Sambhalka, and arrayed before the Marathas on 1 November.

===Third Battle of Panipat===

The Mughal power in northern India had been declining since the reign of Aurangzeb, who died in 1707. In 1751–52, the &quot;Ahamdiya&quot; treaty was signed between the Marathas and Mughals, when Balaji Bajirao was the Peshwa of the Maratha Empire. Through this treaty, the Marathas controlled large parts of India from their capital at Pune and Mughal rule was restricted only to Delhi (Mughals remained the nominal heads of Delhi). Marathas were now straining to expand their area of control toward the Northwest of India. Durrani sacked the Mughal capital and withdrew with the booty he coveted. To counter the Afghans, Peshwa Balaji Bajirao sent Raghunathrao. He succeeded in ousting Timur Shah and his court from India and brought northwest of India up to Peshawar under Maratha rule. Thus, upon his return to Kandahar in 1757, Durrani chose to return to India and confront the Maratha forces to regain northwestern part of the subcontinent.

In 1761, Durrani set out on his campaign to win back lost territories. The early skirmishes ended in victory for the Afghans against the Maratha garrisons in northwest India. By 1759, Durrani and his army had reached Lahore and were poised to confront the Marathas. By 1760, the Maratha groups had coalesced into a big enough army under the command of Sadashivrao Bhau. Once again, Panipat was the scene of a battle for control of northern India. The Third battle of Panipat was fought between Durrani&#x27;s Afghan forces and the Maratha forces in January 1761, and resulted in a decisive Durrani victory.

===Central Asia===

The Afaqi brothers died in Badakhshan and the ruler Sultan Shah delivered their bodies to the Qing. Ahmad Shah Durrani accused Sultan Shah of having caused the Afaqi brothers to die.

Durrani dispatched troops to Kokand after rumours that the Qing dynasty planned to launch an expedition to Samarkand, but the alleged expedition never happened and Ahmad Shah subsequently withdrew his forces when his attempt at an anti-Qing alliance among Central Asian states failed. Durrani then sent envoys to Beijing to discuss the situation regarding the Afaqi Khojas.

==Death and legacy==
Ahmad Shah may have suffered an injury due to a flying brick striking his nose when the Harimandir Sahib was destroyed with gunpowder. Other sources state that he suffered from what Afghan sources described as a &quot;gangrenous ulcer&quot;, which may attribute to numerous illnesses, such as Leprosy, Syphilis, or a tumor.

Lee writes: &quot;Ahmad Shah gained poor health as a result of all his campaigns. Despite all attempts to treat it, a wound in his nose remained. The ulcer in his later years began eating into his brain&quot;. Following the advice of his physicians, he spent part of the summer in the cooler climate of the Margha plain in the Toba Achakzai range during the last few years of his life. He died of his illness on 4 June 1772 (2 Rabi&#x27; al-Awwal 1186) in Maruf, Toba Achakzai, east of Kandahar. Some other sources state that he died on 16 October 1772.

Ahmad Shah was buried in the city of Kandahar adjacent to the Shrine of the Cloak, where a large mausoleum was built. It has been described in the following way:
In his tomb his epitaph is written:
Durrani&#x27;s victory over the Marathas influenced the history of the subcontinent and, in particular, the policies of the East India Company in the region. His refusal to continue his campaigns deeper into India prevented a clash with the company and allowed them to continue to acquire power and influence after they established complete control over the former Mughal province of Bengal in 1793. Fear of another Afghan invasion influenced company policy-makers for almost half a century after the Battle of Panipat. The acknowledgment of Durrani&#x27;s military accomplishments is reflected in an intelligence report made by Company officials on the Battle of Panipat, which referred to Ahmad Shah as the &#x27;King of Kings&#x27;. This fear led in 1798 to a Company envoy being sent to the Persian court in part to instigate the Persians in their claims on Herat to forestall a possible Afghan invasion of India that might have halted Company expansion. Mountstuart Elphinstone wrote of Ahmad Shah:
His successors, beginning with his son Timur Shah and ending with Shuja Shah Durrani, proved largely incapable of governing the last Afghan empire and faced with advancing enemies on all sides. Much of the territory conquered by Ahmad Shah fell to others by the end of the 19th century. Timur Shah consolidated the holdings of the Durrani Empire, quashed civil war and rebellion throughout his reign and led multiple campaigns into Punjab to try and repeat his fathers success. After the death of Timur Shah, his son, Zaman Shah Durrani ascended to the throne; throughout his reign he lost the outlying territories, alienated some Pashtun tribes and those of other Durrani lineages. Zaman Shah led campaigns into Punjab, capturing Lahore. Due to internal strife, he withdrew on all attempts. He was later deposed by Mahmud Shah Durrani, his brother, and the Durrani Realm continued to disintegrate in the following years from progressive succession crises, usually between Timur Shah&#x27;s sons, with Mahmud Shah Durrani, Zaman Shah Durrani, and Shah Shuja Durrani. Afghanistan remained disunited until Dost Mohammad Khan&#x27;s ascendancy in 1826. Chaos had effectively reigned and it ceased to exist as a single entity, disintegrating into a fragmented collection of small countries or units. Throughout his reign, the khan focused on reuniting it and somewhat did so with the Herat Campaign of 1862-63, which retook Herat, and the eventual conquest of the Principality of Qandahar.

In Pakistan, a short-range ballistic missile Abdali-I, is named in the honour of Ahmad Shah Abdali.

==Poetry==
Durrani wrote a collection of odes in his native Pashto. He was also the author of several poems in Persian. One of his most famous Pashto poems was &quot;Love of a Nation&quot;:
== In popular culture ==
* In the 1994 television series &quot;The Great Maratha&quot;, the character of Ahmad Shah Durrani is portrayed by Bob Christo.
* In the 2019 Bollywood war drama Panipat film, Ahmad Shah Durrani appears as the main antagonist who invades the Maratha Empire, and is portrayed by Sanjay Dutt.

==See also==
* List of monarchs of Afghanistan

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
*
*
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="0" end="18" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shāh Durrānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="39" end="56" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shāh Abdālī"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="100" end="114" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="162" end="173" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="286" end="291" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178890" start="302" end="310" title="Khorasan province" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431702" start="325" end="341" title="Afghan Turkestan" label="Afghan Turkestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="500" end="516" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="518" end="523" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="540" end="550" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q48727331" start="562" end="576" title="Hari Ram Gupta" label="Hari Ram Gupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433670" start="780" end="786" title="Durrani" label="Abdali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1015" end="1025" title="Father of the Nation#List" label="the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="1250" end="1255" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="1257" end="1268" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185453" start="1273" end="1279" title="Multan" label="Multan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="1281" end="1289" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127220580" start="1579" end="1599" title="Tarikh-i Ahmad Shahi" label="Tarikh-i Ahmad Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108695612" start="1679" end="1692" title="Sadozai Sultanate of Herat" label="emir of Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497882" start="1797" end="1805" title="Shindand" label="Shindand"/>
<link wikidata="Q593156" start="1810" end="1815" title="Farah, Afghanistan" label="Farah"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="1964" end="1974" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="2029" end="2037" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918583" start="2082" end="2095" title="Hussain Hotak" label="Hussain Hotak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510145" start="2115" end="2133" title="Siege of Kandahar" label="conquered Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957844" start="2270" end="2287" title="Nader Shah&amp;#x27;s invasion of India" label="invasion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q308864" start="2323" end="2333" title="Mazandaran province" label="Mazandaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q23043467" start="2491" end="2508" title="Military of Afsharid Iran" label="Afsharid military"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="2745" end="2753" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433670" start="2757" end="2764" title="Durrani" label="Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2801" end="2837" title="Nader Shah&amp;#x27;s invasion of India#Massacre of Delhi" label="committed massacres and sacked Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29896" start="2903" end="2916" title="Nizam-ul-Mulk, Asaf Jah I" label="Nizam ul-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="2922" end="2928" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240096" start="2941" end="2950" title="Hyderabad State" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q841933" start="2973" end="2984" title="physiognomy" label="physiognomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465891" start="3417" end="3446" title="Ottoman–Persian War (1743–1746)" label="campaign against the Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q971045" start="3841" end="3855" title="royal guard" label="personal guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="3868" end="3879" title="assassinate" label="assassinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433670" start="3995" end="4002" title="Durrani" label="Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379765" start="4317" end="4327" title="Patrol" label="night duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q60269" start="4918" end="4927" title="Qizilbash" label="Qizilbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q212797" start="4992" end="5002" title="Koh-i-Noor" label="Koh-i-Noor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21660310" start="5176" end="5186" title="Maimana Khanate" label="Uzbek ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="5429" end="5437" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398804" start="5625" end="5634" title="Khabushan" label="Khabushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q720403" start="5649" end="5656" title="Kashmar" label="Kashmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q765528" start="5740" end="5758" title="Torbat-e Heydarieh" label="Torbat-e Heydarieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q197881" start="5790" end="5799" title="Adel Shah" label="Adel Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q720397" start="5880" end="5883" title="Ferdows" label="Tun"/>
<link wikidata="Q593156" start="5893" end="5898" title="Farah, Afghanistan" label="Farah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735459" start="6002" end="6008" title="Grishk" label="Grishk"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="6136" end="6141" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746973" start="6281" end="6307" title="Mohammad Taqi Khan Shirazi" label="Mohammad Taqi Khan Shirazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="6385" end="6390" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="6395" end="6403" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="6625" end="6635" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="6700" end="6713" title="war elephants" label="war elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q21042286" start="6803" end="6812" title="Naderabad, Kandahar" label="Naderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192317" start="6892" end="6897" title="Jirga" label="Jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918404" start="6913" end="6927" title="Pashtun tribes" label="tribal leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011876" start="7045" end="7050" title="Ganda Singh (historian)" label="Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12270311" start="7306" end="7314" title="Barakzai" label="Barakzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q173808" start="7395" end="7403" title="Kandahar Province" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173821" start="7408" end="7415" title="Helmand Province" label="Helmand"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="7602" end="7607" title="Vizier" label="Wazir"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="7855" end="7859" title="coup" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="7876" end="7884" title="election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433670" start="8058" end="8065" title="Durrani" label="Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="8167" end="8173" title="Durrani Empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q173808" start="8187" end="8195" title="Kandahar Province" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173821" start="8197" end="8204" title="Helmand Province" label="Helmand"/>
<link wikidata="Q180330" start="8210" end="8215" title="Farah Province" label="Farah"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="8221" end="8228" title="Hazaras" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867397" start="8232" end="8244" title="Bala Murghab" label="Bala Murghab"/>
<link wikidata="Q139948" start="8253" end="8269" title="Khanate of Kalat" label="Khanate of Kalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q123394634" start="8279" end="8289" title="Nasir Khan I Ahmadzai" label="Nasir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="8485" end="8492" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="8497" end="8505" title="Safavid Iran" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="8554" end="8571" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="8650" end="8657" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="8717" end="8727" title="Hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="8841" end="8848" title="de-jure" label="de-jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669121" start="8946" end="8955" title="Afghan Qizilbash" label="Qizilbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="8991" end="9001" title="Literacy" label="illiterate"/>
<link wikidata="Q971045" start="9079" end="9088" title="royal guard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q385503" start="9654" end="9672" title="Tax revenue" label="revenue collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="10053" end="10063" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="10116" end="10126" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="10367" end="10375" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178890" start="10625" end="10633" title="Khorasan province" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431702" start="10648" end="10664" title="Afghan Turkestan" label="Afghan Turkestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="10684" end="10695" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="10812" end="10828" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647182" start="10900" end="10916" title="Muhammad of Ghor" label="Muhammad of Ghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="11039" end="11052" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="11191" end="11202" title="casus belli" label="casus belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827102" start="11206" end="11214" title="holy war" label="holy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="11393" end="11401" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="11663" end="11668" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="11670" end="11676" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="11682" end="11690" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="11691" end="11699" title="Rebellion" label="revolted"/>
<link wikidata="Q205377" start="11877" end="11884" title="Ghilzai" label="Ghilzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="11930" end="11938" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durranis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="11974" end="11980" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q558714" start="11992" end="12005" title="Muhammad Shah" label="Muhammad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="12128" end="12134" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="12139" end="12146" title="Hazaras" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="12205" end="12211" title="Autumn" label="Autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="12312" end="12318" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="12322" end="12330" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="12393" end="12399" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q527318" start="12421" end="12434" title="Qalati Ghilji" label="Qalati Ghilji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813562" start="12461" end="12474" title="Tokhi" label="Tokhi Ghilzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635975" start="12787" end="12799" title="Suleimankhel" label="Suleimankhel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746973" start="12828" end="12837" title="Mohammad Taqi Khan Shirazi" label="Taqi Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669121" start="12878" end="12887" title="Afghan Qizilbash" label="Qizilbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q804581" start="13135" end="13146" title="Bala Hissar, Kabul" label="Bala Hissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44083678" start="13218" end="13227" title="Chindawol" label="Chindawol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937186" start="13232" end="13243" title="Murad Khani" label="Murad Khani"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="13345" end="13363" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13365" end="13375" title="Jahan Khan (Afghan general)" label="Jahan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973073" start="13435" end="13441" title="Attock" label="Attock"/>
<link wikidata="Q183303" start="13470" end="13479" title="Jalalabad" label="Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="13546" end="13557" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918404" start="13634" end="13648" title="Pashtun tribes" label="Pashtun tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822975" start="13682" end="13690" title="Yusufzai" label="Yusufzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q384643" start="13692" end="13698" title="Afridi" label="Afridi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83642" start="13704" end="13711" title="Khattak" label="Khattak"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="13821" end="13827" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="13828" end="13836" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="13844" end="13850" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="14034" end="14048" title="List of emperors of the Mughal Empire" label="Mughal emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q558714" start="14049" end="14062" title="Muhammad Shah" label="Muhammad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="14268" end="14274" title="Grand vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q317899" start="14643" end="14653" title="Ravi River" label="Ravi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q499527" start="14700" end="14716" title="Shalimar Gardens, Lahore" label="Shalimar Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="14729" end="14735" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190995" start="14777" end="14789" title="Battle of Lahore (1748)" label="began battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="15001" end="15006" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="15061" end="15067" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="15286" end="15291" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672955" start="15314" end="15321" title="Sirhind-Fategarh" label="Sirhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q21244904" start="15402" end="15409" title="Battle of Manupur (1748)" label="Manupur"/>
<link wikidata="Q558714" start="15737" end="15750" title="Muhammad Shah" label="Muhammad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="15886" end="15894" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="15975" end="15986" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66606954" start="16175" end="16187" title="Itimad-ad-Daula, Qamar-ud-Din Khan" label="Qamar-ud-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q400807" start="16331" end="16343" title="Ahmad Shah Bahadur" label="Bahadur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q97996432" start="16536" end="16548" title="Moin-ul-Mulk" label="Moin-ul-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="16624" end="16631" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="16635" end="16640" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553268" start="16734" end="16740" title="Sodhra" label="Sodhra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="16803" end="16808" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16860" end="16870" title="Jahan Khan (Afghan general)" label="Jahan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977843" start="16919" end="16928" title="Chaj Doab" label="Chaj Doab"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="16960" end="16966" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q929062" start="17184" end="17190" title="Gujrat, Pakistan" label="Gujrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q643883" start="17204" end="17211" title="Sialkot" label="Sialkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246361" start="17217" end="17223" title="Pasrur" label="Pasrur"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="17312" end="17323" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="17363" end="17371" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249888" start="17373" end="17389" title="Dera Ismail Khan" label="Dera Ismail Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q999076" start="17395" end="17410" title="Dera Ghazi Khan" label="Dera Ghazi Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178890" start="17731" end="17739" title="Khorasan province" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="17762" end="17767" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q63149558" start="17947" end="17956" title="Afsharids" label="Afsharids"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="17971" end="17978" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q197884" start="18109" end="18122" title="Shahrokh Shah" label="Shahrokh Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="18480" end="18498" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q131350" start="18614" end="18622" title="Nishapur" label="Nishapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q21843649" start="18647" end="18665" title="Qara Bayat Amirdom" label="Qara Bayat Amirdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="18863" end="18870" title="cannons" label="cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760704" start="19313" end="19320" title="Withdrawal (military)" label="retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8505" start="19537" end="19545" title="Hari (Afghanistan)" label="Hari Rud"/>
<link wikidata="Q622377" start="19675" end="19687" title="pack animals" label="pack animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="19956" end="19966" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q97996432" start="20088" end="20100" title="Moin-ul-Mulk" label="Moin-ul-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q929062" start="20192" end="20198" title="Gujrat, Pakistan" label="Gujrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q643883" start="20212" end="20219" title="Sialkot" label="Sialkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246361" start="20225" end="20231" title="Pasrur" label="Pasrur"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="20330" end="20336" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q255546" start="20461" end="20474" title="Vanguard" label="advance guard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20481" end="20491" title="Jahan Khan (Afghan general)" label="Jahan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155188" start="20527" end="20533" title="Rohtas Fort" label="Rohtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="20784" end="20789" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q255455" start="20793" end="20798" title="Jammu" label="Jammu"/>
<link wikidata="Q317899" start="20851" end="20855" title="Ravi River" label="Ravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="20900" end="20906" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q499527" start="21035" end="21051" title="Shalimar Gardens, Lahore" label="Shalimar gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="21181" end="21188" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q743488" start="21238" end="21252" title="pitched battle" label="pitched battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25302666" start="21310" end="21323" title="Battle of Lahore (1752)" label="fierce battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="21513" end="21519" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="21692" end="21698" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q185453" start="21709" end="21715" title="Multan" label="Multan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672955" start="21742" end="21749" title="Sirhind-Fategarh" label="Sirhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="21757" end="21771" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q400807" start="21792" end="21804" title="Ahmad Shah Bahadur" label="Bahadur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="21981" end="21988" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="22099" end="22107" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21660310" start="22281" end="22296" title="Maimana Khanate" label="Maimana Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739864" start="22341" end="22355" title="Chahar Wilayat" label="Chahar Wilayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267083" start="22410" end="22418" title="Qataghan Province" label="Qataghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="22447" end="22452" title="Balkh" label="Balkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q60269" start="22693" end="22702" title="Qizilbash" label="Qizilbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669121" start="23088" end="23104" title="Afghan Qizilbash" label="Afghan Qizilbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q32056" start="23478" end="23488" title="Badakhshan" label="Badakhshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="23562" end="23567" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q15267557" start="23579" end="23597" title="Ispahsalar" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q838954" start="24213" end="24223" title="Sheberghan" label="Sheberghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q577668" start="24363" end="24370" title="Khanate of Bukhara" label="Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431702" start="24393" end="24409" title="Afghan Turkestan" label="Afghan Turkestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246526" start="24589" end="24594" title="Aqcha" label="Aqcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="25065" end="25074" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267083" start="25391" end="25399" title="Qataghan Province" label="Qataghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32056" start="25404" end="25414" title="Badakhshan" label="Badakhshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q644008" start="25613" end="25619" title="Qarshi" label="Qarshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21660310" start="25724" end="25731" title="Maimana Khanate" label="Maimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054127" start="25733" end="25740" title="Andkhoy (city)" label="Andkhoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q838954" start="25742" end="25752" title="Sheberghan" label="Sheberghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="25758" end="25763" title="Balkh" label="Balkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739864" start="25892" end="25906" title="Chahar Wilayat" label="Chahar Wilayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406259" start="26019" end="26036" title="cloak of Muhammad" label="cloak of Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q104764538" start="26128" end="26140" title="Kirka Sharif" label="Kirka Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999300" start="26166" end="26174" title="Mausoleum of Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="his tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q131350" start="26310" end="26318" title="Nishapur" label="Nishapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q765553" start="26479" end="26487" title="Sabzevar" label="Sabzevar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="26551" end="26556" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q720397" start="26591" end="26594" title="Ferdows" label="Tun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26618" end="26628" title="Jahan Khan (Afghan general)" label="Jahan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123394634" start="26633" end="26643" title="Nasir Khan I Ahmadzai" label="Nasir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q139948" start="26662" end="26678" title="Khanate of Kalat" label="Khanate of Kalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q767820" start="26776" end="26781" title="Tabas" label="Tabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371358" start="27184" end="27188" title="rout" label="rout"/>
<link wikidata="Q767820" start="27222" end="27227" title="Tabas" label="Tabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q720397" start="27232" end="27235" title="Ferdows" label="Tun"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="27331" end="27338" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q63149558" start="27411" end="27420" title="Afsharids" label="Afsharids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27512" end="27530" title="Khutbah#Sovereign&amp;#x27;s name" label="read in the sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987095" start="27638" end="27645" title="Torshiz" label="Torshiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428507" start="27647" end="27654" title="Bakharz" label="Bakharz"/>
<link wikidata="Q765715" start="27656" end="27659" title="Torbat-e Jam" label="Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421210" start="27661" end="27665" title="Khaf, Iran" label="Khaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q765528" start="27671" end="27687" title="Torbat-e Heydarieh" label="Turbat-e Haidari"/>
<link wikidata="Q197884" start="27723" end="27736" title="Shahrokh Shah" label="Shahrokh Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="27778" end="27785" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q308864" start="27949" end="27959" title="Mazandaran province" label="Mazandaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q631658" start="27972" end="27978" title="Mohammad Hasan Khan Qajar" label="Qajars"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="28435" end="28444" title="rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="28670" end="28685" title="siege equipment" label="siege equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q901715" start="28754" end="28762" title="gunmetal" label="gunmetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="28803" end="28811" title="Armenians" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="29007" end="29014" title="bazaars" label="bazaars"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="29179" end="29188" title="Looting" label="plundered"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="29243" end="29250" title="mosques" label="mosques"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="29349" end="29355" title="Demolition" label="razing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325086" start="30020" end="30034" title="Mughlani Begum" label="Mughlani Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q104846004" start="30051" end="30064" title="List of Mughal grand viziers" label="Mughal vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595689" start="30065" end="30077" title="Ghazi ud-Din Khan Feroze Jung III" label="Imad ul-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682872" start="30111" end="30120" title="Adina Beg" label="Adina Beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462476" start="30262" end="30276" title="Najib ad-Dawlah" label="Najib ud-Daula"/>
<link wikidata="Q81893195" start="30289" end="30298" title="Kingdom of Rohilkhand" label="Rohilkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q732026" start="30327" end="30337" title="Alamgir II" label="Alamgir II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30423" end="30438" title="Indian campaign of Ahmad Shah Durrani#Fourth Invasion" label="fourth invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="30465" end="30473" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973073" start="30500" end="30506" title="Attock" label="Attock"/>
<link wikidata="Q171675" start="30706" end="30712" title="Sutlej" label="Sutlej"/>
<link wikidata="Q200123" start="30736" end="30744" title="Ludhiana" label="Ludhiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q255546" start="30756" end="30769" title="Vanguard" label="advance guard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30789" end="30799" title="Jahan Khan (Afghan general)" label="Jahan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672955" start="30808" end="30815" title="Sirhind" label="Sirhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q256194" start="30817" end="30823" title="Karnal" label="Karnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q139706" start="30829" end="30836" title="Panipat" label="Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="30843" end="30851" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Marathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207219" start="31017" end="31023" title="Battle of Narela" label="Narela"/>
<link wikidata="Q83486" start="31294" end="31302" title="Shahdara district" label="Shahdara"/>
<link wikidata="Q233678" start="31327" end="31338" title="Jama Masjid, Delhi" label="Jama Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q738826" start="31386" end="31393" title="Khutbah" label="Khutbah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31399" end="31418" title="Khutbah#Sovereign&amp;#x27;s name" label="sign of sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="31461" end="31466" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110101" start="31537" end="31553" title="Fatehpuri Mosque" label="Fatehpuri Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143986" start="31620" end="31630" title="gun salute" label="gun salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q738826" start="31834" end="31841" title="Khutbah" label="Khutbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="31948" end="31960" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="32030" end="32037" title="bazaars" label="bazaars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187568" start="32116" end="32132" title="Feroz Shah Kotla" label="Feroz Shah Kotla"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="32142" end="32150" title="Fortification" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894248" start="32187" end="32199" title="Coining (mint)" label="minted coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q40097685" start="32232" end="32244" title="Hazrat Begum" label="Hazrat Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="32299" end="32317" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="32380" end="32386" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460567" start="32479" end="32485" title="turban" label="turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q810668" start="32742" end="32755" title="foot whipping" label="foot whipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790733" start="32785" end="32792" title="cripple" label="cripple"/>
<link wikidata="Q98144679" start="33020" end="33037" title="Intizam-ud-Daulah" label="Intizam-ud-Daulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="33436" end="33444" title="diamonds" label="diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="33446" end="33452" title="rubies" label="rubies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="33454" end="33460" title="pearls" label="pearls"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="33466" end="33474" title="emeralds" label="emeralds"/>
<link wikidata="Q854850" start="33530" end="33534" title="Bharatpur State" label="Jats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634691" start="33536" end="33545" title="Suraj Mal" label="Suraj Mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200663" start="33718" end="33727" title="Faridabad" label="Faridabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13639138" start="33791" end="33804" title="Jawahar Singh" label="Jawahar Singh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33869" end="33879" title="Siege of Ballabhgarh (1757)" label="laid siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631550" start="33883" end="33894" title="Ballabhgarh" label="Ballabhgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="34002" end="34009" title="Mathura" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q885286" start="34054" end="34063" title="Chaumuhan" label="Chaumuhan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34673" end="34681" title="Sack of Mathura (1757)" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="34682" end="34689" title="Mathura" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="34766" end="34774" title="pilgrims" label="pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="34792" end="34796" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="34933" end="34941" title="Asceticism" label="ascetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="35035" end="35040" title="idolatry" label="idols"/>
<link wikidata="Q688281" start="35364" end="35373" title="Vrindavan" label="Vrindavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="35503" end="35513" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35647" end="35655" title="Battle of Gokul (1757)" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q12424362" start="35668" end="35673" title="Gokul" label="Gokul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35710" end="35721" title="Daśanāmi Sampradaya#Naga Sadhus akharas" label="Naga Sadhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914617" start="35731" end="35737" title="Bhakti movement" label="Bhakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083684" start="35883" end="35895" title="Bengal Subah" label="Bengal Subah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="36065" end="36069" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36087" end="36105" title="Siege of Agra (1757)" label="besieging the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="36360" end="36367" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="36674" end="36681" title="Cholera" label="Cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="36784" end="36796" title="Yamuna River" label="Yamuna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="37139" end="37145" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672955" start="37186" end="37193" title="Sirhind-Fategarh" label="Sirhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595689" start="37230" end="37242" title="Ghazi ud-Din Khan Feroze Jung III" label="Imad ul-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="37262" end="37268" title="vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q123739281" start="37310" end="37321" title="Bakhshi (Mughal Empire)" label="Mir Bakhshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q203233" start="37696" end="37713" title="Battle of Plassey" label="Battle of Plassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="37737" end="37744" title="East India Company" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q41692" start="37974" end="37979" title="mules" label="mules"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="38230" end="38242" title="Yamuna River" label="Yamuna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="38335" end="38345" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38410" end="38420" title="Jahan Khan (Afghan general)" label="Jahan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578028" start="38508" end="38513" title="Sikh Confederacy" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="38539" end="38545" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="38558" end="38566" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647639" start="38570" end="38574" title="Battle of Amritsar (1757)" label="1757"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="38617" end="38621" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="38641" end="38646" title="Jihad" label="Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682872" start="38723" end="38732" title="Adina Beg" label="Adina Beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249458" start="38864" end="38878" title="Jalandhar Doab" label="Jalandhar Doab"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="38989" end="38995" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130797" start="39091" end="39102" title="Hill States of India" label="Hill states"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467967" start="39137" end="39156" title="Vadbhag Singh Sodhi" label="Vadbhag Singh Sodhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639665" start="39161" end="39182" title="Jassa Singh Ahluwalia" label="Jassa Singh Ahluwalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210128" start="39202" end="39212" title="Dal Khalsa (Sikh army)" label="Dal Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115815207" start="39303" end="39321" title="Battle of Mahilpur (1757)" label="battle of Mahilpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="39593" end="39600" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283047" start="39614" end="39627" title="Raghunath Rao" label="Raghunath Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="39643" end="39647" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="39700" end="39711" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462476" start="39800" end="39814" title="Najib ad-Dawlah" label="Najib ud-Daula"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016230" start="39822" end="39837" title="Battle of Delhi (1757)" label="battle of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q732026" start="39857" end="39867" title="Alamgir II" label="Alamgir II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595689" start="39912" end="39924" title="Ghazi ud-Din Khan Feroze Jung III" label="Imad ul-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q104846004" start="39937" end="39943" title="List of Mughal grand viziers" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672955" start="40104" end="40111" title="Sirhind-Fategarh" label="Sirhind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40122" end="40140" title="Sack of Sirhind (1758)" label="which was besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882590" start="40570" end="40578" title="Shahdara Bagh" label="Shahdara"/>
<link wikidata="Q317899" start="40613" end="40617" title="Ravi River" label="Ravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372475" start="40852" end="40860" title="Eminabad" label="Eminabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q216875" start="40891" end="40897" title="Chenab River" label="Chenab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026613" start="40904" end="40913" title="Wazirabad" label="Wazirabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973073" start="41182" end="41188" title="Attock" label="Attock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="41208" end="41216" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="41257" end="41264" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q123394634" start="41289" end="41299" title="Nasir Khan I Ahmadzai" label="Nasir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q139948" start="41318" end="41334" title="Khanate of Kalat" label="Khanate of Kalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="41578" end="41584" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592655" start="41723" end="41730" title="Mastung, Pakistan" label="Mastung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581527" start="41815" end="41820" title="Kalat, Balochistan" label="Kalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q194465" start="42135" end="42140" title="Annexation" label="annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="42237" end="42243" title="peace treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="42638" end="42646" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Marathas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42718" end="42728" title="Sardar Jahan Khan" label="Jahan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q392835" start="42925" end="42947" title="Shah Waliullah Dehlawi" label="Shah Waliullah Dehlawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="43069" end="43074" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="43078" end="43095" title="Ulama" label="religious leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="43099" end="43107" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462476" start="43142" end="43156" title="Najib ad-Dawlah" label="Najib ud-Daula"/>
<link wikidata="Q732026" start="43229" end="43239" title="Alamgir II" label="Alamgir II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595689" start="43346" end="43358" title="Ghazi ud-Din Khan Feroze Jung III" label="Imad ul-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727377" start="43405" end="43416" title="Madho Singh I" label="Madho Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124144" start="43431" end="43436" title="Kingdom of Amber" label="Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495974" start="43442" end="43453" title="Vijay Singh of Marwar" label="Vijay Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207845" start="43468" end="43474" title="Kingdom of Marwar" label="Marwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="43604" end="43614" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="43659" end="43665" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43746" end="43756" title="Sardar Jahan Khan" label="Jahan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="43771" end="43779" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="43783" end="43788" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="43811" end="43822" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q891257" start="43898" end="43908" title="Bolan Pass" label="Bolan Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q123394634" start="43939" end="43949" title="Nasir Khan I Ahmadzai" label="Nasir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="43990" end="44001" title="Indus river" label="Indus river"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973073" start="44111" end="44117" title="Attock" label="Attock"/>
<link wikidata="Q155188" start="44161" end="44167" title="Rohtas Fort" label="Rohtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="44238" end="44243" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185453" start="44292" end="44298" title="Multan" label="Multan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="44352" end="44358" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q709254" start="44490" end="44496" title="Batala" label="Batala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672955" start="44507" end="44514" title="Sirhind" label="Sirhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q120848059" start="44596" end="44618" title="Second Battle of Lahore (1759)" label="battled with the Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q98144679" start="44851" end="44868" title="Intizam-ud-Daulah" label="Intizam-ud-Daulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="44869" end="44877" title="assassination" label="murdered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627138" start="44899" end="44913" title="Shah Jahan III" label="Shah Jahan III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="45158" end="45163" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q944133" start="45244" end="45251" title="Taraori" label="Taraori"/>
<link wikidata="Q119199585" start="45263" end="45292" title="Battle of Taraori (1759)" label="a battle against the Marathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="45640" end="45647" title="muskets" label="muskets"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="45870" end="45876" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q719549" start="45941" end="45948" title="Rohilla" label="Rohilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q242895" start="45960" end="45970" title="Saharanpur" label="Saharanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q45957" start="46061" end="46069" title="Red Fort" label="Red Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227752" start="46112" end="46127" title="Dattaji Rao Scindia" label="Dattaji Scindia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827782" start="46175" end="46183" title="Kunjpura" label="Kunjpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634691" start="46406" end="46415" title="Suraj Mal" label="Suraj Mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41561" start="46443" end="46450" title="Sonipat" label="Sonipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q124322860" start="46678" end="46684" title="Burari, Delhi" label="Barari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385673" start="46805" end="46826" title="Battle of Barari Ghat" label="battle of Barari Ghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q721960" start="46923" end="46933" title="Musketeers" label="musketeers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="47512" end="47525" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="47618" end="47624" title="vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634691" start="47676" end="47685" title="Suraj Mal" label="Suraj Mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192807" start="47737" end="47741" title="Deeg" label="Deeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949364" start="47906" end="47912" title="Rewari" label="Rewari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827791" start="47972" end="47989" title="Malhar Rao Holkar" label="Malhar Rao Holkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341892" start="48012" end="48019" title="Narnaul" label="Narnaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="48111" end="48117" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717646" start="48222" end="48233" title="Sikandrabad" label="Sikandrabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q119138242" start="48480" end="48502" title="battle of Sikandarabad" label="battle of Sikandarabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="48574" end="48578" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q201832" start="48687" end="48694" title="Aligarh" label="Aligarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717915" start="49110" end="49120" title="Shikohabad" label="Shikohabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718260" start="49122" end="49130" title="Phaphund" label="Phaphund"/>
<link wikidata="Q861837" start="49136" end="49143" title="Bithoor" label="Bithoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q117006721" start="49230" end="49248" title="Ahmad Khan Bangash" label="Ahmad Khan Bangash"/>
<link wikidata="Q18129046" start="49511" end="49515" title="Oudh State" label="Oudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q642993" start="49517" end="49531" title="Shuja ud-Daula" label="Shuja ud-Daula"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="49689" end="49695" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632646" start="49802" end="49818" title="Sadashivrao Bhau" label="Sadashivrao Bhau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816155" start="49838" end="49844" title="Peshwa" label="Peshwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629888" start="49846" end="49861" title="Balaji Baji Rao" label="Balaji Baji Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q16660626" start="49896" end="49906" title="Vishwasrao" label="Vishwasrao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="50142" end="50156" title="Northern India" label="Northern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="50229" end="50233" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="50321" end="50326" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125745882" start="50408" end="50422" title="Capture of Delhi (1760)" label="it was stormed"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="50469" end="50476" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="50864" end="50868" title="Fodder" label="feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="51055" end="51062" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="51262" end="51272" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827782" start="51559" end="51567" title="Kunjpura" label="Kunjpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q125758658" start="51637" end="51655" title="Battle of Kunjpura" label="battle of Kunjpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859432" start="51734" end="51746" title="Najabat Khan" label="Najabat Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q624402" start="52010" end="52017" title="Baghpat" label="Baghpat"/>
<link wikidata="Q41561" start="52108" end="52115" title="Sonipat" label="Sonipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734529" start="52135" end="52144" title="Sambhalka" label="Sambhalka"/>
<link wikidata="Q139706" start="52207" end="52214" title="Panipat" label="Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q485547" start="52413" end="52422" title="Aurangzeb" label="Aurangzeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629888" start="52536" end="52550" title="Balaji Bajirao" label="Balaji Bajirao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816155" start="52559" end="52565" title="Peshwa" label="Peshwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="52573" end="52587" title="Maratha Empire" label="Maratha Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="52677" end="52681" title="Pune" label="Pune"/>
<link wikidata="Q128996486" start="52873" end="52898" title="Sack of Delhi (1757)" label="sacked the Mughal capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629888" start="52970" end="52984" title="Balaji Bajirao" label="Balaji Bajirao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283047" start="52990" end="53002" title="Raghunathrao" label="Raghunathrao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="53101" end="53109" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632646" start="53640" end="53656" title="Sadashivrao Bhau" label="Sadashivrao Bhau"/>
<link wikidata="Q139706" start="53670" end="53677" title="Panipat" label="Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259218" start="53739" end="53762" title="Third battle of Panipat" label="Third battle of Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q489890" start="54129" end="54135" title="Kokand" label="Kokand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="54159" end="54171" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432691" start="54460" end="54472" title="Khoja (Turkestan)" label="Afaqi Khojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="54584" end="54600" title="Golden Temple" label="Harimandir Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="54789" end="54796" title="Leprosy" label="Leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="54798" end="54806" title="Syphilis" label="Syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403419" start="55148" end="55161" title="Toba Achakzai" label="Toba Achakzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q474167" start="55248" end="55267" title="Rabi&amp;#x27; al-Awwal" label="Rabi&amp;#x27; al-Awwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777905" start="55277" end="55282" title="Maruf, Afghanistan" label="Maruf"/>
<link wikidata="Q104764538" start="55438" end="55457" title="Shrine of the Cloak" label="Shrine of the Cloak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999300" start="55465" end="55482" title="Tomb of Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="a large mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="55698" end="55716" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="55958" end="55964" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259218" start="56075" end="56092" title="Battle of Panipat (1761)" label="Battle of Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="56514" end="56531" title="Company rule in India" label="Company expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q910933" start="56533" end="56556" title="Mountstuart Elphinstone" label="Mountstuart Elphinstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="56617" end="56627" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q457944" start="56644" end="56662" title="Shuja Shah Durrani" label="Shuja Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="56909" end="56923" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="57075" end="57085" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q145401" start="57096" end="57114" title="Zaman Shah Durrani" label="Zaman Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918404" start="57209" end="57223" title="Pashtun tribes" label="Pashtun tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="57309" end="57315" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q732840" start="57394" end="57413" title="Mahmud Shah Durrani" label="Mahmud Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="57436" end="57449" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q732840" start="57580" end="57599" title="Mahmud Shah Durrani" label="Mahmud Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q145401" start="57601" end="57619" title="Zaman Shah Durrani" label="Zaman Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q457944" start="57625" end="57643" title="Shah Shuja Durrani" label="Shah Shuja Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q32027" start="57682" end="57700" title="Dost Mohammad Khan" label="Dost Mohammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108315270" start="57958" end="57983" title="Herat Campaign of 1862-63" label="Herat Campaign of 1862-63"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="57998" end="58003" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669042" start="58038" end="58062" title="Principality of Qandahar" label="Principality of Qandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q400704" start="58080" end="58109" title="short-range ballistic missile" label="short-range ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4054441" start="58110" end="58118" title="Abdali-I" label="Abdali-I"/>
<link wikidata="Q178985" start="58207" end="58210" title="ode" label="ode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737846" start="58419" end="58436" title="The Great Maratha" label="The Great Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q887851" start="58496" end="58507" title="Bob Christo" label="Bob Christo"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="58523" end="58532" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q50624631" start="58543" end="58550" title="Panipat (film)" label="Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="58623" end="58637" title="Maratha Empire" label="Maratha Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q310867" start="58659" end="58670" title="Sanjay Dutt" label="Sanjay Dutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186111" start="58688" end="58719" title="List of monarchs of Afghanistan" label="List of monarchs of Afghanistan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1563" wikidata="Q708372" url="?curid=1563" title="Arthur Aikin">
<text>Arthur Aikin (19 May 177315 April 1854) was an English chemist, mineralogist and scientific writer, and was a founding member of the Chemical Society (now the Royal Society of Chemistry). He first became its treasurer in 1841, and later became the society&#x27;s second president.

==Life==
He was born at Warrington, Lancashire into a distinguished literary family of prominent Unitarians. The best known of these was his paternal aunt, Anna Laetitia Barbauld, a woman of letters who wrote poetry and essays as well as early children&#x27;s literature. His father, Dr John Aikin, was a medical doctor, historian, and author. His grandfather, also called John (1713–1780), was a Unitarian scholar and theological tutor, closely associated with Warrington Academy. His sister Lucy (1781–1864) was a historical writer. Their brother Charles Rochemont Aikin was adopted by their famous aunt and brought up as their cousin.

Arthur Aikin studied chemistry under Joseph Priestley in the New College at Hackney, and gave attention to the practical applications of the science. In early life, he was a Unitarian minister for a short time. Aikin lectured on chemistry at Guy&#x27;s Hospital for thirty-two years. He became the President of the British Mineralogical Society in 1801 for five years up until 1806 when the Society merged with the Askesian Society. From 1803 to 1808 he was editor of the &quot;Annual Review&quot;. In 1805 Aiken also became a proprietor of the London Institution, which was officially founded in 1806. He was one of the founders of the Geological Society of London in 1807 and was its honorary secretary in 1812–1817. He also gave lectures in 1813 and 1814. He contributed papers on the Wrekin and the Shropshire coalfield, among others, to the transactions of that society. His &quot;Manual of Mineralogy&quot; was published in 1814. Later he became the paid secretary of the Society of Arts and later was elected as a fellow. He was founder of the Chemical Society of London in 1841, being its first treasurer and, between 1843 and 1845, second president.

In order to support himself, outside of his work with the British Mineralogical Society, the London Institution and the Geological Society, Aiken worked as a writer, translator and lecturer to the public and to medical students at Guy&#x27;s Hospital. His writing and journalism were useful for publicising foreign scientific news to the wider British public. He was also a member of the Linnean Society and in 1820 joined the Institution of Civil Engineers.

He was highly esteemed as a man of sound judgement and wide knowledge. Aikin never married, and died at Hoxton in London in 1854.

==Publications==

* &quot;The natural history of the year; being an enlargement of Dr. Aikin&#x27;s Calendar of nature&quot;, 1798
* &quot;Journal of a Tour through North Wales and Part of Shropshire with Observations in Mineralogy and Other Branches of Natural History&quot; (London, 1797)
* &quot;Syllabus of a course of lectures on chemistry, by A. and C.R. Aikin&quot;, 1799
* &quot;The Annual review and history of literature; for 1807&quot;, 1808
* &quot;A Manual of Mineralogy&quot; (1814; ed. 2, 1815)
* &quot; dictionary of chemistry and mineralogy, with an account of the processes employed in many of the most important chemical manufactures. To which are added a description of chemical apparatus, and various useful tables of weights and measures, chemical instruments, &amp;c. &amp;c&quot;. Vol. I; Vol. II (with his brother C. R. Aikin), 2 vols. (London, 1807, 1814).
*&quot;An account of the most important recent discoveries and improvements in chemistry and mineralogy, to the present time : being an appendix to their Dictionary of chemistry and mineralogy&quot;, 1814

For &quot;Rees&#x27;s Cyclopædia&quot; he wrote articles about chemistry, geology and mineralogy, but the topics are not known.

==References==

==External links==

* The Aikin Family Papers, D.190, at Rare Books, Special Collections, and Preservation, River Campus Libraries, University of Rochester.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q708372" start="0" end="12" title="Arthur Aikin" label="Arthur Aikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="55" end="62" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="64" end="76" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q941221" start="133" end="149" title="Chemical Society" label="Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q905549" start="159" end="185" title="Royal Society of Chemistry" label="Royal Society of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q215733" start="306" end="316" title="Warrington, England" label="Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="318" end="328" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="379" end="389" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q268305" start="438" end="460" title="Anna Letitia Barbauld" label="Anna Laetitia Barbauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="464" end="480" title="man of letters" label="woman of letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="526" end="552" title="children&amp;#x27;s literature" label="children&amp;#x27;s literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712004" start="566" end="579" title="John Aikin" label="Dr John Aikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218332" start="655" end="659" title="John Aikin (Unitarian)" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025751" start="744" end="762" title="Warrington Academy" label="Warrington Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530036" start="775" end="779" title="Lucy Aikin" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q860245" start="831" end="854" title="Charles Rochemont Aikin" label="Charles Rochemont Aikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="958" end="974" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006625" start="982" end="1004" title="New College at Hackney" label="New College at Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501533" start="1095" end="1113" title="General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches" label="Unitarian minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="1163" end="1182" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1236" end="1265" title="British Mineralogical Society" label="British Mineralogical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q731528" start="1336" end="1352" title="Askesian Society" label="Askesian Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1399" end="1412" title="Annual Review (19th century)" label="Annual Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670494" start="1466" end="1484" title="London Institution" label="London Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="1558" end="1586" title="Geological Society of London" label="Geological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501749" start="1607" end="1625" title="honorary secretary" label="honorary secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425298" start="1709" end="1715" title="Telford and Wrekin" label="Wrekin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="1724" end="1734" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="1899" end="1914" title="Society of Arts" label="Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q941221" start="1972" end="1988" title="Chemical Society" label="Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q867447" start="2469" end="2484" title="Linnean Society" label="Linnean Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="2508" end="2538" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998354" start="2645" end="2651" title="Hoxton" label="Hoxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916259" start="3771" end="3793" title="Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia" label="Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1564" wikidata="Q160580" url="?curid=1564" title="Ailanthus">
<text>Ailanthus (; derived from &quot;ailanto,&quot; an Ambonese word probably meaning &quot;tree of the gods&quot; or &quot;tree of heaven&quot;) is a genus of trees belonging to the family Simaroubaceae, in the order Sapindales (formerly Rutales or Geraniales). The genus is native from east Asia south to northern Australasia. One species, the Tree-of-Heaven (&quot;Ailanthus altissima&quot;,) is considered a weed in some parts of the world.

==Selected species==
The number of living species is disputed, with some authorities accepting up to ten species, while others accept six or fewer. Species include:
*&quot;Ailanthus altissima&quot; (tree of heaven, syn. &quot;A. vilmoriniana&quot; ) – northern and central mainland China, Taiwan. Invasive in North America, Europe, Britain, and Australia. Serves as central metaphor in &quot;A Tree Grows in Brooklyn&quot;.
*&quot;Ailanthus excelsa&quot; – India and Sri Lanka
*&quot;Ailanthus fordii&quot; – China
*&quot;Ailanthus integrifolia&quot; – New Guinea and Queensland, Australia
*&quot;Ailanthus triphysa&quot; (white siris syn. &quot;A. malabarica&quot;) – India, South-east Asia and Australia
*&quot;Ailanthus vietnamensis&quot; – Vietnam

There is a good fossil record of &quot;Ailanthus&quot; with many species names based on their geographic occurrence, but almost all of these have very similar morphology and have been grouped as a single species among the three species recognized:
*&quot;Ailanthus tardensis&quot; – from a single locality in Hungary
*&quot;Ailanthus confucii&quot; – Tertiary period, Europe, Asia, and North America
*&quot;Ailanthus gigas&quot; – from a single locality in Slovenia
*&quot;Ailanthus pythii&quot; – known from the Miocene of Iceland, Styria in Austria and the Gavdos island in Greece
*&quot;Ailanthus kurzii&quot; – endemic to the Andaman Islands, India
*&quot;Ailanthus maximus&quot; - known from the latest Paleocene to late Oligocene in the Tibetan Plateau

==Ailanthus silk moth==
A silk spinning moth, the ailanthus silkmoth (&quot;Samia cynthia&quot;), lives on &quot;Ailanthus&quot; leaves, and yields a silk more durable and cheaper than mulberry silk, but inferior to it in fineness and gloss. This moth has been introduced to the eastern United States and is common near many towns; it is about 12 cm across, with angulated wings, and in color olive brown, with white markings. Other Lepidoptera whose larvae feed on &quot;Ailanthus&quot; include &quot;Endoclita malabaricus&quot;, and &quot;Atteva aurea&quot; (commonly known as the Ailanthus webworm moth).

==See also==
* Spotted lanternfly

== References ==
*
*Germplasm Resources Information Network: &quot;Ailanthus&quot;
*Plant Conservation Alliance&#x27;s Alien Plant Working Group: Least Wanted</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1250259" start="50" end="58" title="Ambonese" label="Ambonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="155" end="159" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q156679" start="185" end="198" title="Simaroubaceae" label="Simaroubaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26316" start="213" end="223" title="Sapindales" label="Sapindales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26316" start="234" end="241" title="Rutales" label="Rutales"/>
<link wikidata="Q14272" start="245" end="255" title="Geraniales" label="Geraniales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077944" start="311" end="322" title="Australasian realm" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159570" start="341" end="355" title="Ailanthus altissima" label="Tree-of-Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q159570" start="613" end="632" title="Ailanthus altissima" label="Ailanthus altissima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="656" end="660" title="synonym (biology)" label="syn."/>
<link wikidata="Q3335456" start="667" end="682" title="Ailanthus vilmoriniana" label="A. vilmoriniana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="714" end="728" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="730" end="736" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="738" end="746" title="invasive species" label="Invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13931921" start="833" end="857" title="A Tree Grows in Brooklyn (novel)" label="A Tree Grows in Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476469" start="872" end="889" title="Ailanthus excelsa" label="Ailanthus excelsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="898" end="903" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="908" end="917" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11060468" start="925" end="941" title="Ailanthus fordii" label="Ailanthus fordii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110726" start="963" end="985" title="Ailanthus integrifolia" label="Ailanthus integrifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="994" end="1004" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="1009" end="1019" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1021" end="1030" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110253" start="1038" end="1056" title="Ailanthus triphysa" label="Ailanthus triphysa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="1076" end="1080" title="synonym (biology)" label="syn."/>
<link wikidata="Q10824988" start="1154" end="1176" title="Ailanthus vietnamensis" label="Ailanthus vietnamensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1449" end="1468" title="Ailanthus tardensis" label="Ailanthus tardensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1503" end="1510" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1518" end="1536" title="Ailanthus confucii" label="Ailanthus confucii"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="1545" end="1553" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1601" end="1616" title="Ailanthus gigas" label="Ailanthus gigas"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="1651" end="1659" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1667" end="1683" title="Ailanthus pythii" label="Ailanthus pythii"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="1707" end="1714" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="1718" end="1725" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41358" start="1727" end="1733" title="Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1737" end="1744" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q213895" start="1753" end="1759" title="Gavdos" label="Gavdos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1770" end="1776" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1784" end="1800" title="Ailanthus kurzii" label="Ailanthus kurzii"/>
<link wikidata="Q186233" start="1824" end="1839" title="Andaman Islands" label="Andaman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1854" end="1871" title="Ailanthus maximus" label="Ailanthus maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="1902" end="1911" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="1920" end="1929" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="1937" end="1952" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462214" start="2030" end="2043" title="Samia cynthia" label="Samia cynthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="2387" end="2398" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="2405" end="2410" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376266" start="2456" end="2477" title="Endoclita malabaricus" label="Endoclita malabaricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10571341" start="2578" end="2596" title="Spotted lanternfly" label="Spotted lanternfly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1565" wikidata="Q1283657" url="?curid=1565" title="Aimoin of Fleury">
<text>Aimoin of Fleury (; ) was a medieval French monk and chronicler active in the late 10th and early 11th centuries. He was born at Villefranche-de-Longchat, in Southwestern France, about 960. Early in his life he entered the monastery of Fleury, where he became a monk and then passed the greater part of his life. Between c. 980 and 985 Aimoin wrote about Saint Benedict in the Abbey of Fleury-sur-Loire. His chief work is the &quot;Historia Francorum&quot;, or &quot;Libri V. de Gestis Francorum&quot;, which deals with the history of the Franks from the earliest times to 653, and was continued by other writers until the middle of the 12th century. It was much in vogue during the Middle Ages, but its historical value is now regarded as slight. It was edited in the 19th century by G. Waitz and published in the &quot;Monumenta Germaniae Historica: Scriptores&quot;, Band xxvi (Hanover and Berlin, 1826–1892).

In 1004 Aimoin also wrote &quot;Vita Abbonis, abbatis Floriacensis&quot;, the last of a series of lives of the abbots of Fleury, all of which, except the life of Abbo, have been lost. This was published by J. Mabillon in the &quot;Acta sanctorum ordinis sancti Benedicti&quot; (Paris, 1668–1701).

Aimoin&#x27;s third work was the composition of books ii and iii of the &quot;Miracula sancti Benedicti&quot;, the first book of which was written by another monk of Fleury named Adrevald ( – 878). This also appears in the &quot;Acta sanctorum&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Latina with analytical indices</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1283657" start="0" end="16" title="Aimoin of Fleury" label="Aimoin of Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="37" end="43" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q126969" start="129" end="153" title="Villefranche-de-Longchat" label="Villefranche-de-Longchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="158" end="177" title="France" label="Southwestern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="223" end="232" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q956741" start="236" end="242" title="Fleury Abbey" label="Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q44265" start="355" end="369" title="Saint Benedict" label="Saint Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="539" end="545" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="683" end="694" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q66936" start="785" end="793" title="Georg Waitz" label="G. Waitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q316880" start="821" end="850" title="Monumenta Germaniae Historica" label="Monumenta Germaniae Historica"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="1025" end="1030" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q306658" start="1076" end="1080" title="Abbo of Fleury" label="Abbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q354563" start="1120" end="1131" title="Jean Mabillon" label="J. Mabillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695694" start="1391" end="1399" title="Adrevald" label="Adrevald"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1566" wikidata="Q4461035" url="?curid=1566" title="Akkadian Empire">
<text>The Akkadian Empire () was the first ancient Empire of Mesopotamia, succeeding the long-lived city-states of Sumer. Centered on the city of Akkad () and its surrounding region, the empire united Akkadian and Sumerian speakers under one rule and exercised significant influence across Mesopotamia, the Levant, and Anatolia, sending military expeditions as far south as Dilmun and Magan (modern United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar and Oman) in the Arabian Peninsula.

The Akkadian Empire reached its political peak between the 24th and 22nd centuries BC, following the conquests by its founder Sargon of Akkad. Under Sargon and his successors, the Akkadian language was briefly imposed on neighboring conquered states such as Elam and Gutium. Akkad is sometimes regarded as the first empire in history, though the meaning of this term is not precise, and there are earlier Sumerian claimants.

==Contemporary epigraphic sources==
Epigraphic sources from the Sargonic (Akkadian Empire) period are in relatively short supply, partly because the capital Akkad, like the capitals of the later Mitanni and Sealand, has not yet been located, though there has been much speculation. Some cuneiform tablets have been excavated at cities under Akkadian Empire control such as Eshnunna and Tell Agrab.

Other tablets have become available on the antiquities market and are held in museums and private collections such as those from the Akkadian governor in Adab. Internal evidence allows their dating to the Sargonic period and sometimes to the original location. Archives are especially important to historians and only a few have become available. The Me-sag Archive, which commenced publication in 1958, is considered one of the most significant collections. The tablets, about 500 in number with about half published, are held primarily at the Babylonian Collection of the Yale University and Baghdad Museum with a few others scattered about. The tablets date to the period of late in the reign of Naram-Sin to early in the reign of Shar-kali-shari. They are believed to be from a town between Umma and Lagash and Me-sag to be the governor of Umma. An archive of 47 tablets was found at the excavation of Tell el-Suleimah in the Hamrin Basin.

Various royal inscriptions by the Akkadian rulers have also been found. Most of the original examples are short, or very fragmentary like the Victory Stele of Naram-Sin and the Sargonic victory stele from Telloh. A few longer ones are known because of later copies made, often from the much later Old Babylonian period. While these are assumed to be mostly accurate, it is difficult to know if they had been edited to reflect current political conditions. One of the longer surviving examples is the Bassetki Statue, the copper base of a Narim-Sin statue:

A number of fragments of royal statues of Manishtushu all bearing portions of a &quot;standard inscription&quot;. Aside from a few minor short inscriptions this is the only known contemporary source for this ruler. An excerpt:


Before the Akkadian Empire, calendar years were marked by Regnal Numbers. During Sargonic times, a system of year-names was used. This practice continued until the end of the Old Babylonian period, for example, &quot;Year in which the divine Hammu[rabi] the king Esznunna destroyed by a flood.” Afterwards, Regnal Numbers were used by all succeeding kingdoms. During the Akkadian Empire 3 of the presumed 40 Sargon year-names are known, 1 (presumed 9) of Rimush, 20 (presumed 56) of Naram-Sin, and 18 (presumed 18) of Shar-kali-shari. Recently, a single year-name had been found &quot;In the year that Dūr-Maništusu was established.” There are also, perhaps, a dozen more known, which cannot be firmly linked to a ruler. Especially with the paucity of other inscriptions, year-names are extremely important in determining the history of the Akkadian Empire. As an example, from one year-name, we know that the empire was in conflict with the Gutians long before its end. It attests the name of a Gutian ruler and marks the construction of two temples in Babylon as recognition of Akkadian victory.

The final contemporary source are seals and their sealing dates. These are especially important here, as markers, with the shortage of other Akkadian Empire epigraphics and very useful to historians. As an example, two seals and one sealing were found in the Royal Cemetery at Ur which contained the name of Sargons&#x27;s daughter En-hedu-ana. This provided confirmation of her existence. The seals read &quot;En-hedu-ana, daughter of Sargon: Ilum-pal[il] (is) her coiffeur&quot; and &quot;Adda, estate supervisor/majordomo of En-hedu-ana&quot;. At Tell Mozan (ancient Urkesh) brought to light a clay sealing of Tar&#x27;am-Agade (Akkad loves &lt;her&gt;), a previously unknown daughter of Naram-Sin, who was possibly married to an unidentified local &quot;endan&quot; (ruler).

==Later copies and literary compositions==
So great was the Akkadian Empire, especially Sargon and Narim-Sin, that its history was passed down for millennia. This ranged on one end to purported copies of still existing Sargonic period inscriptions to literary tales made up from the whole cloth at the other. A few examples:

*Great Rebellion Against Naram-Sin – At one point in his reign much of the Empire, especially in the old mainly Sumerian city-states, rose up against Naram-Sin. The revolt was crushed but the echoes of the event were passed down in history. Some of the tales, like &quot;Naram-Sin and the Enemy Hordes&quot; (Old Babylonian – purported to be a copy of an inscription at the temple of Nergal in Cutha) and &quot;Gula-AN and the Seventeen Kings against Naram-Sin&quot; were literary compositions which further developed and changed the themes. The earliest examplar, from the Old Babylonian period, is found in several incomplete tablets and fragments, which differ somewhat, purporting to be copies of an inscription on a statue of Naram-Sin standing in the Ekur temple of Enlil at Nippur. Because it aligns with known contemporary inscriptions and year name it is considered authentic, which the usual Mesopotamian slant that something going wrong means you displeased the gods.

*Cursing of Agade – A purely literary composition which was handed down for millennia in Mesopotamia. Composed in the Ur III period, a century or at most two after the events, it is essentially artistic propaganda. After a long period of Akkadian dominance the Sumerians from the south are back in ascendancy. The Ur rule is sometimes called the Neo-Sumerian Empire. This composition lays all the troubles before the rise of Ur at the feet of the Akkadian Empire (because Naram-Sin leveled the Ekur temple of Enlil while rebuilding it causing the eight chief deities of Mesopotamia to withdraw their support and protection from Akkad). While basically fiction, it is still useful to historians.

There were a number of these, passed down as part of scribel tradition including The Birth Legend of Sargon (Neo-Assyrian), Weidner Chronicle, and the Geographical Treatise on Sargon of Akkad&#x27;s Empire.

==Archaeology==
Identifying architectural remains is hindered by the fact that there are sometimes no clear distinctions between features thought to stem from the preceding Early Dynastic period, and those thought to be Akkadian. Likewise, material that is thought to be Akkadian continues to be in use into the Ur III period. There is a similar issue with cuneiform tablets. In the early Akkadian Empire tablets and the signs on them are much like those from earlier periods, before developing into the much different Classical Sargonic style.

With the capital, Akkad, still unlocated, archaeological remains of the empire are still to be found, mainly at the cities where they established regional governors. An example is Adab where Naram-Sin established direct imperial control after Adab joined the &quot;great revolt&quot;. After destroying the city of Mari the Akkadian Empire rebuilt it as an administrative center with an imperial governor. The city of Nuzi was established by the Akkadians and a number of economic and administrative texts were found there. Similarly, there are Marad, Nippur, Tutub and Ebla.

Excavation at the modern site of Tell Brak has suggested that the Akkadians rebuilt a city (&quot;Brak&quot; or &quot;Nagar&quot;) on this site, for use as an administrative center. The city included two large buildings including a complex with temple, offices, courtyard, and large ovens.

==Dating and periodization==
The Akkadian period is generally dated to 2334–2154 BC (according to the middle chronology). The short-chronology dates of 2270–2083 BC are now considered less likely. It was preceded by the Early Dynastic Period of Mesopotamia (ED) and succeeded by the Ur III Period, although both transitions are blurry. For example, it is likely that the rise of Sargon of Akkad coincided with the late ED Period and that the final Akkadian kings ruled simultaneously with the Gutian kings alongside rulers at the city-states of both Uruk and Lagash. The Akkadian Period is contemporary with EB IV (in Israel), EB IVA and EJ IV (in Syria), and EB IIIB (in Turkey).

===Timeline of rulers===
The relative order of Akkadian kings is clear, while noting that the Ur III version of the Sumerian King List inverts the order of Rimush and Manishtushu. The absolute dates of their reigns are approximate (as with all dates prior to the Late Bronze Age collapse &quot;c.&quot; 1200 BC).

==History and development of the empire==

===Pre-Sargonic Akkad===

The Akkadian Empire takes its name from the region and the city of Akkad, both of which were localized in the general confluence area of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. Although the city of Akkad has not yet been identified on the ground, it is known from various textual sources. Among these is at least one text predating the reign of Sargon. Together with the fact that the name Akkad is of non-Akkadian origin, this suggests that the city of Akkad may have already been occupied in pre-Sargonic times.

===Sargon of Akkad===
The earliest records in the Akkadian language date to the time of Sargon of Akkad, who defeated the Sumerian king Lugal-zage-si at the Battle of Uruk and conquered his former territory, establishing the Akkadian Empire. Sargon was claimed to be the son of a gardener in the Sumerian King List. Later legends named his father as La&#x27;ibum or Itti-Bel and his birth mother as a priestess (or possibly even a hierodule) of Ishtar, the Akkadian equivalent of the Sumerian goddess Inanna. One legend of Sargon from Neo-Assyrian times quotes him as saying

Later claims made on behalf of Sargon were that his mother was an &quot;entu&quot; priestess (high priestess). The claims might have been made to ensure a pedigree of nobility, since only a highly placed family could achieve such a position.

Originally a cupbearer (Rabshakeh) to a king of Kish with a Semitic name, Ur-Zababa, Sargon thus became a gardener, responsible for the task of clearing out irrigation canals. The royal cupbearer at this time was in fact a prominent political position, close to the king and with various high level responsibilities not suggested by the title of the position itself. This gave him access to a disciplined corps of workers, who also may have served as his first soldiers. Displacing Ur-Zababa, Sargon was crowned king, and he entered upon a career of foreign conquest. Four times he invaded Syria and Canaan, and he spent three years thoroughly subduing the countries of &quot;the west&quot; to unite them with Mesopotamia &quot;into a single empire&quot;.

However, Sargon took this process further, conquering many of the surrounding regions to create an empire that reached westward as far as the Mediterranean Sea and perhaps Cyprus (&quot;Kaptara&quot;); northward as far as the mountains (a later Hittite text asserts he fought the Hattian king Nurdaggal of Burushanda, well into Anatolia); eastward over Elam; and as far south as Magan (Oman) — a region over which he reigned for purportedly 56 years, though only four &quot;year-names&quot; survive. He consolidated his dominion over his territories by replacing the earlier opposing rulers with noble citizens of Akkad, his native city where loyalty was thus ensured.
Trade extended from the silver mines of Anatolia to the lapis lazuli mines in modern Afghanistan, the cedars of Lebanon and the copper of Magan. This consolidation of the city-states of Sumer and Akkad reflected the growing economic and political power of Mesopotamia. The empire&#x27;s breadbasket was the rain-fed agricultural system and a chain of fortresses was built to control the imperial wheat production.

Images of Sargon were erected on the shores of the Mediterranean, in token of his victories, and cities and palaces were built at home with the spoils of the conquered lands. Elam and the northern part of Mesopotamia were also subjugated, and rebellions in Sumer were put down. Contract tablets have been found dated in the years of the campaigns against Canaan and against Sarlak, king of Gutium. He also boasted of having subjugated the &quot;four-quarters&quot; — the lands surrounding Akkad to the north, the south (Sumer), the east (Elam), and the west (Martu). Some of the earliest historiographic texts (ABC 19, 20) suggest he rebuilt the city of Babylon (&quot;Bab-ilu&quot;) in its new location near Akkad.

Sargon, throughout his long life, showed special deference to the Sumerian deities, particularly Inanna (Ishtar), his patroness, and Zababa, the warrior god of Kish. He called himself &quot;The anointed priest of Anu&quot; and &quot;the great&quot; ensi&quot; of Enlil&quot; and his daughter, Enheduanna, was installed as priestess to Nanna at the temple in Ur.

Troubles multiplied toward the end of his reign. A later Babylonian text states:
It refers to his campaign in &quot;Elam&quot;, where he defeated a coalition army led by the King of Awan and forced the vanquished to become his vassals.

Also shortly after, another revolt took place:
The Bible refers to the city of Akkad in the Book of Genesis, which states:

Nimrod&#x27;s historical inspiration remains uncertain, but he has been identified with Sargon of Akkad by some scholars who also propose that the name of Sargon&#x27;s grandson and successor Naram-Sin is the root of Nimrod&#x27;s, while others have noted similarities between Nimrod and the legendary Gilgamesh, king of Uruk (Erech).

===Rimush and Manishtushu===
Sargon had crushed opposition even at old age. These difficulties broke out again in the reign of his sons, where revolts broke out during the nine-year reign of Rimush (2278–2270 BC), who fought hard to retain the empire, and was successful until he was assassinated by some of his own courtiers. According to his inscriptions, he faced widespread revolts, and had to reconquer the cities of Ur, Umma, Adab, Lagash, Der, and Kazallu from rebellious &quot;ensis&quot;: Rimush introduced mass slaughter and large scale destruction of the Sumerian city-states, and maintained meticulous records of his destructions. Most of the major Sumerian cities were destroyed, and Sumerian human losses were enormous:

Rimush&#x27;s elder brother, Manishtushu (2269–2255 BC) succeeded him. The latter seems to have fought a sea battle against 32 kings who had gathered against him and took control over their pre-Arab country, consisting of modern-day United Arab Emirates and Oman. Despite the success, like his brother he seems to have been assassinated in a palace conspiracy.

===Naram-Sin===
Manishtushu&#x27;s son and successor, Naram-Sin (2254–2218 BC), due to vast military conquests, assumed the imperial title &quot;King Naram-Sin, king of the four-quarters&quot; (&quot;Lugal Naram-Sîn, Šar kibrat &#x27;arbaim&quot;), the four-quarters as a reference to the entire world. He was also for the first time in Sumerian culture, addressed as &quot;the god (Sumerian = DINGIR, Akkadian = &quot;ilu&quot;) of Agade&quot; (Akkad), in opposition to the previous religious belief that kings were only representatives of the people towards the gods.
He also faced revolts at the start of his reign, but quickly crushed them.
Naram-Sin also recorded the Akkadian conquest of Ebla as well as Armanum and its king.
To better police Syria, he built a royal residence at Tell Brak, a crossroads at the heart of the Khabur River basin of the Jezirah. Naram-Sin campaigned against Magan which also revolted; Naram-Sin &quot;marched against Magan and personally caught Mandannu, its king&quot;, where he instated garrisons to protect the main roads. The chief threat seemed to be coming from the northern Zagros Mountains, the Lulubis and the Gutians. A campaign against the Lullubi led to the carving of the &quot;Victory Stele of Naram-Suen&quot;, now in the Louvre. Hittite sources claim Naram-Sin of Akkad even ventured into Anatolia, battling the Hittite and Hurrian kings Pamba of Hatti, Zipani of Kanesh, and 15 others.

The economy was highly planned. Grain was cleaned, and rations of grain and oil were distributed in standardized vessels made by the city&#x27;s potters. Taxes were paid in produce and labour on public walls, including city walls, temples, irrigation canals and waterways, producing huge agricultural surpluses. This newfound Akkadian wealth may have been based upon benign climatic conditions, huge agricultural surpluses and the confiscation of the wealth of other peoples.

In later Assyrian and Babylonian texts, the name &quot;Akkad&quot;, together with &quot;Sumer&quot;, appears as part of the royal title, as in the Sumerian LUGAL KI-EN-GI KI-URI or Akkadian &quot;Šar māt Šumeri u Akkadi&quot;, translating to &quot;king of Sumer and Akkad&quot;. This title was assumed by the king who seized control of Nippur, the intellectual and religious center of southern Mesopotamia.

During the Akkadian period, the Akkadian language became the lingua franca of the Middle East, and was officially used for administration, although the Sumerian language remained as a spoken and literary language. The spread of Akkadian stretched from Syria to Elam, and even the Elamite language was temporarily written in Mesopotamian cuneiform. Akkadian texts later found their way to far-off places, from Egypt (in the Amarna Period) and Anatolia, to Persia (Behistun).

===Submission of Sumerian kings===
The submission of some Sumerian rulers to the Akkadian Empire, is recorded in the seal inscriptions of Sumerian rulers such as Lugal-ushumgal, governor (ensi) of Lagash (&quot;Shirpula&quot;), circa 2230–2210 BC. Several inscriptions of Lugal-ushumgal are known, particularly seal impressions, which refer to him as governor of Lagash and at the time a vassal (, &quot;arad&quot;, &quot;servant&quot; or &quot;slave&quot;) of Naram-Sin, as well as his successor Shar-kali-sharri. One of these seals proclaims:

It can be considered that Lugal-ushumgal was a collaborator of the Akkadian Empire, as was Meskigal, ruler of Adab. Later however, Lugal-ushumgal was succeeded by Puzer-Mama who, as Akkadian power waned, achieved independence from Shar-Kali-Sharri, assuming the title of &quot;King of Lagash&quot; and starting the illustrious Second Dynasty of Lagash.

=== Collapse ===
The empire of Akkad likely fell in the 22nd century BC, within 180 years of its founding, ushering in a &quot;Dark Age&quot; with no prominent imperial authority until the Third Dynasty of Ur. The region&#x27;s political structure may have reverted to the &quot;status quo ante&quot; of local governance by city-states.

By the end of Sharkalisharri&#x27;s reign, the empire had begun to unravel.

After several years of chaos (and four kings), Shu-turul and Dudu appear to have restored some centralized authority for several decades; however, they were unable to prevent the empire from eventually collapsing outright, eventually ceding power to Gutians, based in Adab, who had been conquered by Akkad during the reign of Sharkalisharri.

Little is known about the Gutian period, or how long it endured. Cuneiform sources suggest that the Gutians&#x27; administration showed little concern for maintaining agriculture, written records, or public safety; they reputedly released all farm animals to roam about Mesopotamia freely and soon brought about famine and rocketing grain prices. The Sumerian king Ur-Nammu (2112–2095 BC) cleared the Gutians from Mesopotamia during his reign.

The &quot;Sumerian King List&quot;, describing the Akkadian Empire after the death of Shar-kali-shari, states:
However, there are no known year-names or other archaeological evidence verifying any of these later kings of Akkad or Uruk, apart from several artefact referencing king Dudu of Akkad and Shu-turul. The named kings of Uruk may have been contemporaries of the last kings of Akkad, but in any event could not have been very prominent.


The period between BC and 2004 BC is known as the Ur III period. Documents again began to be written in Sumerian, although Sumerian was becoming a purely literary or liturgical language, much as Latin later became in Medieval Europe.

One explanation for the end of the Akkadian empire is simply that the Akkadian dynasty could not maintain its political supremacy over other independently powerful city-states.

==== Natural causes: drought, seasonal weather patterns ====
One theory, which remains controversial, associates regional decline at the end of the Akkadian period (and of the First Intermediary Period following the Old Kingdom in Ancient Egypt) with rapidly increasing aridity, and failing rainfall in the region of the Ancient Near East, caused by a global centennial-scale drought, sometimes called the 4.2 kiloyear event. Harvey Weiss has shown that Peter B. de Menocal has shown &quot;there was an influence of the North Atlantic Oscillation on the streamflow of the Tigris and Euphrates at this time, which led to the collapse of the Akkadian Empire&quot;. More recent analysis of simulations from the HadCM3 climate model indicate that there was a shift to a more arid climate on a timescale that is consistent with the collapse of the empire.
Excavation at Tell Leilan suggests that this site was abandoned soon after the city&#x27;s massive walls were constructed, its temple rebuilt and its grain production reorganized. The debris, dust, and sand that followed show no trace of human activity. Soil samples show fine wind-blown sand, no trace of earthworm activity, reduced rainfall and indications of a drier and windier climate. Evidence shows that skeleton-thin sheep and cattle died of drought, and up to 28,000 people abandoned the site, presumably seeking wetter areas elsewhere. Tell Brak shrank in size by 75%. Trade collapsed. Nomadic herders such as the Amorites moved herds closer to reliable water suppliers, bringing them into conflict with Akkadian populations. This climate-induced collapse seems to have affected the whole of the Middle East, and to have coincided with the collapse of the Egyptian Old Kingdom.

This collapse of rain-fed agriculture in the Upper Country meant the loss to southern Mesopotamia of the agrarian subsidies which had kept the Akkadian Empire solvent. Water levels within the Tigris and Euphrates fell 1.5 meters beneath the level of 2600 BC, and although they stabilized for a time during the following Ur III period, rivalries between pastoralists and farmers increased. Attempts were undertaken to prevent the former from herding their flocks in agricultural lands, such as the building of a wall known as the &quot;Repeller of the Amorites&quot; between the Tigris and Euphrates under the Ur III ruler Shu-Sin. Such attempts led to increased political instability; meanwhile, severe depression occurred to re-establish demographic equilibrium with the less favorable climatic conditions.

Richard Zettler has critiqued the drought theory, observing that the chronology of the Akkadian empire is very uncertain and that available evidence is not sufficient to show its economic dependence on the northern areas excavated by Weiss and others. He also criticizes Weiss for taking Akkadian writings literally to describe certain catastrophic events.

According to Joan Oates, at Tell Brak, the soil &quot;signal&quot; associated with the drought lies below the level of Naram-Sin&#x27;s palace. However, evidence may suggest a tightening of Akkadian control following the Brak &#x27;event&#x27;, for example, the construction of the heavily fortified &#x27;palace&#x27; itself and the apparent introduction of greater numbers of Akkadian as opposed to local officials, perhaps a reflection of unrest in the countryside of the type that often follows some natural catastrophe. Furthermore, Brak remained occupied and functional after the fall of the Akkadians.

In 2019, a study by Hokkaido University on fossil corals in Oman provides an evidence that prolonged winter shamal seasons led to the salinization of the irrigated fields; hence, a dramatic decrease in crop production triggered a widespread famine and eventually the collapse of the ancient Akkadian Empire.

==Government==

The Akkadian government formed a &quot;classical standard&quot; with which all future Mesopotamian states compared themselves. Traditionally, the &quot;ensi&quot; was the highest functionary of the Sumerian city-states. In later traditions, one became an &quot;ensi&quot; by marrying the goddess Inanna, legitimising the rulership through divine consent.

Initially, the monarchical &quot;lugal&quot; (&quot;lu&quot; = man, &quot;gal&quot; =Great) was subordinate to the priestly &quot;ensi&quot;, and was appointed at times of troubles, but by later dynastic times, it was the &quot;lugal&quot; who had emerged as the preeminent role, having his own &quot;é&quot; (= house) or &quot;palace&quot;, independent from the temple establishment. By the time of Mesalim, whichever dynasty controlled the city of Kish was recognised as &quot;šar kiššati&quot; (= king of Kish), and was considered preeminent in Sumer, possibly because this was where the two rivers approached, and whoever controlled Kish ultimately controlled the irrigation systems of the other cities downstream.

As Sargon extended his conquest from the &quot;Lower Sea&quot; (Persian Gulf), to the &quot;Upper Sea&quot; (Mediterranean), it was felt that he ruled &quot;the totality of the lands under heaven&quot;, or &quot;from sunrise to sunset&quot;, as contemporary texts put it. Under Sargon, the &quot;ensi&quot;s generally retained their positions, but were seen more as provincial governors. The title &quot;šar kiššati&quot; became recognised as meaning &quot;lord of the universe&quot;. Sargon is even recorded as having organised naval expeditions to Dilmun (Bahrain) and Magan, amongst the first organised military naval expeditions in history. Whether he also did in the case of the Mediterranean with the kingdom of Kaptara (possibly Cyprus), as claimed in later documents, is more questionable.

With Naram-Sin, Sargon&#x27;s grandson, this went further than with Sargon, with the king not only being called &quot;Lord of the Four-Quarters (of the Earth)&quot;, but also elevated to the ranks of the &quot;dingir&quot; (= gods), with his own temple establishment. Previously a ruler could, like Gilgamesh, become divine after death but the Akkadian kings, from Naram-Sin onward, were considered gods on earth in their lifetimes. Their portraits showed them of larger size than mere mortals and at some distance from their retainers.

One strategy adopted by both Sargon and Naram-Sin, to maintain control of the country, was to install their daughters, Enheduanna and Emmenanna respectively, as high priestess to Sin, the Akkadian version of the Sumerian moon deity, Nanna, at Ur, in the extreme south of Sumer; to install sons as provincial &quot;ensi&quot; governors in strategic locations; and to marry their daughters to rulers of peripheral parts of the Empire (Urkesh and Marhashe). A well documented case of the latter is that of Naram-Sin&#x27;s daughter Tar&#x27;am-Agade at Urkesh.

Records at the Brak administrative complex suggest that the Akkadians appointed locals as tax collectors.

==Economy==

The population of Akkad, like nearly all pre-modern states, was entirely dependent upon the agricultural systems of the region, which seem to have had two principal centres: the irrigated farmlands of southern Iraq that traditionally had a yield of 30 grains returned for each grain sown and the rain-fed agriculture of northern Iraq, known as the &quot;Upper Country.&quot;

Southern Iraq during Akkadian period seems to have been approaching its modern rainfall level of less than per year, with the result that agriculture was totally dependent upon irrigation. Before the Akkadian period, the progressive salinisation of the soils, produced by poorly drained irrigation, had been reducing yields of wheat in the southern part of the country, leading to the conversion to more salt-tolerant barley growing. Urban populations there had peaked already by 2,600 BC, and demographic pressures were high, contributing to the rise of militarism apparent immediately before the Akkadian period (as seen in the Stele of the Vultures of Eannatum). Warfare between city states had led to a population decline, from which Akkad provided a temporary respite. It was this high degree of agricultural productivity in the south that enabled the growth of the highest population densities in the world at this time, giving Akkad its military advantage.
The water table in this region was very high and replenished regularly—by winter storms in the headwaters of the Tigris and Euphrates from October to March and from snow-melt from March to July. Flood levels, that had been stable from about 3,000 to 2,600 BC, had started falling, and by the Akkadian period were a half-meter to a meter lower than recorded previously. Even so, the flat country and weather uncertainties made flooding much more unpredictable than in the case of the Nile; serious deluges seem to have been a regular occurrence, requiring constant maintenance of irrigation ditches and drainage systems. Farmers were recruited into regiments for this work from August to October—a period of food shortage—under the control of city temple authorities, thus acting as a form of unemployment relief. Gwendolyn Leick has suggested that this was Sargon&#x27;s original employment for the king of Kish, giving him experience in effectively organising large groups of men; a tablet reads, &quot;Sargon, the king, to whom Enlil permitted no rival—5,400 warriors ate bread daily before him&quot;.

Harvest was in the late spring and during the dry summer months. Nomadic Amorites from the northwest pastured their flocks of sheep and goats to graze on the crop residue and were watered from the river and irrigation canals. For this privilege, they had to pay a tax in wool, meat, milk, and cheese to the temples, who distributed these products to the bureaucracy and priesthood. In good years, all went well, but in bad years, wild winter pastures were in short supply, nomads sought to pasture their flocks in the grain fields, resulting in conflicts with farmers. It appeared that the subsidizing of southern populations by the import of wheat from the north of the Empire temporarily overcame this problem, and it seems to have allowed economic recovery and a growing population within this region.

===Foreign trade===
As a result, Sumer and Akkad had a surplus of agricultural products but was short of almost everything else, particularly metal ores, timber and building stone, all of which had to be imported. The spread of the Akkadian state as far as the &quot;silver mountain&quot; (possibly the Taurus Mountains), the &quot;cedars&quot; of Lebanon, and the copper deposits of Magan, was largely motivated by the goal of securing control over these imports. One tablet, an Old Babylonian Period copy of an original inscription, reads:

International trade developed during the Akkadian period. Indus–Mesopotamia relations also seem to have expanded: Sargon of Akkad (circa 2300 or 2250 BC), was the first Mesopotamian ruler to make an explicit reference to the region of Meluhha, which is generally understood as being the Balochistan or the Indus area.

==Culture==
===Akkadian art===

In art, there was a great emphasis on the kings of the dynasty, alongside much that continued earlier Sumerian art. Little architecture remains. In large works and small ones such as seals, the degree of realism was considerably increased, but the seals show a &quot;grim world of cruel conflict, of danger and uncertainty, a world in which man is subjected without appeal to the incomprehensible acts of distant and fearful divinities who he must serve but cannot love. This sombre mood ... remained characteristic of Mesopotamian art...&quot;

Akkadian sculpture is remarkable for its fineness and realism, which shows a clear advancement compared to the previous period of Sumerian art.

====Seals====
The Akkadians used visual arts as a vehicle of ideology. They developed a new style for cylinder seals by reusing traditional animal decorations but organizing them around inscriptions, which often became central parts of the layout. The figures also became more sculptural and naturalistic. New elements were also included, especially in relation to the rich Akkadian mythology.


===Language===

During the 3rd millennium BC, there developed a very intimate cultural symbiosis between the Sumerians and the Akkadians, which included widespread . The influence of Sumerian on Akkadian (and vice versa) is evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale, to syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence. This has prompted scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the third millennium as a &quot;sprachbund&quot;.

Akkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as a spoken language somewhere around 2000 BC (the exact dating being a matter of debate), but Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary, and scientific language in Mesopotamia until the 1st century AD.

===Poet–priestess Enheduanna===

Sumerian literature continued in rich development during the Akkadian period. Enheduanna, the &quot;wife (Sumerian &quot;dam&quot; = high priestess) of Nanna [the Sumerian moon god] and daughter of Sargon&quot; of the temple of Sin at Ur, who lived –2250 BC, is the first poet in history whose name is known. Her known works include hymns to the goddess Inanna, the &quot;Exaltation of Inanna&quot; and &quot;In-nin sa-gur-ra&quot;. A third work, the &quot;Temple Hymns&quot;, a collection of specific hymns, addresses the temples and their occupants, the deities to whom they were consecrated. The works of this poet are significant, because although they start out using the third person, they shift to the first person voice of the poet herself, and they mark a significant development in the use of cuneiform. As poet, princess, and priestess, she was a person who, according to William W. Hallo, &quot;set standards in all three of her roles for many succeeding centuries&quot;

In the &quot;Exultation of Inanna&quot;,


The kings of Akkad were legendary among later Mesopotamian civilizations, with Sargon understood as the prototype of a strong and wise leader, and his grandson Naram-Sin considered the wicked and impious leader (&quot;Unheilsherrscher&quot; in the analysis of Hans Gustav Güterbock) who brought ruin upon his kingdom.

==Technology==
A tablet from the periods reads, &quot;(From the earliest days) no-one had made a statue of lead, (but) Rimush king of Kish, had a statue of himself made of lead. It stood before Enlil; and it recited his (Rimush&#x27;s) virtues to the idu of the gods&quot;. The copper Bassetki Statue, cast with the lost wax method, testifies to the high level of skill that craftsmen achieved during the Akkadian period.

==See also==
* List of cities of the ancient Near East
* List of Mesopotamian deities
* History of Mesopotamia
* List of Mesopotamian dynasties

==Notes==
=== Bibliography ===

* Liverani, Mario, ed. (1993). &quot;Akkad: The First World Empire: Structure, Ideology Traditions&quot;. Padova: Sargon srl. 
* Oates, Joan (2004). &quot;Archaeology in Mesopotamia: Digging Deeper at Tell Brak&quot;. 2004 Albert Reckitt Archaeological Lecture. In &quot;Proceedings of the British Academy: 2004 Lectures&quot;; Oxford University Press, 2005. .

==Further reading==
*Gough, M.A, Historical Perception in the Sargonic Literary Tradition. The Implication of Copied Texts, Rosetta 1, pp 1–9, 2006
* Paszke, Marcin Z, &quot;From Sargon To Narām-Sîn: some remarks on Akkadian military activity in the II nd half of the III rd millennium bc. The example of eastern campaigns&quot;, Acta Archaeologica Lodziensia 68, pp. 75–83, 2022
* E. A. Speiser, &quot;Some Factors in the Collapse of Akkad&quot;, Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 97–101, (Jul. - Sep. 1952)

==External links==

* Iraq&#x27;s Ancient Past – Penn Museum
* Year Names of Narim-Sin – CDLI
* Year Named of Shar-kali-Sharri – CDLI
* Site on Enheduanna at Virginia Tech University (archived 12 December 2009)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="4" end="19" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="55" end="66" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="94" end="104" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="109" end="114" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="140" end="145" title="Akkad (city)" label="Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="195" end="203" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="208" end="216" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="301" end="307" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="313" end="321" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="368" end="374" title="Dilmun" label="Dilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429914" start="379" end="384" title="Magan (civilization)" label="Magan"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="393" end="413" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="415" end="427" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="429" end="436" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="438" end="443" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="448" end="452" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="461" end="478" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q199461" start="607" end="622" title="Sargon of Akkad" label="Sargon of Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="739" end="743" title="Elam" label="Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q549531" start="748" end="754" title="Gutian people" label="Gutium"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="943" end="953" title="Epigraphy" label="Epigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="1064" end="1069" title="Akkad (city)" label="Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="1102" end="1109" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440601" start="1114" end="1121" title="First Sealand dynasty" label="Sealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q375685" start="1280" end="1288" title="Eshnunna" label="Eshnunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612336" start="1293" end="1303" title="Tell Agrab" label="Tell Agrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q346445" start="1460" end="1464" title="Adab (city)" label="Adab"/>
<link wikidata="Q897474" start="2393" end="2419" title="Victory Stele of Naram-Sin" label="Victory Stele of Naram-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868081" start="2751" end="2766" title="Bassetki Statue" label="Bassetki Statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="2772" end="2778" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758030" start="4686" end="4696" title="Urkesh" label="Tell Mozan"/>
<link wikidata="Q297506" start="4827" end="4836" title="Naram-Sin of Akkad" label="Naram-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5243" end="5276" title="Gutian rule in Mesopotamia#Great Revolt against Naram-Sin" label="Great Rebellion Against Naram-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214672" start="6014" end="6019" title="Enlil" label="Enlil"/>
<link wikidata="Q188395" start="6023" end="6029" title="Nippur" label="Nippur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6223" end="6239" title="Gutian rule in Mesopotamia#Curse of Akkad" label="Cursing of Agade"/>
<link wikidata="Q716742" start="7299" end="7320" title="Early Dynastic Period (Mesopotamia)" label="Early Dynastic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="7438" end="7451" title="Third Dynasty of Ur" label="Ur III period"/>
<link wikidata="Q346445" start="7852" end="7856" title="Adab (city)" label="Adab"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="7986" end="7990" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q584605" start="8089" end="8093" title="Nuzi" label="Nuzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183843" start="8216" end="8221" title="Marad" label="Marad"/>
<link wikidata="Q188395" start="8223" end="8229" title="Nippur" label="Nippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305112" start="8231" end="8236" title="Tutub" label="Tutub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743" start="8241" end="8245" title="Ebla" label="Ebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q978443" start="8281" end="8290" title="Tell Brak" label="Tell Brak"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="8641" end="8658" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="8665" end="8681" title="Short chronology" label="short-chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q716742" start="8759" end="8795" title="Early Dynastic Period of Mesopotamia" label="Early Dynastic Period of Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="8822" end="8835" title="Ur III period" label="Ur III Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q199461" start="8918" end="8933" title="Sargon of Akkad" label="Sargon of Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064034" start="9032" end="9038" title="Gutian dynasty of Sumer" label="Gutian"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="9089" end="9093" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207330" start="9098" end="9104" title="Lagash" label="Lagash"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="9157" end="9163" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9211" end="9217" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059758" start="9484" end="9508" title="Late Bronze Age collapse" label="Late Bronze Age collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="9648" end="9654" title="Akkad (region)" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="9745" end="9751" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="9756" end="9765" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="10003" end="10011" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="10234" end="10239" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q316241" start="10248" end="10261" title="Lugal-zage-si" label="Lugal-zage-si"/>
<link wikidata="Q199461" start="10269" end="10283" title="Battle of Uruk" label="Battle of Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q270860" start="10408" end="10426" title="Sumerian King List" label="Sumerian King List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413317" start="10543" end="10552" title="hierodule" label="hierodule"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="10557" end="10563" title="Ishtar" label="Ishtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="10613" end="10619" title="Inanna" label="Inanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="10647" end="10659" title="Neo-Assyrian" label="Neo-Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075791" start="10944" end="10953" title="cupbearer" label="cupbearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920137" start="10955" end="10964" title="Rabshakeh" label="Rabshakeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q132272" start="10979" end="10983" title="Kish (Sumer)" label="Kish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="10991" end="10998" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327805" start="11005" end="11014" title="Ur-Zababa" label="Ur-Zababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="11521" end="11526" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="11531" end="11537" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="11830" end="11847" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="11860" end="11866" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35668" start="11933" end="11940" title="Hittite language" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322482" start="11968" end="11975" title="Hattians" label="Hattian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11981" end="11990" title="Nurdaggal" label="Nurdaggal"/>
<link wikidata="Q908494" start="11994" end="12004" title="Burushanda" label="Burushanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="12016" end="12024" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="12041" end="12045" title="Elam" label="Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429914" start="12067" end="12072" title="Magan (civilization)" label="Magan"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="12074" end="12078" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="12381" end="12387" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q216798" start="12413" end="12425" title="lapis lazuli" label="lapis lazuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="12442" end="12453" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61105" start="12459" end="12465" title="Cedrus libani" label="cedars"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="12469" end="12476" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="12485" end="12491" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429914" start="12495" end="12500" title="Magan (civilization)" label="Magan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="13029" end="13034" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="13127" end="13133" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5819497" start="13146" end="13152" title="Sarlak" label="Sarlak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064034" start="13162" end="13168" title="Gutian period" label="Gutium"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="13331" end="13336" title="Amorites" label="Martu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061346" start="13383" end="13393" title="Babylonian Chronicles" label="ABC 19, 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="13586" end="13592" title="Inanna" label="Inanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="13594" end="13600" title="Ishtar" label="Ishtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q147461" start="13622" end="13628" title="Zababa" label="Zababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188536" start="13702" end="13705" title="Anu" label="Anu"/>
<link wikidata="Q214672" start="13752" end="13757" title="Enlil" label="Enlil"/>
<link wikidata="Q232505" start="13782" end="13792" title="Enheduanna" label="Enheduanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q217420" start="13824" end="13829" title="Nanna (Sumerian deity)" label="Nanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="13847" end="13849" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="14140" end="14145" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="14156" end="14173" title="Akkad (city)" label="the city of Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="14181" end="14196" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201861" start="14213" end="14219" title="Nimrod" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q297506" start="14405" end="14414" title="Naram-Sin of Akkad" label="Naram-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159709" start="14515" end="14524" title="Gilgamesh" label="Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="14534" end="14538" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="14540" end="14545" title="Erech" label="Erech"/>
<link wikidata="Q313856" start="14740" end="14746" title="Rimush (Akkad)" label="Rimush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="14971" end="14973" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q740952" start="14975" end="14979" title="Umma" label="Umma"/>
<link wikidata="Q346445" start="14981" end="14985" title="Adab (city)" label="Adab"/>
<link wikidata="Q207330" start="14987" end="14993" title="Lagash" label="Lagash"/>
<link wikidata="Q262432" start="14995" end="14998" title="Der (Sumer)" label="Der"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669395" start="15004" end="15011" title="Kazallu" label="Kazallu"/>
<link wikidata="Q932495" start="15034" end="15039" title="Ensi (Sumerian)" label="ensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61054" start="15313" end="15324" title="Manishtushu" label="Manishtushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="15478" end="15482" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="15517" end="15537" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="15542" end="15546" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q297506" start="15700" end="15709" title="Naram-Sin of Akkad" label="Naram-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60773977" start="15807" end="15832" title="King of the Four Corners" label="king of the four-quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743" start="16340" end="16344" title="Ebla" label="Ebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933288" start="16356" end="16363" title="Armanum" label="Armanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q685344" start="16476" end="16488" title="Khabur (Euphrates)" label="Khabur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="16502" end="16509" title="Al-Jazira, Mesopotamia" label="Jezirah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429914" start="16599" end="16604" title="Majan (civilization)" label="Magan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434558" start="16833" end="16840" title="Lullubi" label="Lullubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="16919" end="16925" title="Musée du Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="16927" end="16934" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="16987" end="16995" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190394" start="17022" end="17029" title="Hurrian" label="Hurrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086836" start="17036" end="17041" title="Pamba (king)" label="Pamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322482" start="17045" end="17050" title="Hattians" label="Hatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q538605" start="17062" end="17068" title="Kanesh" label="Kanesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q854642" start="17719" end="17724" title="LUGAL" label="LUGAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q188395" start="17899" end="17905" title="Nippur" label="Nippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="18032" end="18045" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35470" start="18251" end="18267" title="Elamite language" label="Elamite language"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="18308" end="18317" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="18380" end="18385" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q455151" start="18394" end="18407" title="Amarna Period" label="Amarna Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="18413" end="18421" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="18426" end="18432" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180012" start="18434" end="18442" title="Behistun" label="Behistun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4267888" start="18608" end="18622" title="Lugal-ushumgal" label="Lugal-ushumgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q932495" start="18634" end="18638" title="Ensi (Sumerian)" label="ensi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207330" start="18643" end="18649" title="Lagash" label="Lagash"/>
<link wikidata="Q207330" start="18809" end="18815" title="Lagash" label="Lagash"/>
<link wikidata="Q349653" start="18943" end="18959" title="Shar-kali-sharri" label="Shar-kali-sharri"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392705" start="19083" end="19091" title="Meskigal" label="Meskigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q346445" start="19102" end="19106" title="Adab (city)" label="Adab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644832" start="19155" end="19165" title="Puzer-Mama" label="Puzer-Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q349653" start="19223" end="19239" title="Shar-Kali-Sharri" label="Shar-Kali-Sharri"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="19473" end="19481" title="Dark Ages (historiography)" label="Dark Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="19535" end="19554" title="Third Dynasty of Ur" label="Third Dynasty of Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="19670" end="19680" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q627980" start="19808" end="19817" title="Shu-turul" label="Shu-turul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064034" start="20011" end="20018" title="Gutian period" label="Gutians"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="20416" end="20422" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q297417" start="20469" end="20477" title="Ur-Nammu" label="Ur-Nammu"/>
<link wikidata="Q560137" start="20830" end="20843" title="Dudu of Akkad" label="Dudu of Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q627980" start="20848" end="20857" title="Shu-turul" label="Shu-turul"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="21099" end="21107" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="21212" end="21220" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="21221" end="21227" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q232211" start="21584" end="21609" title="First Intermediary Period" label="First Intermediary Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q177819" start="21624" end="21635" title="Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="21639" end="21652" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="21784" end="21791" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291515" start="21814" end="21832" title="4.2 kiloyear event" label="4.2 kiloyear event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556685" start="21834" end="21846" title="Harvey Weiss" label="Harvey Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137345" start="21928" end="21954" title="North Atlantic Oscillation" label="North Atlantic Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637529" start="22116" end="22122" title="HadCM3" label="HadCM3"/>
<link wikidata="Q588192" start="22273" end="22284" title="Tell Leilan" label="Tell Leilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="22855" end="22860" title="Nomad" label="Nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="22883" end="22890" title="Amorite" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q362942" start="23770" end="23777" title="Shu-Suen" label="Shu-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="23887" end="23910" title="Demography" label="demographic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q74839754" start="23957" end="23972" title="Richard L. Zettler" label="Richard Zettler"/>
<link wikidata="Q19654959" start="24328" end="24338" title="Joan Oates" label="Joan Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057199" start="24945" end="24964" title="Hokkaido University" label="Hokkaido University"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="24985" end="24989" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q967685" start="25033" end="25039" title="Shamal (wind)" label="shamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="25059" end="25071" title="Soil salinity" label="salinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="25457" end="25467" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q385862" start="26006" end="26013" title="Mesalim" label="Mesalim"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="26876" end="26882" title="Dilmun" label="Dilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="26884" end="26891" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728546" start="27044" end="27051" title="Keftiu" label="Kaptara"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="27062" end="27068" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159709" start="27424" end="27433" title="Gilgamesh" label="Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758030" start="28096" end="28102" title="Urkesh" label="Urkesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139055" start="28312" end="28325" title="tax collector" label="tax collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="28951" end="28963" title="soil salinity" label="salinisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="29045" end="29050" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="29136" end="29142" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="29212" end="29233" title="demography" label="demographic pressures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088425" start="29348" end="29369" title="Stele of the Vultures" label="Stele of the Vultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q352544" start="29373" end="29381" title="Eannatum" label="Eannatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q104875634" start="29384" end="29391" title="Warfare in Ancient Sumeria" label="Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="29686" end="29697" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="30852" end="30857" title="Nomad" label="Nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="30860" end="30868" title="Amorites" label="Amorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187955" start="30945" end="30957" title="crop residue" label="crop residue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="31058" end="31062" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="31064" end="31068" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="31070" end="31074" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="31080" end="31086" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q172556" start="31896" end="31912" title="Taurus Mountains" label="Taurus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q62490925" start="32194" end="32221" title="Indus–Mesopotamia relations" label="Indus–Mesopotamia relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q199461" start="32250" end="32265" title="Sargon of Akkad" label="Sargon of Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q483421" start="32371" end="32378" title="Meluhha" label="Meluhha"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="32423" end="32434" title="Balochistan" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="32442" end="32447" title="Indus" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072751" start="33163" end="33175" title="Sumerian art" label="Sumerian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="33769" end="33777" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q839463" start="34018" end="34028" title="sprachbund" label="sprachbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q232505" start="34411" end="34421" title="Enheduanna" label="Enheduanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q217420" start="34485" end="34490" title="Sin (mythology)" label="Nanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="34687" end="34693" title="Inanna" label="Inanna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34790" end="34802" title="Temple Hymns" label="Temple Hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q91991" start="35620" end="35641" title="Hans Gustav Güterbock" label="Hans Gustav Güterbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868081" start="35964" end="35979" title="Bassetki Statue" label="Bassetki Statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q765814" start="35995" end="36003" title="lost wax" label="lost wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q63780" start="36117" end="36156" title="List of cities of the ancient Near East" label="List of cities of the ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q16490393" start="36159" end="36187" title="List of Mesopotamian deities" label="List of Mesopotamian deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481441" start="36190" end="36212" title="History of Mesopotamia" label="History of Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589970" start="36215" end="36245" title="List of Mesopotamian dynasties" label="List of Mesopotamian dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097820" start="36281" end="36296" title="Mario Liverani" label="Liverani, Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q19654959" start="36408" end="36419" title="Joan Oates" label="Oates, Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285902" start="37228" end="37239" title="University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology" label="Penn Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1567" wikidata="Q242319" url="?curid=1567" title="Ajax the Lesser">
<text>Ajax ( &quot;Aias&quot; according to Graves means &quot;of the earth&quot;.) was a Greek mythological hero, son of Oileus, the king of Locris. He was called the &quot;Ajax the Less&quot;, the &quot;lesser&quot; or &quot;Locrian&quot; Ajax, to distinguish him from Ajax the Great, son of Telamon. He was the leader of the Locrian contingent during the Trojan War. He is a significant figure in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; and is also mentioned in the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, in Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot; and in Euripides&#x27; &quot;The Trojan Women&quot;. In Etruscan legend, he was known as &quot;Aivas Vilates&quot;.

== Description ==
In the account of Dares the Phrygian, Ajax was described as &quot;stocky, powerfully built, swarthy, a pleasant person, and brave.&quot;

== Mythology ==

=== Life ===

Ajax&#x27;s mother&#x27;s name was Eriopis. According to Strabo, he was born in Naryx in Locris, where Ovid calls him &quot;Narycius heros&quot;. According to the &quot;Iliad&quot;, he led his Locrians in forty ships against Troy. He is described as one of the great heroes among the Greeks. In battle, he wore a linen cuirass (, ), was brave and intrepid, especially skilled in throwing the spear and, next to Achilles, the swiftest of all the Greeks. The chronicler Malalas portrayed him as &quot;tall, strong, tawny, squinting, good nose, curly hair, black hair, thick beard, long face, daring warrior, magnanimous, a womanizer.&quot;

In the funeral games at the pyre of Patroclus, Ajax contended with Odysseus and Antilochus for the prize in the footrace; but Athena, who was hostile towards him and favored Odysseus, made him stumble and fall, so that he won only the second prize.

In later traditions, this Ajax is called a son of Oileus and the nymph Rhene, and is also mentioned among the suitors of Helen. After the taking of Troy, he rushed into the temple of Athena, where Cassandra had taken refuge, and was embracing the statue of the goddess in supplication. Ajax violently dragged her away to the other captives. According to some writers, he raped Cassandra inside the temple. Odysseus called for Ajax&#x27;s death by stoning for this crime, but Ajax saved himself by claiming innocence with an oath to Athena, clutching her statue in supplication.

=== Death ===
Since Ajax dragged the supplicant from her temple, Athena had cause to be indignant. According to the &quot;Bibliotheca&quot;, no one was aware that Ajax had raped Cassandra until Calchas, the Greek seer, warned the Greeks that Athena was furious at the treatment of her priestess and she would destroy the Greek ships if they did not kill him immediately. Despite this, Ajax managed to hide at the altar of a deity where the Greeks, fearing divine retribution should they kill him and destroy the altar, allowed him to live. When the Greeks left without killing Ajax, despite their sacrifices, Athena became so angry that she persuaded Zeus to send a storm that sank many of their ships.

As Ajax was returning from Troy, Athena hit his ship with a thunderbolt and the vessel was wrecked on the Whirling Rocks (). But he escaped with some of his men, managing to cling onto a rock through the assistance of Poseidon. He would have been saved in spite of Athena, but he then audaciously declared that he would escape the dangers of the sea in defiance of the immortals. Offended by this presumption, Poseidon split the rock with his trident and Ajax was swallowed up by the sea. Thetis buried him when the corpse washed up on Mykonos. Other versions depict a different death for Ajax, showing him dying when on his voyage home. In these versions, when Ajax came to the Capharean Rocks on the coast of Euboea, his ship was wrecked in a fierce storm, he himself was lifted up in a whirlwind and impaled with a flash of rapid fire from Athena in his chest, and his body thrust upon sharp rocks, which afterwards were called the rocks of Ajax.

After Ajax&#x27;s death, his spirit dwelt in the island of Leuce. The Opuntian Locrians worshipped Ajax as their national hero, and so great was their faith in him that when they drew up their army in battle, they always left one place open for him, believing that, although invisible to them, he was fighting for and among them. The story of Ajax was frequently made use of by ancient poets and artists, and the hero who appears on some Locrian coins with the helmet, shield, and sword is probably this Ajax.

Other accounts of Ajax&#x27;s death are offered by Philostratus, Euripides, and the scholiast on Lycophron.

==Art==
The abduction of Cassandra by Ajax was frequently represented in Greek works of art, such as the chest of Cypselus described by Pausanias and in extant works.

==Notes==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Conon&quot;, Fifty Narrations, surviving as one-paragraph summaries in the Bibliotheca (Library) of Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople&quot; translated from the Greek by Brady Kiesling. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Dictys Cretensis&quot;, from The Trojan War.&quot; &quot;The Chronicles of Dictys of Crete and Dares the Phrygian&quot; translated by Richard McIlwaine Frazer Jr. Indiana University Press. 1966. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Graves, Robert, &quot;The Greek Myths&quot;, Harmondsworth, London, England, Penguin Books, 1960. 
* Graves, Robert, &quot;The Greek Myths: The Complete and Definitive Edition.&quot; Penguin Books Limited. 2017. 
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. . Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;The Odyssey&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Lycophron, &quot;The Alexandra&quot; translated by Alexander William Mair. Loeb Classical Library Volume 129. London: William Heinemann, 1921. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Lycophron, &quot;Alexandra&quot; translated by A.W. Mair. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. 1921. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; translated by Brookes More. Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses.&quot; Hugo Magnus. Gotha (Germany). Friedr. Andr. Perthes. 1892. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Aeneid.&quot; Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics&quot;. J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn &amp; Co. 1900. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Quintus Smyrnaeus, &quot;The Fall of Troy&quot; translated by Way. A. S. Loeb Classical Library Volume 19. London: William Heinemann, 1913. Online version at theio.com
*Quintus Smyrnaeus, &quot;The Fall of Troy&quot;. Arthur S. Way. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. 1913. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Strabo, &quot;The Geography of Strabo.&quot; Edition by H.L. Jones. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Strabo, &quot;Geographica&quot; edited by A. Meineke. Leipzig: Teubner. 1877. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Tryphiodorus, &quot;Capture of Troy&quot; translated by Mair, A. W. Loeb Classical Library Volume 219. London: William Heinemann Ltd, 1928. Online version at theoi.com
*Tryphiodorus, &quot;Capture of Troy&quot; with an English Translation by A.W. Mair. London, William Heinemann, Ltd.; New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. 1928. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Tzetzes, John, &quot;Allegories of the Iliad&quot; translated by Goldwyn, Adam J. and Kokkini, Dimitra. Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library, Harvard University Press, 2015. 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q242319" start="0" end="4" title="Ajax the Lesser" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="83" end="101" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878906" start="102" end="106" title="Greek hero cult" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q975447" start="115" end="121" title="Oileus" label="Oileus"/>
<link wikidata="Q659791" start="135" end="141" title="Locris" label="Locris"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="264" end="278" title="Ajax the Great" label="Ajax the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q331327" start="287" end="294" title="Telamon" label="Telamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q764236" start="321" end="328" title="Locrians" label="Locrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="351" end="361" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="393" end="398" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="412" end="417" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="459" end="466" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="477" end="483" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="497" end="503" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="517" end="526" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216943" start="539" end="555" title="The Trojan Women" label="The Trojan Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="566" end="581" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="663" end="681" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares the Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389488" start="849" end="856" title="Eriopis" label="Eriopis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="871" end="877" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938409" start="894" end="899" title="Naryx" label="Naryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q659791" start="903" end="909" title="Locris" label="Locris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="917" end="921" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q764236" start="1007" end="1015" title="Locrians" label="Locrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="1039" end="1043" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="1127" end="1132" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182731" start="1133" end="1140" title="cuirass" label="cuirass"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="1225" end="1233" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q736132" start="1481" end="1485" title="pyre" label="pyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="1489" end="1498" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="1520" end="1528" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q577552" start="1533" end="1543" title="Antilochus of Pylos" label="Antilochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="1579" end="1585" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="1768" end="1773" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q170779" start="1900" end="1909" title="Cassandra" label="Cassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644480" start="1975" end="1987" title="supplication" label="supplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="2404" end="2415" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q725527" start="2476" end="2483" title="Calchas" label="Calchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="2933" end="2937" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317385" start="2998" end="3017" title="Returns from Troy" label="returning from Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="3204" end="3212" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="3429" end="3436" title="trident" label="trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="3475" end="3481" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190210" start="3522" end="3529" title="Mykonos" label="Mykonos"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="3697" end="3703" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q155868" start="3996" end="4001" title="Leuce (island)" label="Leuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354839" start="4007" end="4015" title="Opuntian Locris" label="Opuntian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274948" start="4499" end="4511" title="Philostratus" label="Philostratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="4513" end="4522" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="4532" end="4541" title="scholiast" label="scholiast"/>
<link wikidata="Q432737" start="4545" end="4554" title="Lycophron" label="Lycophron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747618" start="4630" end="4635" title="Art in ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q430688" start="4671" end="4679" title="Cypselus" label="Cypselus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="4693" end="4702" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="4755" end="4766" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q709305" start="5050" end="5055" title="Conon (mythographer)" label="Conon"/>
<link wikidata="Q475001" start="5281" end="5297" title="Dictys Cretensis" label="Dictys Cretensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="5376" end="5394" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares the Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="5520" end="5540" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="5726" end="5740" title="Robert Graves" label="Graves, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="5941" end="5946" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="5948" end="5969" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="6319" end="6342" title="Odyssey" label="&amp;quot;The Odyssey&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q432737" start="6583" end="6592" title="Lycophron" label="Lycophron"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="6949" end="6958" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="7355" end="7375" title="Ovid" label="Publius Ovidius Naso"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="7383" end="7396" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="7679" end="7701" title="Virgil" label="Publius Vergilius Maro"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="7709" end="7715" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q352702" start="8003" end="8020" title="Quintus Smyrnaeus" label="Quintus Smyrnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998710" start="8028" end="8044" title="Posthomerica" label="The Fall of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="8358" end="8364" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q690653" start="8372" end="8395" title="Geographica" label="The Geography of Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371938" start="8688" end="8700" title="Tryphiodorus" label="Tryphiodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="9069" end="9082" title="John Tzetzes" label="Tzetzes, John"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1568" wikidata="Q172725" url="?curid=1568" title="Ajax the Great">
<text>Ajax () or Aias (; , &quot;Aíantos&quot;; archaic ) is a Greek mythological hero, the son of King Telamon and Periboea, and the half-brother of Teucer. He plays an important role in the Trojan War, and is portrayed as a towering figure and a warrior of great courage in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; and in the Epic Cycle, a series of epic poems about the Trojan War, being second only to Achilles among Greek heroes of the war. He is also referred to as &quot;Telamonian Ajax&quot; (, in Etruscan recorded as &quot;Aivas Tlamunus&quot;), &quot;Greater Ajax&quot;, or &quot;Ajax the Great&quot;, which distinguishes him from Ajax, son of Oileus, also known as Ajax the Lesser.

==Family==
Ajax is the son of Telamon. Telamon was the son of Aeacus and grandson of Zeus, and his first wife Periboea. By Telamon, he is also the elder half-brother of Teucer. Through his uncle Peleus (Telamon&#x27;s brother), he is the cousin of Achilles.

The etymology of his given name is uncertain. By folk etymology, his name was said to come from the root of &quot;aiazō&quot; which means &quot;to lament&quot;, translating to &quot;one who laments; mourner&quot;. Hesiod provided a different folk etymology in a story in his &quot;The Great Eoiae&quot;, where Ajax receives his name when Heracles prays to Zeus that a son might be born to Telemon and Eriboea: Zeus sends an eagle (&quot;aetos&quot; αετός) as a sign, and Heracles then bids the parents call their son Ajax after the eagle.

Many illustrious Athenians, including Cimon, Miltiades, Alcibiades and the historian Thucydides, traced their descent from Ajax. On an Etruscan tomb dedicated to Racvi Satlnei in Bologna (5th century BC), there is an inscription that says &quot;aivastelmunsl&quot;, which means &quot;[family] of Telamonian Ajax&quot;.

== Mythology ==

=== Description ===
In the account of Dares the Phrygian, Ajax was illustrated as &quot;. . .powerful. His voice was clear, his hair black and curly. He was perfectly single-minded and unrelenting in the onslaught of battle.&quot; Meanwhile, In Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; he is described as of great stature, colossal frame, and strongest of all the Achaeans. Known as the &quot;bulwark of the Achaeans&quot;, he was trained by the centaur Chiron (who had trained Ajax&#x27;s father Telamon and Achilles&#x27; father Peleus and later died of an accidental wound inflicted by a poison arrow belonging to Heracles). He was described as fearless, strong, and powerful but also with a very high level of combat intelligence. Ajax commands his army wielding a huge shield made of seven cowhides with a layer of bronze. Most notably, Ajax is not wounded in any of the battles described in the &quot;Iliad&quot;, and he is the only principal character on either side who does not receive substantial assistance from any of the gods (except for Agamemnon) who take part in the battles, although, in book 13, Poseidon strikes Ajax with his staff, renewing his strength. Unlike Diomedes, Agamemnon, and Achilles, Ajax appears as a mainly defensive warrior, instrumental in the defense of the Greek camp and ships and that of Patroclus&#x27; body. When the Trojans are on the offensive, he is often seen covering the retreat of the Achaeans. Significantly, while one of the deadliest heroes in the whole poem, Ajax has no aristeia depicting him on the offensive.

===Trojan War===
In the &quot;Iliad&quot;, Ajax is notable for his abundant strength and courage, seen particularly in two fights with Hector. In Book 7, Ajax is chosen by lot to meet Hector in a duel which lasts most of a whole day. Ajax at first gets the better of the encounter, wounding Hector with his spear and knocking him down with a large stone, but Hector battles on until the heralds, acting at the direction of Zeus, call a draw, with the two combatants exchanging gifts, Ajax giving Hector his &quot;war-belt, glistening purple&quot; and Hector giving Ajax his &quot;silver-studded sword&quot;

The second fight between Ajax and Hector occurs when the latter breaks into the Mycenaean camp, and battles with the Greeks among the ships. In Book 14, Ajax throws a giant rock at Hector which almost kills him. In Book 15, Hector is restored to his strength by Apollo and returns to attack the ships. Ajax, wielding an enormous spear as a weapon and leaping from ship to ship, holds off the Trojan armies virtually single-handedly. In Book 16, Hector and Ajax duel once again. Hector then disarms Ajax (although Ajax is not hurt) and Ajax is forced to retreat, seeing that Zeus is clearly favoring Hector. Hector and the Trojans succeed in burning one Greek ship, the culmination of an assault that almost finishes the war. Ajax is responsible for the death of many Trojan lords, including Phorcys.

Ajax often fought in tandem with his brother Teucer, known for his skill with the bow. Ajax would wield his magnificent shield, as Teucer stood behind picking off enemy Trojans.

Achilles was absent during these encounters because of his feud with Agamemnon. In Book 9, Agamemnon and the other Mycenaean chiefs send Ajax, Odysseus and Phoenix to the tent of Achilles in an attempt to reconcile with the great warrior and induce him to return to the fight. Although Ajax speaks earnestly and is well received, he does not succeed in convincing Achilles.

When Patroclus is killed, Hector tries to steal his body. Ajax, assisted by Menelaus, succeeds in fighting off the Trojans and taking the body back with his chariot; however, the Trojans have already stripped Patroclus of Achilles&#x27; armor. Ajax&#x27;s prayer to Zeus to remove the fog that has descended on the battle to allow them to fight or die in the light of day has become proverbial. According to Hyginus, in total, Ajax killed 28 people at Troy.
====Death====
As the &quot;Iliad&quot; comes to a close, Ajax and the majority of other Greek warriors are alive and well. When Achilles dies, killed by Paris (with help from Apollo), Ajax and Odysseus are the heroes who fight against the Trojans to get the body and bury it with his companion, Patroclus. Ajax, with his great shield and spear, manages to recover the body and carry it to the ships, while Odysseus fights off the Trojans. After the burial, each claims Achilles&#x27; magical armor, which had been forged on Mount Olympus by the smith-god Hephaestus, for himself as recognition for his heroic efforts. A competition is held to determine who deserves the armor. Ajax argues that because of his strength and the fighting he has done for the Greeks, including saving the ships from Hector, and driving him off with a massive rock, he deserves this magical protection. However, Odysseus proves to be more eloquent, and with the aid of Athena, the council gives him the armor. Ajax, distraught by this result and &quot;conquered by his own grief&quot;, plunges his sword into his own chest, killing himself. In the Little Iliad, Ajax goes mad with rage at Odysseus&#x27; victory and slaughters the cattle of the Greeks. After returning to his senses, he kills himself out of shame. 
The Belvedere Torso, a marble torso now in the Vatican Museums, is considered to depict Ajax &quot;in the act of contemplating his suicide&quot;.

In Sophocles&#x27; play &quot;Ajax&quot;, a famous retelling of Ajax&#x27;s demise, after the armor is awarded to Odysseus, Ajax feels so insulted that he wants to kill Agamemnon and Menelaus. Athena intervenes and clouds his mind and vision, and he goes to a flock of sheep and slaughters them, imagining they are the Achaean leaders, including Odysseus and Agamemnon. When he comes to his senses, covered in blood, he realizes that what he has done has diminished his honor, and decides that he prefers to kill himself rather than live in shame. He does so with the same sword which Hector gave him when they exchanged presents. From his blood sprang a red flower, as at the death of Hyacinthus, which bore on its leaves the initial letters of his name &quot;Ai&quot;, also expressive of lament. His ashes were deposited in a golden urn on the Rhoetean promontory at the entrance of the Hellespont.

Ajax&#x27;s half-brother Teucer stood trial before his father for not bringing Ajax&#x27;s body or famous weapons back. Teucer was acquitted for responsibility but found guilty of negligence. He was disowned by his father and was not allowed to return to his home, the island of Salamis off the coast of Athens.

Homer is somewhat vague about the precise manner of Ajax&#x27;s death but does ascribe it to his loss in the dispute over Achilles&#x27; armor; when Odysseus visits Hades, he begs the soul of Ajax to speak to him, but Ajax, still resentful over the old quarrel, refuses and descends silently back into Erebus.

Like Achilles, he is represented (although not by Homer) as living after his death on the island of Leuke at the mouth of the Danube. Ajax, who in the post-Homeric legend is described as the grandson of Aeacus and the great-grandson of Zeus, was the tutelary hero of the island of Salamis, where he had a temple and an image, and where a festival called &quot;Aianteia&quot; was celebrated in his honour. At this festival a couch was set up, on which the panoply of the hero was placed, a practice which recalls the Roman Lectisternium. The identification of Ajax with the family of Aeacus was chiefly a matter which concerned the Athenians, after Salamis had come into their possession, on which occasion Solon is said to have inserted a line in the &quot;Iliad&quot; (2.557–558), for the purpose of supporting the Athenian claim to the island. Ajax then became an Attic hero; he was worshipped at Athens, where he had a statue in the market-place, and the tribe &quot;Aiantis&quot; was named after him. Pausanias also relates that a gigantic skeleton, its kneecap in diameter, appeared on the beach near Sigeion, on the Trojan coast; these bones were identified as those of Ajax.

===Gallery===
==Palace==
In 2001, Yannis Lolos began excavating a Mycenaean palace near the village of Kanakia on the island of Salamis which he theorized to be the home of the mythological Aiacid dynasty. The multi-story structure covers and had perhaps 30 rooms. The palace appears to have been abandoned at the height of the Mycenaean civilization, roughly the same time the Trojan War may have occurred.

==See also==
* Corpus vasorum antiquorum
* Troy VII

==Notes==
==References==
== Bibliography ==
* Homer. &quot;Iliad&quot;, 7.181–312.
* Homer, &quot;Odyssey&quot; 11.543–67.
* &quot;Bibliotheca&quot;. &quot;Epitome&quot; III, 11-V, 7.
*Graves, Robert, &quot;The Greek Myths&quot;, Harmondsworth, London, England, Penguin Books, 1960. 
*Graves, Robert, &quot;The Greek Myths: The Complete and Definitive Edition.&quot; Penguin Books Limited. 2017. 
* Ovid. &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; 12.620–13.398.
* Friedrich Schiller, &quot;Das Siegerfest&quot;.
* Pindar&#x27;s &quot;Nemeans&quot;, 7, 8; &quot;Isthmian 4&quot;
*Tzetzes, John, &quot;Allegories of the Iliad&quot; translated by Goldwyn, Adam J. and Kokkini, Dimitra. Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library, Harvard University Press, 2015. 

==External links==

* A translation of the debate and Ajax&#x27;s death. http://classics.mit.edu/Ovid/metam.13.thirteenth.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="0" end="4" title="Ajax the Great" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="11" end="15" title="Ajax the Great" label="Aias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839562" start="42" end="49" title="Archaic Greek alphabets" label="archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="57" end="75" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878906" start="76" end="80" title="Greek hero cult" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q331327" start="98" end="105" title="Telamon" label="Telamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12773649" start="110" end="118" title="Periboea" label="Periboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q878184" start="144" end="150" title="Teucer" label="Teucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="186" end="196" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="270" end="275" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="289" end="294" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q578605" start="312" end="322" title="Epic Cycle" label="Epic Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="336" end="346" title="epic poems" label="epic poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="357" end="367" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="390" end="398" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="462" end="477" title="Ajax the Great" label="Telamonian Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="490" end="498" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="546" end="558" title="Ajax the Great" label="Greater Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="575" end="589" title="Ajax the Great" label="Ajax the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q975447" start="639" end="645" title="Oileus" label="Oileus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242319" start="661" end="676" title="Ajax the Lesser" label="Ajax the Lesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q331327" start="709" end="716" title="Telamon" label="Telamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q206187" start="741" end="747" title="Aeacus" label="Aeacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="764" end="768" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31184" start="832" end="844" title="Sibling" label="half-brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q878184" start="848" end="854" title="Teucer" label="Teucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="874" end="880" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="927" end="935" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="942" end="951" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="987" end="1001" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1152" end="1158" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233074" start="1219" end="1234" title="Catalogue of Women" label="The Great Eoiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1495" end="1504" title="Athenians" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q218102" start="1516" end="1521" title="Cimon" label="Cimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q210350" start="1523" end="1532" title="Miltiades the Younger" label="Miltiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="1534" end="1544" title="Alcibiades" label="Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="1563" end="1573" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1657" end="1664" title="Bologna#Antiquity and Middle Ages" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="1853" end="1871" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares the Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="2169" end="2177" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="2213" end="2221" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="2251" end="2258" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q183417" start="2259" end="2265" title="Chiron" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="2336" end="2342" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="2422" end="2430" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="2919" end="2927" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208256" start="2987" end="2995" title="Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="2997" end="3006" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="3012" end="3020" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="3134" end="3143" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q665892" start="3330" end="3338" title="aristeia" label="aristeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="3507" end="3513" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q696819" start="3759" end="3765" title="herald" label="herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="4242" end="4248" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="4372" end="4378" title="Troy" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381470" start="4771" end="4778" title="Phorcys (Trojan War)" label="Phorcys"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="5103" end="5111" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061747" start="5116" end="5123" title="Phoenix (son of Amyntor)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="5411" end="5419" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="5743" end="5750" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="5946" end="5951" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="6317" end="6330" title="Mount Olympus" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44384" start="6348" end="6358" title="Hephaestus" label="Hephaestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087365" start="6919" end="6931" title="Little Iliad" label="Little Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551806" start="7091" end="7106" title="Belvedere Torso" label="Belvedere Torso"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997444" start="7218" end="7225" title="Suicide of Ajax vase" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="7237" end="7246" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q412341" start="7264" end="7268" title="Ajax (Sophocles)" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q207273" start="7920" end="7930" title="Hyacinth (mythology)" label="Hyacinthus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8080" end="8088" title="Rhoiteion#The Tomb of Ajax" label="Rhoetean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="8123" end="8133" title="Hellespont" label="Hellespont"/>
<link wikidata="Q202422" start="8415" end="8422" title="Salamis Island" label="Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="8614" end="8619" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q131122" start="8751" end="8757" title="Erebus" label="Erebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155868" start="8850" end="8865" title="Snake Island (Black Sea)" label="island of Leuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="8886" end="8892" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681141" start="9010" end="9023" title="tutelary deity" label="tutelary hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255603" start="9215" end="9222" title="panoply" label="panoply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799199" start="9282" end="9295" title="Lectisternium" label="Lectisternium"/>
<link wikidata="Q133337" start="9466" end="9471" title="Solon" label="Solon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="9517" end="9522" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="9626" end="9631" title="Attica" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583181" start="9866" end="9873" title="Sigeion" label="Sigeion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="10009" end="10018" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q202422" start="10071" end="10078" title="Salamis Island" label="Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135179" start="10367" end="10392" title="Corpus vasorum antiquorum" label="Corpus vasorum antiquorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q941943" start="10395" end="10403" title="Troy VII" label="Troy VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="10536" end="10547" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="10590" end="10604" title="Robert Graves" label="Graves, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="10853" end="10871" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="10903" end="10909" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="10968" end="10981" title="John Tzetzes" label="Tzetzes, John"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1569" wikidata="Q169527" url="?curid=1569" title="Ajax">
<text>Ajax may refer to:
==Greek mythology and tragedy==
* Ajax the Great, a Greek mythological hero, son of King Telamon and Periboea
* Ajax the Lesser, a Greek mythological hero, son of Oileus, the king of Locris
* &quot;Ajax&quot; (play), by the ancient Greek tragedian Sophocles, about Ajax the Great

==Arts and entertainment==
===Fictional characters===
* Ajax Duckman, in the animated television series &quot;Duckman&quot;
* Marvel Comics:
** Ajax the Greater, another name for Ajak, one of the Eternals from Marvel Comics
** Ajax the Lesser, another name for Arex, one of the Eternals from Marvel Comics
** Ajax, a member of the Pantheon appearing in Marvel Comics
** Ajax (Francis Freeman), a fictional supervillain first appearing in &quot;Deadpool&quot; #14
* Martian Manhunter, a DC Comics superhero called Ajax in Brazil and Portugal
* Ajax, a &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops 4&quot; operative
* Ajax, the real name of Tartaglia, a character in 2020 video game &quot;Genshin Impact&quot;

===Music===
* A-Jax (band), a South Korean boy band
* Ajax (band), an electronic music band from New York City
* &quot;Ajax&quot; (opera), by the French composer Toussaint Bertin de la Doué
* DJ Ajax (1971–2013; born Adrian Thomas), an Australian electro mashup DJ
* Lisa Ajax (born 1998), Swedish singer
* &quot;Ajax&quot; (song), a song by Tante Leen, 1969
* Ajax Records, a former North American record company

===Other arts and entertainment===
* &quot;Ajax&quot; (painting), a painting by John Steuart Curry
* Ajax (Disney), a fictional company (the Disney equivalent of Looney Tunes&#x27; Acme Corporation)
* A-Jax (video game), a 1987 Konami arcade game

==Computing==
* Ajax (floppy disk controller), a floppy disk controller fitted to the Atari STE
* Ajax (programming), Asynchronous JavaScript and XML, a method used in web application development, and a software framework for it

==Places==
===Canada===
* Ajax (federal electoral district), in the Durham Region of Ontario
* Ajax (provincial electoral district), in Ontario
* Ajax, Ontario, a town in the Greater Toronto Area

===United States===
* Ajax, Louisiana, an unincorporated community
* Ajax, Missouri, a ghost town
* Ajax Peak, a summit near Telluride, Colorado
* Ajax, South Dakota, an unincorporated community
* Ajax, Utah, a ghost town
* Ajax, Virginia, an unincorporated community
* Ajax, West Virginia, an unincorporated community
* Aspen Mountain (Colorado), also known as Ajax Mountain

===Elsewhere===
* Mount Ajax, part of the Admiralty Mountains, Victoria Land, Antarctic
* 1404 Ajax, an asteroid

==People==
* Ajax (missionary), Arian missionary who converted the Suevi to Christianity ( 466)
* Ajax, pen name of Sidney William Jackson (1873–1946), Australian naturalist and ornithologist
* Ajax, nickname of Heinrich Bleichrodt (1909–1977), German World War II U-boat commander

==Sport==

===Association football (soccer)===
* AFC Ajax, a football club in Amsterdam, Netherlands
* Ajax Cape Town F.C., a South African football club
* Ajax Futebol Clube, a Brazilian football club
* Ajax de Ouenzé, a Congolese football club
* FC Ajax Lasnamäe, an Estonian football club
* Ajax Orlando Prospects, American soccer team from Orlando, Florida, a.k.a. Ajax America
* Ajax America Women, American women&#x27;s soccer team from California
* Aias Salamina F.C., a football club in Salamina, Greece
* Ajax Sportsman Combinatie, a cricket and football club in Leiden, Netherlands
* Rabat Ajax F.C., a Maltese football club
* Unión Ájax, a football club in Trujillo, Honduras
* V.V. Ajax, a Surinamese football club

===Other sports===
*Aias Evosmou, a Greek sports club
* Ajax Kenitra, a Moroccan futsal (indoor football) club
* Ajax København, a Danish handball team
* Ajax (horse) (born 1901), a French Champion racehorse
* Ajax II (born 1934), an Australian Champion racehorse

==Military==
* , several ships of the Royal Navy
* , several ships of the US Navy
* General Dynamics Ajax, a family of armoured fighting vehicles for the British Army
* Operation Ajax, the 1953 Iranian coup d&#x27;état

==Transport==
* Ajax (1906 automobile), a Swiss automobile
* Ajax (1913 automobile), a French automobile by the American Briscoe brothers
* Ajax (1914 automobile), an American automobile by Ajax Motors Co. of Seattle, Washington
* Ajax (1921 automobile), an American prototype that was not produced
* Ajax (Nash Motors), an automobile brand of Nash Motors, 1925–1926
* &quot;Ajax&quot; (locomotive), several train locomotives
* Ajax (motorcycle), manufactured in England between 1923 and 1924
* &quot;Ajax&quot; (crane barge), a floating crane used to install the Panama Canal locks
* &quot;Ajax&quot; (ship), various ships
* Ajax GO Station, a train and bus station in Ajax, Ontario, Canada
* Ajax Motors Co., an American carmaker, manufacturer of the Ajax (1914 automobile)

==Other uses==
* Ajax (cleaning product), a brand of household cleaning products
* AFC Ajax N.V., a sports company associated with AFC Ajax
* Kanichee Mine, Temagami, Ontario, also known as Ajax Mine
* Ajax High School, a public high school in Ajax, Ontario, Canada
* AJAX furnace, a type of open hearth furnace

==See also==
* 
* Nike Ajax, the world&#x27;s first operational surface-to-air missile
* Ayaks (Ajax), a hypersonic waverider aircraft program started in the Soviet Union
* Ayaks (disambiguation) ()</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169527" start="0" end="4" title="Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="53" end="67" title="Ajax the Great" label="Ajax the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q242319" start="131" end="146" title="Ajax the Lesser" label="Ajax the Lesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q412341" start="211" end="234" title="Ajax (play)" label="&amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q974077" start="356" end="368" title="Ajax Duckman" label="Ajax Duckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q554230" start="479" end="483" title="Ajak" label="Ajak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570292" start="567" end="605" title="List of Eternals" label="one of the Eternals from Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131746" start="631" end="639" title="Pantheon (Marvel Comics)" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699585" start="670" end="692" title="Ajax (Francis Freeman)" label="Ajax (Francis Freeman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q675179" start="765" end="782" title="Martian Manhunter" label="Martian Manhunter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="857" end="882" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops 4" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="972" end="986" title="List of Genshin Impact characters#Tartaglia" label="Genshin Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q492271" start="1008" end="1020" title="A-Jax (band)" label="A-Jax (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699584" start="1048" end="1059" title="Ajax (band)" label="Ajax (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15475621" start="1107" end="1131" title="Ajax (opera)" label="&amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699583" start="1186" end="1193" title="DJ Ajax" label="DJ Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q18606122" start="1261" end="1270" title="Lisa Ajax" label="Lisa Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003728" start="1301" end="1324" title="Ajax (song)" label="&amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699611" start="1355" end="1367" title="Ajax Records" label="Ajax Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q20539178" start="1446" end="1473" title="Ajax (painting)" label="&amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (painting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260246" start="1510" end="1523" title="Ajax (Disney)" label="Ajax (Disney)"/>
<link wikidata="Q88273" start="1610" end="1628" title="A-Jax (video game)" label="A-Jax (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987782" start="1673" end="1702" title="Ajax (floppy disk controller)" label="Ajax (floppy disk controller)"/>
<link wikidata="Q134471" start="1755" end="1773" title="Ajax (programming)" label="Ajax (programming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960528" start="1913" end="1946" title="Ajax (federal electoral district)" label="Ajax (federal electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797139" start="1982" end="2018" title="Ajax (provincial electoral district)" label="Ajax (provincial electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q386567" start="2033" end="2046" title="Ajax, Ontario" label="Ajax, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699573" start="2106" end="2121" title="Ajax, Louisiana" label="Ajax, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28103438" start="2153" end="2167" title="Ajax, Missouri" label="Ajax, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q30126810" start="2184" end="2193" title="Ajax Peak" label="Ajax Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600046" start="2231" end="2249" title="Ajax, South Dakota" label="Ajax, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699574" start="2281" end="2291" title="Ajax, Utah" label="Ajax, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699575" start="2308" end="2322" title="Ajax, Virginia" label="Ajax, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699576" start="2354" end="2373" title="Ajax, West Virginia" label="Ajax, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807832" start="2405" end="2430" title="Aspen Mountain (Colorado)" label="Aspen Mountain (Colorado)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950606" start="2479" end="2489" title="Mount Ajax" label="Mount Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q138810" start="2551" end="2560" title="1404 Ajax" label="1404 Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q412247" start="2588" end="2605" title="Ajax (missionary)" label="Ajax (missionary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439842" start="2691" end="2713" title="Sidney William Jackson" label="Sidney William Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q66927" start="2787" end="2806" title="Heinrich Bleichrodt" label="Heinrich Bleichrodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="2907" end="2915" title="AFC Ajax" label="AFC Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q412502" start="2961" end="2980" title="Ajax Cape Town F.C." label="Ajax Cape Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4699604" start="3014" end="3032" title="Ajax Futebol Clube" label="Ajax Futebol Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699618" start="3062" end="3076" title="Ajax de Ouenzé" label="Ajax de Ouenzé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386840" start="3106" end="3122" title="FC Ajax Lasnamäe" label="FC Ajax Lasnamäe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699613" start="3152" end="3174" title="Ajax Orlando Prospects" label="Ajax Orlando Prospects"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154053" start="3242" end="3260" title="Ajax America Women" label="Ajax America Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292661" start="3314" end="3332" title="Aias Salamina F.C." label="Aias Salamina F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4699621" start="3372" end="3397" title="Ajax Sportsman Combinatie" label="Ajax Sportsman Combinatie"/>
<link wikidata="Q749073" start="3452" end="3467" title="Rabat Ajax F.C." label="Rabat Ajax F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7896926" start="3495" end="3505" title="Unión Ájax" label="Unión Ájax"/>
<link wikidata="Q24264004" start="3547" end="3556" title="V.V. Ajax" label="V.V. Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12872758" start="3606" end="3618" title="Aias Evosmou" label="Aias Evosmou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699607" start="3642" end="3654" title="Ajax Kenitra" label="Ajax Kenitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083947" start="3699" end="3713" title="Ajax København" label="Ajax København"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699589" start="3740" end="3752" title="Ajax (horse)" label="Ajax (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699606" start="3796" end="3803" title="Ajax II" label="Ajax II"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356235" start="3935" end="3956" title="General Dynamics Ajax" label="General Dynamics Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q593774" start="4020" end="4034" title="Operation Ajax" label="Operation Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607280" start="4087" end="4109" title="Ajax (1906 automobile)" label="Ajax (1906 automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q412352" start="4132" end="4154" title="Ajax (1913 automobile)" label="Ajax (1913 automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699580" start="4211" end="4233" title="Ajax (1914 automobile)" label="Ajax (1914 automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699581" start="4302" end="4324" title="Ajax (1921 automobile)" label="Ajax (1921 automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q412232" start="4372" end="4390" title="Ajax (Nash Motors)" label="Ajax (Nash Motors)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26806571" start="4440" end="4469" title="Ajax (locomotive)" label="&amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (locomotive)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918042" start="4499" end="4516" title="Ajax (motorcycle)" label="Ajax (motorcycle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457849" start="4566" end="4596" title="Ajax (crane barge)" label="&amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (crane barge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121249" start="4656" end="4679" title="Ajax (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699602" start="4697" end="4712" title="Ajax GO Station" label="Ajax GO Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699580" start="4765" end="4780" title="Ajax Motors Co." label="Ajax Motors Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q2828856" start="4865" end="4888" title="Ajax (cleaning product)" label="Ajax (cleaning product)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221214" start="4931" end="4944" title="AFC Ajax N.V." label="AFC Ajax N.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q6363113" start="4990" end="5003" title="Kanichee Mine" label="Kanichee Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699603" start="5050" end="5066" title="Ajax High School" label="Ajax High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985448" start="5116" end="5128" title="AJAX furnace" label="AJAX furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990116" start="5179" end="5188" title="Nike Ajax" label="Nike Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830859" start="5250" end="5255" title="Ayaks" label="Ayaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131432295" start="5334" end="5356" title="Ayaks (disambiguation)" label="Ayaks (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1570" wikidata="Q102371" url="?curid=1570" title="Alaric I">
<text>Alaric I (; , &#x27;ruler of all&#x27;; – 411 AD) was the first king of the Visigoths, from 395 to 410. He rose to leadership of the Goths who came to occupy Moesia—territory acquired a couple of decades earlier by a combined force of Goths and Alans after the Battle of Adrianople.

Alaric began his career under the Gothic soldier Gainas and later joined the Roman army. Once an ally of Rome under the Roman emperor Theodosius, Alaric helped defeat the Franks and other allies of a would-be Roman usurper. Despite losing many thousands of his men, he received little recognition from Rome and left the Roman army disappointed. After the death of Theodosius and the disintegration of the Roman armies in 395, he is described as king of the Visigoths. As the leader of the only effective field force remaining in the Balkans, he sought Roman legitimacy, never quite achieving a position acceptable to himself or to the Roman authorities.

He operated mainly against the successive Western Roman regimes, and marched into Italy, where he died. He is responsible for the sack of Rome in 410; one of several notable events in the Western Roman Empire&#x27;s eventual decline.

==Early life, federate status in the Balkans==

According to Jordanes, a 6th-century Roman bureaucrat of Gothic origin—who later turned his hand to history—Alaric was born on Peuce Island at the mouth of the Danube Delta in present-day Romania and belonged to the noble Balti dynasty of the Thervingian Goths. There is no way to verify this claim. Historian Douglas Boin does not make such an unequivocal assessment about Alaric&#x27;s Gothic heritage and instead claims he came from either the Thervingi or the Greuthung tribes. When the Goths suffered setbacks against the Huns, they made a mass migration across the Danube, and fought a war with Rome. Alaric was probably a child during this period who grew up along Rome&#x27;s periphery. Alaric&#x27;s upbringing was shaped by living along the border of Roman territory in a region that the Romans viewed as a veritable &quot;backwater&quot;; some four centuries before, the Roman poet Ovid regarded the area along the Danube and Black Sea where Alaric was reared as a land of &quot;barbarians&quot;, among &quot;the most remote in the vast world.&quot;

Alaric&#x27;s childhood in the Balkans, where the Goths had settled by way of an agreement with Theodosius, was spent in the company of veterans who had fought at the Battle of Adrianople in 378, during which they had annihilated much of the Eastern army and killed Emperor Valens. Imperial campaigns against the Visigoths were conducted until a treaty was reached in 382. This treaty was the first &quot;foedus&quot; on imperial Roman soil and required these semi-autonomous Germanic tribes—among whom Alaric was raised—to supply troops for the Roman army in exchange for peace, control of cultivatable land, and freedom from Roman direct administrative control. Correspondingly, there was hardly a region along the Roman frontier during Alaric&#x27;s day without Gothic slaves and servants of one form or another. For several subsequent decades, many Goths like Alaric were &quot;called up into regular units of the eastern field army&quot; while others served as auxiliaries in campaigns led by Theodosius against the western usurpers Magnus Maximus and Eugenius.

==Rebellion against Rome, rise to Gothic leadership==
A new phase in the relationship between the Goths and the empire resulted from the treaty signed in 382, as more and more Goths attained aristocratic rank from their service in the imperial army. Alaric began his military career under the Gothic soldier Gainas, and later joined the Roman army. He first appeared as leader of a mixed band of Goths and allied peoples, who invaded Thrace in 391 but were stopped by the Roman general Stilicho. While the Roman poet Claudian belittled Alaric as &quot;a little-known menace&quot; terrorizing southern Thrace during this time, Alaric&#x27;s abilities and forces were formidable enough to prevent the Roman emperor Theodosius from crossing the Hebrus River.

==Service under Theodosius I==
By 392, Alaric had entered Roman military service, which coincided with a reduction of hostilities between Goths and Romans. In 394, he led a Gothic force that helped Emperor Theodosius defeat the Frankish usurper Arbogast—fighting at the behest of Eugenius—at the Battle of Frigidus. Despite sacrificing around 10,000 of his men, who had been victims of Theodosius&#x27; callous tactical decision to overwhelm the enemies&#x27; front lines using Gothic &quot;foederati&quot;, Alaric received little recognition from the emperor. Alaric was among the few who survived the protracted and bloody affair. Many Romans considered it their &quot;gain&quot; and a victory that so many Goths had died during the Battle of Frigidus River. Alaric biographer Douglas Boin (2020) posited that seeing ten thousand of his (Alaric&#x27;s) dead kinsmen likely elicited questions about what kind of ruler Theodosius actually had been and whether remaining in direct Roman service was best for men like him. Refused the reward he expected, which included a promotion to the position of magister militum and command of regular Roman units, Alaric mutinied and began to march against Constantinople.

On 17 January 395, Theodosius died of an illness, leaving his two young and incapable sons Arcadius and Honorius in Stilicho&#x27;s guardianship. Modern writers regard Alaric as king of the Visigoths from 395. According to historian Peter Heather, it is not entirely clear in the sources if Alaric rose to prominence at the time the Goths revolted following Theodosius&#x27;s death, or if he had already risen within his tribe as early as the war against Eugenius. Whatever the circumstances, Jordanes recorded that the new king persuaded his people to &quot;seek a kingdom by their own exertions rather than serve others in idleness.&quot;

==Semi-independent action in Eastern Roman interests, Eastern Roman recognition==
Whether or not Alaric was a member of an ancient Germanic royal clan—as claimed by Jordanes and debated by historians—is less important than his emergence as a leader, the first of his kind since Fritigern. Theodosius&#x27;s death left the Roman field armies collapsing and the Empire divided again between his two sons, one taking the eastern and the other the western portion of the Empire. Stilicho made himself master of the West and attempted to establish control in the East as well, and led an army into Greece. Alaric rebelled again. Historian Roger Collins points out that while the rivalries created by the two halves of the Empire vying for power worked to Alaric&#x27;s advantage and that of his people, simply being called to authority by the Gothic people did not solve the practicalities of their needs for survival. He needed Roman authority in order to be supplied by Roman cities.

Alaric took his Gothic army on what Stilicho&#x27;s propagandist Claudian described as a &quot;pillaging campaign&quot; that began first in the East. Historian Thomas Burns&#x27;s interpretation is that Alaric and his men were recruited by Rufinus&#x27;s Eastern regime in Constantinople, and sent to Thessaly to stave off Stilicho&#x27;s threat. No battle took place. Alaric&#x27;s forces made their way down to Athens and along the coast, where he sought to force a new peace upon the Romans. In 396, he marched through Thermopylae and sacked Athens, where archaeological evidence shows widespread damage to the city. Stilicho&#x27;s propagandist Claudian accuses his troops of plundering for the next year or so as far south as the mountainous Peloponnese peninsula, and reports that only Stilicho&#x27;s surprise attack with his western field army (having sailed from Italy) stemmed the plundering as he pushed Alaric&#x27;s forces north into Epirus. Zosimus adds that Stilicho&#x27;s troops destroyed and pillaged too, and let Alaric&#x27;s men escape with their plunder.

Stilicho was forced to send some of his Eastern forces home. They went to Constantinople under the command of one Gainas, a Goth with a large Gothic following. On arrival, Gainas murdered Rufinus, and was appointed magister militum for Thrace by Eutropius, the new supreme minister and the only eunuch consul of Rome, who, Zosimus claims, controlled Arcadius &quot;as if he were a sheep&quot;. A poem by Synesius advises Arcadius to display manliness and remove a &quot;skin-clad savage&quot; (probably referring to Alaric) from the councils of power and his barbarians from the Roman army. We do not know if Arcadius ever became aware of this advice, but it had no recorded effect.

Stilicho obtained a few more troops from the German frontier and continued to campaign indecisively against the Eastern empire; again he was opposed by Alaric and his men. During the next year, 397, Eutropius personally led his troops to victory over some Huns who were marauding in Asia Minor. With his position thus strengthened he declared Stilicho a public enemy, and he established Alaric as &quot;magister militum per Illyricum&quot; Alaric thus acquired entitlement to gold and grain for his followers and negotiations were underway for a more permanent settlement. Stilicho&#x27;s supporters in Milan were outraged at this seeming betrayal; meanwhile, Eutropius was celebrated in 398 by a parade through Constantinople for having achieved victory over the &quot;wolves of the North&quot;. Alaric&#x27;s people were relatively quiet for the next couple of years. In 399, Eutropius fell from power. The new Eastern regime now felt that they could dispense with Alaric&#x27;s services and they nominally transferred Alaric&#x27;s province to the West. This administrative change removed Alaric&#x27;s Roman rank and his entitlement to legal provisioning for his men, leaving his army—the only significant force in the ravaged Balkans—as a problem for Stilicho.

==In search of Western Roman recognition; invading Italy==
=== First invasion of Italy ( 401–403) ===

According to historian Michael Kulikowski, sometime in the spring of 402 Alaric decided to invade Italy, but no sources from antiquity indicate to what purpose. Burns suggests that Alaric was probably desperate for provisions. Using Claudian as his source, historian Guy Halsall reports that Alaric&#x27;s attack actually began in late 401, but since Stilicho was in &quot;Raetia&quot; &quot;dealing with frontier issues&quot; the two did not first confront one another in Italy until 402. Alaric&#x27;s entry into Italy followed the route identified in the poetry of Claudian, as he crossed the peninsula&#x27;s Alpine frontier near the city of Aquileia. For a period of six to nine months, there were reports of Gothic attacks along the northern Italian roads, where Alaric was spotted by Roman townspeople. Along the route on &quot;Via Postumia&quot;, Alaric first encountered Stilicho.

Two battles were fought. The first was at Pollentia on Easter Sunday, where Stilicho (according to Claudian) achieved an impressive victory, taking Alaric&#x27;s wife and children prisoner, and more significantly, seizing much of the treasure that Alaric had amassed over the previous five years&#x27; worth of plundering. Pursuing the retreating forces of Alaric, Stilicho offered to return the prisoners but was refused. The second battle was at Verona, where Alaric was defeated for a second time. Stilicho once again offered Alaric a truce and allowed him to withdraw from Italy. Kulikowski explains this confusing, if not outright conciliatory behavior by stating, &quot;given Stilicho&#x27;s cold war with Constantinople, it would have been foolish to destroy as biddable and violent a potential weapon as Alaric might well prove to be&quot;. Halsall&#x27;s observations are similar, as he contends that the Roman general&#x27;s &quot;decision to permit Alaric&#x27;s withdrawal into &quot;Pannonia&quot; makes sense if we see Alaric&#x27;s force entering Stilicho&#x27;s service, and Stilicho&#x27;s victory being less total than Claudian would have us believe&quot;. Perhaps more revealing is a report from the Greek historian Zosimus—writing a half a century later—that indicates an agreement was concluded between Stilicho and Alaric in 405, which suggests Alaric being in &quot;western service at that point&quot;, likely stemming from arrangements made back in 402. Between 404 and 405, Alaric remained in one of the four &quot;Pannonian&quot; provinces, from where he could &quot;play East off against West while potentially threatening both&quot;.

Historian A.D. Lee observes, &quot;Alaric&#x27;s return to the north-west Balkans brought only temporary respite to Italy, for in 405 another substantial body of Goths and other barbarians, this time from outside the empire, crossed the middle Danube and advanced into northern Italy, where they plundered the countryside and besieged cities and towns&quot; under their leader Radagaisus. Although the imperial government was struggling to muster enough troops to contain these barbarian invasions, Stilicho managed to stifle the threat posed by the tribes under Radagaisus, when the latter split his forces into three separate groups. Stilicho cornered Radagaisus near Florence and starved the invaders into submission. Meanwhile, Alaric—bestowed with codicils of &quot;magister militum&quot; by Stilicho and now supplied by the West—awaited for one side or the other to incite him to action as Stilicho faced further difficulties from more barbarians.

===Second invasion of Italy, agreement with Western Roman regime===

Sometime in 406 and into 407, more large groups of barbarians, consisting primarily of Vandals, Sueves and Alans, crossed the Rhine into Gaul while about the same time a rebellion occurred in Britain. Under a common soldier named Constantine it spread to Gaul. Burdened by so many enemies, Stilicho&#x27;s position was strained. During this crisis in 407, Alaric again marched on Italy, taking a position in Noricum (modern Austria), where he demanded a sum of 4,000 pounds of gold to buy off another full-scale invasion. The Roman Senate loathed the idea of supporting Alaric; Zosimus observed that one senator famously declaimed &quot;Non est ista pax, sed pactio servitutis&quot; (&quot;This is not peace, but a pact of servitude&quot;). Stilicho paid Alaric the 4,000 pounds of gold nevertheless. This agreement, sensible in view of the military situation, fatally weakened Stilicho&#x27;s standing at Honorius&#x27;s court. Twice Stilicho had allowed Alaric to escape his grasp, and Radagaisus had advanced all the way to the outskirts of Florence.

===Renewed hostilities after Western Roman coup===
In the East, Arcadius died on 1 May 408 and was replaced by his son Theodosius II; Stilicho seems to have planned to march to Constantinople, and to install there a regime loyal to himself. He may also have intended to give Alaric a senior official position and send him against the rebels in Gaul. Before Stilicho could do so, while he was away at Ticinum at the head of a small detachment, a bloody coup against his supporters took place at Honorius&#x27;s court. It was led by Honorius&#x27;s minister, Olympius. Stilicho&#x27;s small escort of Goths and Huns was commanded by a Goth, Sarus, whose Gothic troops massacred the Hun contingent in their sleep, and then withdrew towards the cities in which their own families were billeted. Stilicho ordered that Sarus&#x27;s Goths should not be admitted, but, now without an army, he was forced to flee for sanctuary. Agents of Olympius promised Stilicho his life, but instead betrayed and killed him.

Alaric was again declared an enemy of the emperor. Olympius&#x27;s men then massacred the families of the federate troops (as presumed supporters of Stilicho, although they had probably rebelled against him), and the troops defected &quot;en masse&quot; to Alaric. Many thousands of barbarian auxiliaries, along with their wives and children, joined Alaric in Noricum. The conspirators seem to have let their main army disintegrate and had no policy except hunting down supporters of Stilicho. Italy was left without effective indigenous defence forces thereafter.

As a declared &#x27;enemy of the emperor&#x27;, Alaric was denied the legitimacy that he needed to collect taxes and hold cities without large garrisons, which he could not afford to detach. He again offered to move his men, this time to Pannonia, in exchange for a modest sum of money and the modest title of Comes, but he was refused because Olympius&#x27;s regime regarded him as a supporter of Stilicho.

===First siege of Rome, agreed ransom===
When Alaric was rebuffed, he led his force of around 30,000 men—many newly enlisted and understandably motivated—on a march toward Rome to avenge their murdered families. He moved across the Julian Alps into Italy, probably using the route and supplies arranged for him by Stilicho, bypassing the imperial court in Ravenna which was protected by widespread marshland and had a port, and in September 408 he menaced the city of Rome, imposing a strict blockade. No blood was shed this time; Alaric relied on hunger as his most powerful weapon. When the ambassadors of the Senate, entreating for peace, tried to intimidate him with hints of what the despairing citizens might accomplish, he laughed and gave his celebrated answer: &quot;The thicker the hay, the easier mowed!&quot; After much bargaining, the famine-stricken citizens agreed to pay a ransom of 5,000 pounds of gold, 30,000 pounds of silver, 4,000 silken tunics, 3,000 hides dyed scarlet, and 3,000 pounds of pepper. Alaric also recruited some 40,000 freed Gothic slaves. Thus ended Alaric&#x27;s first siege of Rome. 
===Failed agreement with the Western Romans, Alaric sets up his own emperor===
After having provisionally agreed to the terms offered by Alaric for lifting the blockade, Honorius recanted; historian A.D. Lee highlights that one of the points of contention for the emperor was Alaric&#x27;s expectation of being named head of the Roman Army, a post Honorius was not prepared to grant to Alaric. When this title was not bestowed onto Alaric, he proceeded to not only &quot;besiege Rome again in late 409, but also to proclaim a leading senator, Priscus Attalus, as a rival emperor, from whom Alaric then received the appointment&quot; he desired. Meanwhile, Alaric&#x27;s newly appointed &quot;emperor&quot; Attalus, who seems not to have understood the limits of his power or his dependence on Alaric, failed to take Alaric&#x27;s advice and lost the grain supply in Africa to a pro-Honorian &quot;comes Africae&quot;, Heraclian. Then, sometime in 409, Attalus—accompanied by Alaric—marched on Ravenna and after receiving unprecedented terms and concessions from the legitimate emperor Honorius, refused him and instead demanded that Honorius be deposed and exiled. Fearing for his safety, Honorius made preparations to flee to Ravenna when ships carrying 4,000 troops arrived from Constantinople, restoring his resolve. Now that Honorius no longer felt the need to negotiate, Alaric (regretting his choice of puppet emperor) deposed Attalus, perhaps to re-open negotiations with Ravenna.

===Sack of Rome===

Negotiations with Honorius might have succeeded had it not been for another intervention by Sarus, of the Amal family, and therefore a hereditary enemy of Alaric and his house. He attacked Alaric&#x27;s men. Why Sarus, who had been in imperial service for years under Stilicho, acted at this moment remains a mystery, but Alaric interpreted this attack as directed by Ravenna and as bad faith from Honorius. No longer would negotiations suffice for Alaric, as his patience had reached its end, which led him to march on Rome for a third and final time.

On 24 August 410, Alaric and his forces began the sack of Rome, an assault that lasted three days. After hearing reports that Alaric had entered the city—possibly aided by Gothic slaves inside—there were reports that Emperor Honorius (safe in Ravenna) broke into &quot;wailing and lamentation&quot; but quickly calmed once &quot;it was explained to him that it was the city of Rome that had met its end and not &#x27;Roma&#x27;,&quot; his pet fowl. Writing from Bethlehem, St. Jerome (Letter 127.12, to the lady &quot;Principia&quot;) lamented: &quot;A dreadful rumour reached us from the West. We heard that Rome was besieged, that the citizens were buying their safety with gold … The city which had taken the whole world was itself taken; nay, it fell by famine before it fell to the sword.&quot; Nonetheless, Christian writers also cited how Alaric ordered that anyone who took shelter in a Church was to be spared. When liturgical vessels were taken from the basilica of St. Peter and Alaric heard of this, he ordered them returned and had them ceremoniously restored in the church. If the account from the historian Orosius can be seen as accurate, there was even a celebratory recognition of Christian unity by way of a procession through the streets where Romans and barbarians alike &quot;raised a hymn to God in public&quot;; historian Edward James concludes that such stories are likely more political rhetoric of the &quot;noble&quot; barbarians than a reflection of historical reality.

According to historian Patrick Geary, Roman booty was not the focus of Alaric&#x27;s sack of Rome; he came for needed food supplies. Historian Stephen Mitchell asserts that Alaric&#x27;s followers seemed incapable of feeding themselves and relied on provisions &quot;supplied by the Roman authorities.&quot; Whatever Alaric&#x27;s intentions were cannot be known entirely, but Kulikowski certainly sees the issue of available treasure in a different light, writing that &quot;For three days, Alaric&#x27;s Goths sacked the city, stripping it of the wealth of centuries.&quot; The barbarian invaders were not gentle in their treatment of property as substantial damage was still evident into the sixth century. Certainly the Roman world was shaken by the fall of the Eternal City to barbarian invaders, but as Guy Halsall emphasizes, &quot;Rome&#x27;s fall had less striking political effects. Alaric, unable to treat with Honorius, remained in the political cold.&quot; Kulikowski sees the situation similarly, commenting:

But for Alaric the sack of Rome was an admission of defeat, a catastrophic failure. Everything he had hoped for, had fought for over the course of a decade and a half, went up in flames with the capital of the ancient world. Imperial office, a legitimate place for himself and his followers inside the empire, these were now forever out of reach. He might seize what he wanted, as he had seized Rome, but he would never be given it by right. The sack of Rome solved nothing and when the looting was over Alaric&#x27;s men still had nowhere to live and fewer future prospects than ever before.

Still, the importance of Alaric cannot be &quot;overestimated&quot; according to Halsall, since he had desired and obtained a Roman command even though he was a barbarian; his real misfortune was being caught between the rivalry of the Eastern and Western empires and their court intrigue. According to historian Peter Brown, when one compares Alaric with other barbarians, &quot;he was almost an Elder Statesman.&quot; Nonetheless, Alaric&#x27;s respect for Roman institutions as a former servant to its highest office did not stay his hand in violently sacking the city that had for centuries exemplified Roman glory, leaving behind physical destruction and social disruption, while Alaric took clerics and even the emperor&#x27;s sister, Galla Placidia, with him when he left the city. Many other Italian communities beyond the city of Rome itself fell victim to the forces under Alaric, as Procopius (&quot;Wars&quot; 3.2.11–13) writing in the sixth century later relates:

For they destroyed all the cities which they captured, especially those south of the Ionian Gulf, so completely that nothing has been left to my time to know them by, unless, indeed, it might be one tower or gate or some such thing which chanced to remain. And they killed all the people, as many as came in their way, both old and young alike, sparing neither women nor children. Wherefore even up to the present time Italy is sparsely populated.

Whether Alaric&#x27;s forces wrought the level of destruction described by Procopius or not cannot be known, but evidence speaks to a significant population decrease, as the number of people on the food dole dropped from 800,000 in 408 to 500,000 by 419. Rome&#x27;s fall to the barbarians was as much a psychological blow to the empire as anything else, since some Romans citizens saw the collapse as resulting from the conversion to Christianity, while Christian theologians like St.Augustine (writing &quot;City of God&quot;) responded in turn. Lamenting Rome&#x27;s capture, famed Christian theologian Jerome, wrote how &quot;day and night&quot; he could not stop thinking of everyone&#x27;s safety, and moreover, how Alaric had extinguished &quot;the bright light of all the world.&quot; Some contemporary Christian observers even saw Alaric—a professed Christian—as God&#x27;s wrath upon a still pagan Rome.

===Move to southern Italy, death from disease===

Not only had Rome&#x27;s sack been a significant blow to the Roman people&#x27;s morale, they had also endured two years&#x27; worth of trauma brought about by fear, hunger (due to blockades), and illness. However, the Goths were not long in the city of Rome, as only three days after the sack, Alaric marched his men south to Campania, from where he intended to sail to Sicily—probably to obtain grain and other supplies—when a storm destroyed his fleet. During the early months of 411, while on his northward return journey through Italy, Alaric took ill and died at Consentia in Bruttium. His cause of death was likely fever, and his body was, according to legend, buried under the riverbed of the Busento in accordance with the pagan practices of the Visigothic people. The stream was temporarily turned aside from its course while the grave was dug, wherein the Gothic chief and some of his most precious spoils were interred. When the work was finished, the river was turned back into its usual channel and the captives by whose hands the labour had been accomplished were put to death that none might learn their secret.

==Aftermath==
Alaric was succeeded in the command of the Gothic army by his brother-in-law, Ataulf, who married Honorius&#x27; sister Galla Placidia three years later. 
Following in the wake of Alaric&#x27;s leadership, which Kulikowski claims, had given his people &quot;a sense of community that survived his own death...Alaric&#x27;s Goths remained together inside the empire, going on to settle in Gaul. There, in the province of Aquitaine, they put down roots and created the first autonomous barbarian kingdom inside the frontiers of the Roman empire.&quot; The Goths were able to settle in Aquitaine only after Honorius granted the once Roman province to them, sometime in 418 or 419. Not long after Alaric&#x27;s exploits in Rome and Athaulf&#x27;s settlement in Aquitaine, there is a &quot;rapid emergence of Germanic barbarian groups in the West&quot; who begin controlling many western provinces. These barbarian peoples included: Vandals in Spain and Africa, Visigoths in Spain and Aquitaine, Burgundians along the upper Rhine and southern Gaul, and Franks on the lower Rhine and in northern and central Gaul.

==Sources==
The chief authorities on the career of Alaric are: the historian Orosius and the poet Claudian, both contemporary, neither disinterested; Zosimus, a historian who lived probably about half a century after Alaric&#x27;s death; and Jordanes, a Goth who wrote the history of his nation in 551, basing his work on Cassiodorus&#x27;s &quot;Gothic History&quot;.

==See also==
* Alaric II
* Gaiseric
* Odoacer

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
===Online===

==External links==
* Alaric I
* Edward Gibbon, &quot;History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire&quot;, Chapter 30 and Chapter 31.
* The Legend of Alaric&#x27;s Burial
* For a modern-day novel exploring the historical sources relating to Alaric&#x27;s riverbed grave, see Alaric&#x27;s Gold by Robert Fortune </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102371" start="0" end="8" title="Alaric I" label="Alaric I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253359" start="64" end="68" title="Germanic kingship" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="76" end="85" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="158" end="164" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="245" end="250" title="Alans" label="Alans"/>
<link wikidata="Q192473" start="261" end="281" title="Battle of Adrianople" label="Battle of Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q531278" start="333" end="339" title="Gainas" label="Gainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="404" end="417" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="418" end="428" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="455" end="461" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931781" start="729" end="733" title="reiks" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="741" end="750" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463845" start="1069" end="1081" title="sack of Rome (410)" label="sack of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="1127" end="1171" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire&amp;#x27;s eventual decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="1235" end="1243" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="1279" end="1285" title="Goths" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621695" start="1349" end="1361" title="Peuce Island" label="Peuce Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q184429" start="1382" end="1394" title="Danube Delta" label="Danube Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="1410" end="1417" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q789757" start="1444" end="1457" title="Balti dynasty" label="Balti dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290818" start="1465" end="1474" title="Thervingi" label="Thervingi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="1749" end="1753" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1793" end="1799" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366196" start="1814" end="1827" title="Gothic War (376–382)" label="war with Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="2115" end="2119" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172471" start="2558" end="2564" title="Valens" label="Valens"/>
<link wikidata="Q211396" start="3322" end="3336" title="Magnus Maximus" label="Magnus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313058" start="3341" end="3349" title="Eugenius" label="Eugenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="3450" end="3455" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q531278" start="3660" end="3666" title="Gainas" label="Gainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="3786" end="3792" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q203636" start="3838" end="3846" title="Stilicho" label="Stilicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="3869" end="3877" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="4065" end="4075" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q204347" start="4094" end="4106" title="Maritsa" label="Hebrus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="4337" end="4345" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q380065" start="4354" end="4362" title="Arbogast (magister militum)" label="Arbogast"/>
<link wikidata="Q836944" start="4405" end="4423" title="Battle of Frigidus" label="Battle of Frigidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129224" start="4600" end="4609" title="foederati" label="foederati"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="5208" end="5224" title="magister militum" label="magister militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q159369" start="5412" end="5420" title="Arcadius" label="Arcadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="5425" end="5433" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="5511" end="5520" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358340" start="5554" end="5567" title="Peter Heather" label="Peter Heather"/>
<link wikidata="Q159712" start="6241" end="6250" title="Fritigern" label="Fritigern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6381" end="6388" title="Byzantine Empire" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="6407" end="6422" title="Western Roman Empire" label="western portion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203636" start="6438" end="6446" title="Stilicho" label="Stilicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489169" start="6597" end="6610" title="Roger Collins" label="Roger Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="7010" end="7018" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q63247050" start="7105" end="7117" title="Thomas S. Burns" label="Thomas Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q363482" start="7185" end="7192" title="Rufinus (consul)" label="Rufinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="7246" end="7254" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q194450" start="7467" end="7478" title="Thermopylae" label="Thermopylae"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="7594" end="7602" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="7692" end="7703" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q531278" start="8137" end="8143" title="Gainas" label="Gainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="8238" end="8254" title="magister militum" label="magister militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q658289" start="8259" end="8265" title="Diocese of Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q371999" start="8269" end="8278" title="Eutropius (consul 399)" label="Eutropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q357027" start="8427" end="8435" title="Synesius" label="Synesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="8963" end="8967" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576102" start="9131" end="9140" title="Diocese of Illyricum" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898171" start="10100" end="10118" title="Michael Kulikowski" label="Michael Kulikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q18686556" start="10344" end="10355" title="Guy Halsall" label="Guy Halsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q53216" start="10723" end="10731" title="Aquileia" label="Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q786254" start="10912" end="10924" title="Via Postumia" label="Via Postumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q762717" start="11010" end="11019" title="Battle of Pollentia" label="Pollentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890225" start="11416" end="11422" title="Battle of Verona (402)" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="12203" end="12210" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q452209" start="13008" end="13018" title="Radagaisus" label="Radagaisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="13742" end="13749" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="13751" end="13757" title="Sueves" label="Sueves"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="13762" end="13767" title="Alans" label="Alans"/>
<link wikidata="Q209793" start="13885" end="13896" title="Constantine III (Western Roman emperor)" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="14233" end="14240" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="14699" end="14707" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="14829" end="14842" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q28215083" start="15110" end="15117" title="Ticinum" label="Ticinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351722" start="15267" end="15275" title="Olympius" label="Olympius"/>
<link wikidata="Q920502" start="15349" end="15354" title="Sarus the Goth" label="Sarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="16518" end="16526" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071047" start="16590" end="16595" title="Comes" label="Comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="17045" end="17052" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="17301" end="17307" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="17750" end="17756" title="Goths" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q316286" start="18355" end="18370" title="Priscus Attalus" label="Priscus Attalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q920502" start="19413" end="19418" title="Sarus (Goth)" label="Sarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q452762" start="19427" end="19438" title="Amal dynasty" label="Amal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q311456" start="20997" end="21004" title="Paulus Orosius" label="Orosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343720" start="21221" end="21233" title="Edward James (historian)" label="Edward James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057694" start="21398" end="21411" title="Patrick Geary" label="Patrick Geary"/>
<link wikidata="Q962080" start="23306" end="23317" title="Peter Brown (historian)" label="Peter Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q237907" start="23734" end="23748" title="Galla Placidia" label="Galla Placidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495053" start="24618" end="24627" title="Grain supply to the city of Rome" label="food dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="25026" end="25032" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q852279" start="26086" end="26093" title="Busento" label="Busento"/>
<link wikidata="Q159716" start="26606" end="26612" title="Ataulf" label="Ataulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q237907" start="26648" end="26662" title="Galla Placidia" label="Galla Placidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="26948" end="26957" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="27456" end="27463" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="27485" end="27494" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="27519" end="27530" title="Burgundians" label="Burgundians"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="27576" end="27582" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q311456" start="27714" end="27721" title="Orosius" label="Orosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="27735" end="27743" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="27787" end="27794" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="27879" end="27887" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192365" start="27959" end="27970" title="Cassiodorus" label="Cassiodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q110884" start="28022" end="28031" title="Alaric II" label="Alaric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152127" start="28034" end="28042" title="Gaiseric" label="Gaiseric"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="28045" end="28052" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="28208" end="28221" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313030" start="28229" end="28280" title="History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" label="History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1571" wikidata="Q110884" url="?curid=1571" title="Alaric II">
<text>Alaric II (, , &#x27;ruler of all&#x27;; ; – August 507) was the King of the Visigoths from 484 until 507. He succeeded his father Euric as King of the Visigoths in Toulouse on 28 December 484; he was the great-grandson of the more famous Alaric I, who sacked Rome in 410. He established his capital at Aire-sur-l&#x27;Adour (&quot;Vicus Julii&quot;) in Aquitaine. His dominions included not only the majority of Hispania (excluding its northwestern corner) but also Gallia Aquitania and the greater part of an as-yet undivided Gallia Narbonensis.

==Reign==
Herwig Wolfram opens his chapter on the eighth Visigothic king, &quot;Alaric&#x27;s reign gets no full treatment in the sources, and the little they do contain is overshadowed by his death in the Battle of Vouillé and the downfall of the Toulosan kingdom.&quot; One example is Isidore of Seville&#x27;s account of Alaric&#x27;s reign: consisting of a single paragraph, it is primarily about Alaric&#x27;s death in that battle.

The earliest-documented event in Alaric&#x27;s reign concerned providing refuge to Syagrius, the former ruler of the Domain of Soissons (in what is now northwestern France) who had been defeated by Clovis I, King of the Franks. According to Gregory of Tours&#x27; account, Alaric was intimidated by Clovis into surrendering Syagrius to Clovis; Gregory then adds that &quot;the Goths are a timorous race.&quot; The Franks then imprisoned Syagrius, and once his control over Syagrius&#x27; former kingdom was secure, Clovis had him beheaded. However, Wolfram points out that at the time &quot;Clovis got no farther than the Seine; only after several more years did the Franks succeed in occupying the rest of the Gallo-Roman buffer state north of the Loire.&quot; Any threat of war Clovis could make would only be effective if they were neighbors; &quot;it is nowhere written that Syagrius was handed over in 486 or 487.&quot;

Despite Frankish advances in the years that followed, Alaric was not afraid to take the military initiative when it presented itself. In 490, Alaric assisted his fellow Gothic king, Theodoric the Great, in his conquest of Italy by dispatching an army to raise Odoacer&#x27;s siege of Pavia, where Theodoric had been trapped. Then when the Franks attacked the Burgundians in the decade after 500, Alaric assisted the ruling house, and according to Wolfram the victorious Burgundian king Gundobad ceded Avignon to Alaric. By 502 Clovis and Alaric met on an island in the Loire near Amboise for face-to-face talks, which led to a peace treaty.

In 506, the Visigoths captured the city of Dertosa in the Ebro valley. There they captured the Roman usurper Peter and had him executed.

==Battle of Vouillé and aftermath==
After a few years, however, Clovis violated the peace treaty negotiated in 502. Despite the diplomatic intervention of Theodoric, king of the Ostrogoths and father-in-law of Alaric, Clovis led his followers into Visigothic territory. Alaric was forced by his magnates to meet Clovis in the Battle of Vouillé (summer 507) near Poitiers; there the Goths were defeated and Alaric slain, according to Gregory of Tours, by Clovis himself.

The most serious consequence of this battle was not the loss of their possessions in Gaul to the Franks; with Ostrogothic help, much of the Gallic territory was recovered, Wolfram notes, perhaps as far as Toulouse. Nor was it the loss of the royal treasury at Toulouse, which Gregory of Tours writes Clovis took into his possession. As Peter Heather notes, the Visigothic kingdom was thrown into disarray &quot;by the death of its king in battle&quot;. Alaric&#x27;s heirs were his eldest son, the illegitimate Gesalec, and his younger son, the legitimate Amalaric, who was still a child. Gesalec proved incompetent, and in 511 King Theodoric assumed the throne of the kingdom ostensibly on behalf of Amalaric—Heather uses the word &quot;hijacked&quot; to describe his action. Although Amalaric eventually became king in his own right, the political continuity of the Visigothic kingdom was broken; &quot;Amalaric&#x27;s succession was the result of new power structures, not old ones,&quot; as Heather describes it. With Amalaric&#x27;s death in 531, the Visigothic kingdom entered an extended period of unrest which lasted until Leovigild assumed the throne in 569.

== Ability as king ==
In religion Alaric was an Arian, like all the early Visigothic nobles, but he greatly mitigated the persecution policy of his father Euric toward the Catholics and authorized them to hold in 506 the council of Agde. He was on uneasy terms with the Catholic bishops of Arelate (modern Arles) as epitomized in the career of the Gallo-Roman Caesarius, bishop of Arles, who was appointed bishop in 503. Caesarius was suspected of conspiring with the Burgundians, whose king had married the sister of Clovis, to assist the Burgundians capture Arles. Alaric exiled him for a year to Bordeaux in Aquitania, then allowed him to return unharmed when the crisis had passed.

Alaric displayed similar wisdom in political affairs by appointing a commission headed by the referendary Anianus to prepare an abstract of the Roman laws and imperial decrees, which would form the authoritative code for his Roman subjects. This is generally known as the &quot;Breviarium Alaricianum&quot; or Breviary of Alaric.

==Legacy==
The (Alaric&#x27;s Mountain), near Carcassonne, is named after the Visigoth king. Local rumour has it that he left a vast treasure buried in the caves beneath the mountain.

The (Alaric&#x27;s Canal) in the Hautes-Pyrénées department is named after him. 

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Edward Gibbon, &quot;History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire&quot; Chapter 38
* Alarico II , &quot;Diccionario biográfico español&quot;, Luis Agustín García Moreno, Real Academia de la Historia.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q110884" start="0" end="9" title="Alaric II" label="Alaric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="65" end="86" title="King of the Visigoths" label="King of the Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q217620" start="131" end="136" title="Euric" label="Euric"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="152" end="161" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="165" end="173" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q102371" start="239" end="247" title="Alaric I" label="Alaric I"/>
<link wikidata="Q408608" start="303" end="324" title="Aire-sur-l&amp;#x27;Adour" label="Aire-sur-l&amp;#x27;Adour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="354" end="363" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="413" end="421" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q715376" start="467" end="483" title="Gallia Aquitania" label="Gallia Aquitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="528" end="546" title="Gallia Narbonensis" label="Gallia Narbonensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78997" start="559" end="573" title="Herwig Wolfram" label="Herwig Wolfram"/>
<link wikidata="Q851504" start="755" end="772" title="Battle of Vouillé" label="Battle of Vouillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q166876" start="836" end="854" title="Isidore of Seville" label="Isidore of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q207499" start="1070" end="1078" title="Syagrius" label="Syagrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247508" start="1104" end="1122" title="Domain of Soissons" label="Domain of Soissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1152" end="1158" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="1185" end="1193" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="1207" end="1213" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q67841" start="1228" end="1244" title="Gregory of Tours" label="Gregory of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="1736" end="1741" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="2095" end="2114" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2135" end="2140" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="2173" end="2180" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="2197" end="2202" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="2272" end="2283" title="Burgundians" label="Burgundians"/>
<link wikidata="Q364245" start="2399" end="2407" title="Gundobad" label="Gundobad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="2414" end="2421" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q205116" start="2493" end="2500" title="Amboise" label="Amboise"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="2567" end="2576" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812" start="2598" end="2605" title="Dertosa" label="Dertosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="2613" end="2617" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11161560" start="2650" end="2663" title="Roman usurper" label="Roman usurper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758183" start="2664" end="2669" title="Peter (usurper)" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="2848" end="2857" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="2871" end="2881" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q851504" start="3019" end="3036" title="Battle of Vouillé" label="Battle of Vouillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="3249" end="3253" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="3369" end="3377" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358340" start="3500" end="3513" title="Peter Heather" label="Peter Heather"/>
<link wikidata="Q313192" start="3675" end="3682" title="Gesalec" label="Gesalec"/>
<link wikidata="Q452673" start="3720" end="3728" title="Amalaric" label="Amalaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q313065" start="4295" end="4304" title="Leovigild" label="Leovigild"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="4381" end="4386" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4505" end="4514" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q191396" start="4565" end="4569" title="Agde" label="Agde"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="4639" end="4644" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q304832" start="4693" end="4719" title="Caesarius of Arles" label="Caesarius, bishop of Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="4801" end="4812" title="Burgundians" label="Burgundians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="4932" end="4940" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q465288" start="5114" end="5125" title="referendary" label="referendary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11905633" start="5126" end="5133" title="Anianus (referendary)" label="Anianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q943866" start="5330" end="5348" title="Breviary of Alaric" label="Breviary of Alaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="5397" end="5408" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="5555" end="5560" title="Canal" label="Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12700" start="5569" end="5584" title="Hautes-Pyrénées" label="Hautes-Pyrénées"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="5585" end="5595" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705771" start="5768" end="5798" title="Diccionario biográfico español" label="Diccionario biográfico español"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5806" end="5832" title="Luis Agustín García Moreno" label="Luis Agustín García Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720582" start="5834" end="5862" title="Real Academia de la Historia" label="Real Academia de la Historia"/>
</links>
</doc>
