<doc id="2154" wikidata="Q49085" url="?curid=2154" title="African Americans">
<text>African Americans, also known as Black Americans and formerly also called Afro-Americans, are an American racial or ethnic group consisting of Americans with partial or total ancestry from any of the Black racial groups of Africa. African Americans constitute the second largest ethno-racial group in the US after White Americans. The term &quot;African American&quot; generally denotes descendants of Africans enslaved in the United States.

Most African Americans are descendants of enslaved people within the boundaries of the present United States. While some Black immigrants or their children may also come to identify as African American, the majority of first-generation immigrants do not, preferring to identify with their nation of origin. Most African Americans are of West African and coastal Central African ancestry, with varying amounts of Western European and Native American ancestry.

African-American history began in the 16th century, with Africans from West Africa and coastal Central Africa being sold to European slave traders and transported across the Atlantic to the Western Hemisphere. After arriving in the Americas, they were sold as slaves to European colonists and put to work on plantations, particularly in the southern colonies. A few were able to achieve freedom through manumission or escape, and founded independent communities before and during the American Revolution. After the United States was founded in 1783, most Black people continued to be enslaved, primarily concentrated in the American South, with four million enslaved people only liberated during and at the end of the Civil War in 1865. During Reconstruction, they gained citizenship and adult-males the right to vote; however, due to the widespread policy and ideology of White supremacy, they were largely treated as second-class citizens and found themselves soon disenfranchised in the South. These circumstances changed due to participation in the military conflicts of the United States, substantial migration out of the South, the elimination of legal racial segregation, and the civil rights movement which sought political and social freedom. However, racism against African Americans and racial socioeconomic disparity remain a problem into the 21st century.

In the 20th and 21st centuries, immigration has played an increasingly significant role in the African-American community. As of 2022, 10% of Black Americans were immigrants, and 20% were either immigrants or the children of immigrants. In 2008, Barack Obama became the first, and so far only, African American to be elected president of the United States. Kamala Harris became the nation&#x27;s first African-American vice president in 2020.

African-American culture has had a significant influence on worldwide culture, making numerous contributions to visual arts, literature, the English language, philosophy, politics, cuisine, sports, and music. The African-American contribution to popular music is so profound that most American music, including jazz, gospel, blues, rock and roll, funk, disco, house, techno, hip hop, R&amp;B, trap, and soul, has its origins either partially or entirely in the African-American community.

==History==
===Colonial era===

The vast majority of those who were enslaved and transported in the transatlantic slave trade were people from several Central and West Africa ethnic groups. They had been captured directly by the slave traders in coastal raids, or sold by other West Africans, or by half-European &quot;merchant princes&quot; to European slave traders, who brought them to the Americas.

The first African slaves in what is now the United States arrived in the early 16th century. Africans were Among Juan Ponce de León&#x27;s 1513 voyage that landed in what would become Spanish Florida, and enslaved Africans arrived around the same time to Spanish Puerto Rico.

Africans also came via Santo Domingo in the Caribbean to the San Miguel de Gualdape colony (most likely located in the Winyah Bay area of present-day South Carolina), founded by Spanish explorer Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón in 1526. The ill-fated colony was almost immediately disrupted by a fight over leadership, during which the slaves revolted and fled the colony to seek refuge among local Native Americans. De Ayllón and many of the colonists died shortly afterward, due to an epidemic and the colony was abandoned. The settlers and the slaves who had not escaped returned to the Island of Hispaniola, whence they had come.

The enslaved explorer Esteban arrived in Florida with the Narváez expedition in 1528, a journey that first landed in Santo Domingo and later traveled into Spanish Texas and the Southwest before ending in Mexico.

The marriage between Luisa de Abrego, a free Black domestic servant from Seville, and Miguel Rodríguez, a White Segovian conquistador in 1565 in St. Augustine (Spanish Florida), is the first known and recorded Christian marriage anywhere in what is now the continental United States.
The first recorded Africans in English America (including most of the future United States) were &quot;20 and odd negroes&quot; who arrived in Jamestown, Virginia via Cape Comfort in August 1619 as indentured servants. As many Virginian settlers began to die from harsh conditions, more and more Africans were brought to work as laborers.

An indentured servant (who could be White or Black) would work for several years (usually four to seven) without wages. The status of indentured servants in early Virginia and Maryland was similar to slavery. Servants could be bought, sold, or leased, and they could be physically beaten for disobedience or attempting to running away. Unlike slaves, they were freed after their term of service expired or if their freedom was purchased. Their children did not inherit their status, and on their release from contract they received &quot;a year&#x27;s provision of corn, double apparel, tools necessary&quot;, and a small cash payment called &quot;freedom dues&quot;. Africans could legally raise crops and cattle to purchase their freedom. They raised families, married other Africans and sometimes intermarried with Native Americans or European settlers.

By the 1640s and 1650s, several African families owned farms around Jamestown, and some became wealthy by colonial standards and purchased indentured servants of their own. In 1640, the Virginia General Court recorded the earliest documentation of lifetime slavery when they sentenced John Punch, a Negro, to lifetime servitude under his master Hugh Gwyn, for running away.

In Spanish Florida, some Spanish married or had unions with Pensacola, Creek or African women, both enslaved and free, and their descendants created a mixed-race population of mestizos and mulattos. The Spanish encouraged slaves from the colony of Georgia to come to Florida as a refuge, promising freedom in exchange for conversion to Catholicism. King Charles II issued a royal proclamation freeing all slaves who fled to Spanish Florida and accepted conversion and baptism. Most went to the area around St. Augustine, but escaped slaves also reached Pensacola. St. Augustine had mustered an all-Black militia unit defending Spanish Florida as early as 1683.
One of the Dutch African arrivals, Anthony Johnson, would later own one of the first Black &quot;slaves&quot;, John Casor, resulting from the court ruling of a civil case.

The popular conception of a race-based slave system did not fully develop until the 18th century. The Dutch West India Company introduced slavery in 1625 with the importation of eleven Black slaves into New Amsterdam (present-day New York City). All the colony&#x27;s slaves, however, were freed upon its surrender to the English.

Massachusetts was the first English colony to legally recognize slavery in 1641. In 1662, Virginia passed a law that children of enslaved women would take the status of the mother, rather than that of the father, as was the case under common law. This legal principle was called &quot;partus sequitur ventrum&quot;.

By an act of 1699, Virginia ordered the deportation of all free Blacks, effectively defining all people of African descent who remained in the colony as slaves. In 1670, the colonial assembly passed a law prohibiting free and baptized Blacks (and Native Americans) from purchasing Christians (in this act meaning White Europeans) but allowing them to buy people &quot;of their owne nation&quot;.
In Spanish Louisiana, although there was no movement toward abolition of the African slave trade, Spanish rule introduced a new law called &quot;coartación&quot;, which allowed slaves to buy their freedom, and that of others. Although some did not have the money to do so, government measures on slavery enabled the existence of many free Blacks. This caused problems to the Spaniards with the French creoles (French who had settled in New France) who had also populated Spanish Louisiana. The French creoles cited that measure as one of the system&#x27;s worst elements.

First established in South Carolina in 1704, groups of armed White men—slave patrols—were formed to monitor enslaved Black people. Their function was to police slaves, especially fugitives. Slave owners feared that slaves might organize revolts or slave rebellions, so state militias were formed to provide a military command structure and discipline within the slave patrols. These patrols were used to detect, encounter, and crush any organized slave meetings which might lead to revolts or rebellions.

The earliest African American congregations and churches were organized before 1800 in both northern and southern cities following the Great Awakening. By 1775, Africans made up 20% of the population in the American colonies, which made them the second largest ethnic group after English Americans.

===From the American Revolution to the Civil War===
During the 1770s, Africans, both enslaved and free, helped rebellious American colonists secure their independence by defeating the British in the American Revolutionary War. Blacks played a role in both sides in the American Revolution. Activists in the Patriot cause included James Armistead, Prince Whipple, and Oliver Cromwell. Around 15,000 Black Loyalists left with the British after the war, most of them ending up as free Black people in England or its colonies, such as the Black Nova Scotians and the Sierra Leone Creole people.

In the Spanish Louisiana, Governor Bernardo de Gálvez organized Spanish free Black men into two militia companies to defend New Orleans during the American Revolution. They fought in the 1779 battle in which Spain captured Baton Rouge from the British. Gálvez also commanded them in campaigns against the British outposts in Mobile, Alabama, and Pensacola, Florida. He recruited slaves for the militia by pledging to free anyone who was seriously wounded and promised to secure a low price for &quot;coartación&quot; (buy their freedom and that of others) for those who received lesser wounds. During the 1790s, Governor Francisco Luis Héctor, baron of Carondelet reinforced local fortifications and recruit even more free Black men for the militia. Carondelet doubled the number of free Black men who served, creating two more militia companies—one made up of Black members and the other of pardo (mixed race). Serving in the militia brought free Black men one step closer to equality with Whites, allowing them, for example, the right to carry arms and boosting their earning power. However, actually these privileges distanced free Black men from enslaved Blacks and encouraged them to identify with Whites.

Slavery had been tacitly enshrined in the US Constitution through provisions such as Article I, Section 2, Clause 3, commonly known as the 3/5 compromise. Due to the restrictions of Section 9, Clause 1, Congress was unable to pass an Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves until 1807. Fugitive slave laws (derived from the Fugitive Slave Clause of the Constitution—Article IV, Section 2, Clause 3) were passed by Congress in both 1793 and 1850, guaranteeing the right of a slaveholder to recover an escaped slave anywhere within the US. Slave owners, who viewed enslaved people as property, ensured that it became a federal crime to aid or assist those who had fled slavery or to interfere with their capture. By that time, slavery, which almost exclusively targeted Black people, had become the most critical and contentious political issue in the Antebellum United States, repeatedly sparking crises and conflicts. Among these were the Missouri Compromise, the Compromise of 1850, the infamous Dred Scott decision, and John Brown&#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry.

Prior to the Civil War, eight serving presidents had owned slaves, a practice that was legally protected under the US Constitution. By 1860, the number of enslaved Black people in the US had grown to between 3.5 and 4.4 million, largely as a result of the Atlantic slave trade. In addition, 488,000–500,000 Black people lived free (with legislated limits) across the country. With legislated limits imposed upon them in addition to &quot;unconquerable prejudice&quot; from Whites according to Henry Clay. In response to these conditions, some free Black people chose to leave the US and emigrate to Liberia in West Africa. Liberia had been established in 1821 as a settlement by the American Colonization Society (ACS), with many abolitionist members of the ACS believing Black Americans would have greater opportunities for freedom and equality in Africa than they would in the US.

Slaves not only represented a significant financial investment for their owners, but they also played a crucial role in producing the country&#x27;s most valuable product and export: cotton. Enslaved people were instrumental in the construction of several prominent structures such as, the United States Capitol, the White House and other Washington, D.C.–based buildings. Similar building projects existed in the slave states.

By 1815, the domestic slave trade had become a significant and major economic activity in the United States, continuing to flourish until the 1860s. Historians estimate that nearly one million individuals were subjected to this forced migration, which was often referred to as a new &quot;Middle Passage&quot;. The historian Ira Berlin described this internal forced migration of enslaved people as the &quot;central event&quot; in the life of a slave during the period between the American Revolution and the Civil War. Berlin emphasized that whether enslaved individuals were directly uprooted or lived in constant fear that they or their families would be involuntarily relocated, &quot;the massive deportation traumatized Black people&quot; throughout the US. As a result of this large-scale forced movement, countless individuals lost their connection to families and clans, and many ethnic Africans lost their knowledge of varying tribal origins in Africa.

The 1863 photograph of Wilson Chinn, a branded slave from Louisiana, along with the famous image of Gordon and his scarred back, served as two of the earliest and most powerful examples of how the newborn medium of photography could be used to visually document and encapsulate the brutality and cruelty of slavery.

Emigration of free Blacks to their continent of origin had been proposed since the Revolutionary war. After Haiti became independent, it tried to recruit African Americans to migrate there after it re-established trade relations with the United States. The Haitian Union was a group formed to promote relations between the countries. After riots against Blacks in Cincinnati, its Black community sponsored founding of the Wilberforce Colony, an initially successful settlement of African American immigrants to Canada. The colony was one of the first such independent political entities. It lasted for a number of decades and provided a destination for about 200 Black families emigrating from a number of locations in the United States.

In 1863, during the American Civil War, President Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation. The proclamation declared that all slaves in Confederate-held territory were free. Advancing Union troops enforced the proclamation, with Texas being the last state to be emancipated, in 1865.
Slavery in a few border states continued until the ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment in December 1865. While the Naturalization Act of 1790 limited US citizenship to Whites only, the 14th Amendment (1868) gave Black people citizenship, and the 15th Amendment (1870) gave Black men the right to vote.

===Reconstruction era and Jim Crow===

African Americans quickly set up congregations for themselves, as well as schools and community/civic associations, to have space away from White control or oversight. While the post-war Reconstruction era was initially a time of progress for African Americans, that period ended in 1876. By the late 1890s, Southern states enacted Jim Crow laws to enforce racial segregation and disenfranchisement. Segregation was now imposed with Jim Crow laws, using signs used to show Blacks where they could legally walk, talk, drink, rest, or eat. For those places that were racially mixed, non-Whites had to wait until all White customers were dealt with. Most African Americans obeyed the Jim Crow laws, to avoid racially motivated violence. To maintain self-esteem and dignity, African Americans such as Anthony Overton and Mary McLeod Bethune continued to build their own schools, churches, banks, social clubs, and other businesses.

In the last decade of the 19th century, racially discriminatory laws and racial violence aimed at African Americans began to mushroom in the United States, a period often referred to as the &quot;nadir of American race relations&quot;. These discriminatory acts included racial segregation—upheld by the United States Supreme Court decision in &quot;Plessy v. Ferguson&quot; in 1896—which was legally mandated by southern states and nationwide at the local level of government, voter suppression or disenfranchisement in the southern states, denial of economic opportunity or resources nationwide, and private acts of violence and mass racial violence aimed at African Americans unhindered or encouraged by government authorities.

===Great migration and civil rights movement===
The desperate conditions of African Americans in the South sparked the Great Migration during the first half of the 20th century which led to a growing African American community in Northern and Western United States. The rapid influx of Blacks disturbed the racial balance within Northern and Western cities, exacerbating hostility between both Blacks and Whites in the two regions. The Red Summer of 1919 was marked by hundreds of deaths and higher casualties across the US as a result of race riots that occurred in more than three dozen cities, such as the Chicago race riot of 1919 and the Omaha race riot of 1919. Overall, Blacks in Northern and Western cities experienced systemic discrimination in a plethora of aspects of life. Within employment, economic opportunities for Blacks were routed to the lowest-status and restrictive in potential mobility. At the 1900 Hampton Negro Conference, Reverend Matthew Anderson said: &quot;...the lines along most of the avenues of wage earning are more rigidly drawn in the North than in the South.&quot; Within the housing market, stronger discriminatory measures were used in correlation to the influx, resulting in a mix of &quot;targeted violence, restrictive covenants, redlining and racial steering&quot;. While many Whites defended their space with violence, intimidation, or legal tactics toward African Americans, many other Whites migrated to more racially homogeneous suburban or exurban regions, a process known as White flight.
Despite discrimination, drawing cards for leaving the hopelessness in the South were the growth of African American institutions and communities in Northern cities. Institutions included Black oriented organizations (e.g., Urban League, NAACP), churches, businesses, and newspapers, as well as successes in the development in African American intellectual culture, music, and popular culture (e.g., Harlem Renaissance, Chicago Black Renaissance). The Cotton Club in Harlem was a Whites-only establishment, with Blacks (such as Duke Ellington) allowed to perform, but to a White audience. Black Americans also found a new ground for political power in Northern cities, without the enforced disabilities of Jim Crow.

By the 1950s, the civil rights movement was gaining momentum. A 1955 lynching that sparked public outrage about injustice was that of Emmett Till, a 14-year-old boy from Chicago. Spending the summer with relatives in Money, Mississippi, Till was killed for allegedly having wolf-whistled at a White woman. Till had been badly beaten, one of his eyes was gouged out, and he was shot in the head. The visceral response to his mother&#x27;s decision to have an open-casket funeral mobilized the Black community throughout the US. Vann R. Newkirk wrote &quot;the trial of his killers became a pageant illuminating the tyranny of White supremacy&quot;. The state of Mississippi tried two defendants, but they were speedily acquitted by an all-White jury. One hundred days after Emmett Till&#x27;s murder, Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat on the bus in Alabama—indeed, Parks told Emmett&#x27;s mother Mamie Till that &quot;the photograph of Emmett&#x27;s disfigured face in the casket was set in her mind when she refused to give up her seat on the Montgomery bus.&quot;
The March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom and the conditions which brought it into being are credited with putting pressure on presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. Johnson put his support behind passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that banned discrimination in public accommodations, employment, and labor unions, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which expanded federal authority over states to ensure Black political participation through protection of voter registration and elections. By 1966, the emergence of the Black Power movement, which lasted from 1966 to 1975, expanded upon the aims of the civil rights movement to include economic and political self-sufficiency, and freedom from White authority.

During the post-war period, many African Americans continued to be economically disadvantaged relative to other Americans. Average Black income stood at 54 percent of that of White workers in 1947, and 55 percent in 1962. In 1959, median family income for Whites was $5,600 (), compared with $2,900 () for non-White families. In 1965, 43 percent of all Black families fell into the poverty bracket, earning under $3,000 () a year. The 1960s saw improvements in the social and economic conditions of many Black Americans.

From 1965 to 1969, Black family income rose from 54 to 60 percent of White family income. In 1968, 23 percent of Black families earned under $3,000 () a year, compared with 41 percent in 1960. In 1965, 19 percent of Black Americans had incomes equal to the national median, a proportion that rose to 27 percent by 1967. In 1960, the median level of education for Blacks had been 10.8 years, and by the late 1960s, the figure rose to 12.2 years, half a year behind the median for Whites.

===Post–civil rights era===

Politically and economically, African Americans have made substantial strides during the post–civil rights era. In 1967, Thurgood Marshall became the first African American Supreme Court Justice. In 1968, Shirley Chisholm became the first Black woman elected to the US Congress. In 1989, Douglas Wilder became the first African American elected governor in US history. Clarence Thomas succeeded Marshall to become the second African American Supreme Court Justice in 1991. In 1992, Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois became the first African American woman elected to the US Senate. There were 8,936 Black officeholders in the United States in 2000, showing a net increase of 7,467 since 1970. In 2001, there were 484 Black mayors.

In 2005, the number of Africans immigrating to the United States, in a single year, surpassed the peak number who were involuntarily brought to the United States during the Atlantic slave trade. On November 4, 2008, Democratic Senator Barack Obama—the son of a White American mother and a Kenyan father—defeated Republican Senator John McCain to become the first African American to be elected president. At least 95 percent of African American voters voted for Obama. He also received overwhelming support from young and educated Whites, a majority of Asians, and Hispanics, picking up a number of new states in the Democratic electoral column. Obama lost the overall White vote, although he won a larger proportion of White votes than any previous non-incumbent Democratic presidential candidate since Jimmy Carter. Obama was reelected for a second and final term, by a similar margin on November 6, 2012. In 2021, Kamala Harris, the daughter of a Jamaican father and Indian mother, became the first woman, the first African American, and the first Asian American to serve as Vice President of the United States. In June 2021, Juneteenth, a day which commemorates the end of slavery in the US, became a federal holiday.

==Demographics==


In 1790, when the first US census was taken, Africans (including slaves and free people) numbered about 760,000—about 19.3% of the population. In 1860, at the start of the Civil War, the African American population had increased to 4.4 million, but the percentage rate dropped to 14% of the overall population of the country. The vast majority were slaves, with only 488,000 counted as &quot;freemen&quot;. By 1900, the Black population had doubled and reached 8.8 million.

In 1910, about 90% of African Americans lived in the South. Large numbers began migrating north looking for better job opportunities and living conditions, and to escape Jim Crow laws and racial violence. The Great Migration, as it was called, spanned the 1890s to the 1970s. From 1916 through the 1960s, more than 6 million Black people moved north. But in the 1970s and 1980s, that trend reversed, with more African Americans moving south to the Sun Belt than leaving it.

The following table of the African American population in the United States over time shows that the African American population, as a percentage of the total population, declined until 1930 and has been rising since then.
By 1990, the African American population reached about 30 million and represented 12% of the US population, roughly the same proportion as in 1900.

At the time of the 2000 US census, 54.8% of African Americans lived in the South. In that year, 17.6% of African Americans lived in the Northeast and 18.7% in the Midwest, while only 8.9% lived in the Western states. The west does have a sizable Black population in certain areas, however. California, the nation&#x27;s most populous state, has the fifth largest African American population, only behind New York, Texas, Georgia, and Florida. According to the 2000 census, approximately 2.05% of African Americans identified as Hispanic or Latino in origin, many of whom may be of Brazilian, Puerto Rican, Dominican, Cuban, Haitian, or other Latin American descent. The only self-reported &quot;ancestral&quot; groups larger than African Americans are the Irish and Germans.
According to the 2010 census, nearly 3% of people who self-identified as Black had recent ancestors who immigrated from another country. Self-reported non-Hispanic Black immigrants from the Caribbean, mostly from Jamaica and Haiti, represented 0.9% of the US population, at 2.6 million. Self-reported Black immigrants from sub-Saharan Africa also represented 0.9%, at about 2.8 million. Additionally, self-identified Black Hispanics represented 0.4% of the United States population, at about 1.2 million people, largely found within the Puerto Rican and Dominican communities. Self-reported Black immigrants hailing from other countries in the Americas, such as Brazil and Canada, as well as several European countries, represented less than 0.1% of the population. Mixed-race Hispanic and non-Hispanic Americans who identified as being part Black, represented 0.9% of the population. Of the 12.6% of United States residents who identified as Black, around 10.3% were &quot;native Black American&quot; or ethnic African Americans, who are direct descendants of West/Central Africans brought to the US as slaves. These individuals make up well over 80% of all Blacks in the country. When including people of mixed-race origin, about 13.5% of the US population self-identified as Black or &quot;mixed with Black&quot;. However, according to the US Census Bureau, evidence from the 2000 census indicates that many African and Caribbean immigrant ethnic groups do not identify as &quot;Black, African Am., or Negro&quot;. Instead, they wrote in their own respective ethnic groups in the &quot;Some Other Race&quot; write-in entry. As a result, the census bureau devised a new, separate &quot;African American&quot; ethnic group category in 2010 for ethnic African Americans. Nigerian Americans and Ethiopian Americans were the most reported sub-Saharan African groups in the United States.

In the 2020 census, the African American population was undercounted at an estimated rate of 3.3%, up from 2.1% in 2010.

===Proportion in each county===
Texas has the largest African American population by state. Followed by Texas is Florida, with 3.8 million, and Georgia, with 3.6 million. Mississippi is the state with the highest African American share of the population at 39%. Followed by Mississippi is Louisiana at 34%, and Georgia at 32%.

===US cities===
After 100 years of African Americans leaving the south in large numbers seeking better opportunities and treatment in the west and north, a movement known as the Great Migration, there is now a reverse trend, called the New Great Migration. As with the earlier Great Migration, the New Great Migration is primarily directed toward cities and large urban areas, such as Charlotte, Houston, Dallas, Fort Worth, Huntsville, Raleigh, Tampa, San Antonio, New Orleans, Memphis, Nashville, Jacksonville, and so forth. A growing percentage of African Americans from the west and north are migrating to the southern region of the US for economic and cultural reasons. The New York City, Chicago, and Los Angeles metropolitan areas have the highest decline in African Americans, while Atlanta, Dallas, and Houston have the highest increase respectively. Several smaller metro areas also saw sizable gains, including San Antonio; Raleigh and Greensboro, N.C.; and Orlando. Despite recent declines, as of 2020, the New York City metropolitan area still has the largest African American metropolitan population in the United States and the only to have over 3 million African Americans.

Among cities of 100,000 or more, South Fulton, Georgia had the highest percentage of Black residents of any large US city in 2020, with 93%. Other large cities with African American majorities include Jackson, Mississippi (80%), Detroit, Michigan (80%), Birmingham, Alabama (70%), Miami Gardens, Florida (67%), Memphis, Tennessee (63%), Montgomery, Alabama (62%), Baltimore, Maryland (60%), Augusta, Georgia (59%), Shreveport, Louisiana (58%), New Orleans, Louisiana (57%), Macon, Georgia (56%), Baton Rouge, Louisiana (55%), Hampton, Virginia (53%), Newark, New Jersey (53%), Mobile, Alabama (53%), Cleveland, Ohio (52%), Brockton, Massachusetts (51%), and Savannah, Georgia (51%).

Claiborne County, Mississippi is the Blackest county in the U.S. at 87% Black in 2020. Cook County, Illinois has the largest Black population in the U.S. with 1,185,601 Black residents in 2020.

The nation&#x27;s most affluent community with an African American majority resides in View Park–Windsor Hills, California, with an annual median household income of $159,618. Other largely affluent and African American communities include Prince George&#x27;s County (namely Mitchellville, Woodmore, Upper Marlboro) and Charles County in Maryland, Dekalb County (namely Stonecrest, Lithonia, Smoke Rise) and South Fulton in Georgia, Charles City County in Virginia, Baldwin Hills in California, Hillcrest and Uniondale in New York, and Cedar Hill, DeSoto, and Missouri City in Texas. Additionally, there is a significant affluent Black presence in the southern Chicago suburbs of Cook County, Illinois. A report from the National Association of Real Estate Brokers (NAREB) indicated that 5 of the top 10 municipalities nationwide (with at least 500 Black households) registering the highest Black homeownership rates were in this area - including Olympia Fields, South Holland, Flossmoor, Matteson, and Lynwood. Queens County, New York is the only county with a population of 65,000 or more where African Americans have a higher median household income than White Americans.

Seatack, Virginia is currently the oldest African American community in the United States. It survives today with a vibrant and active civic community.

===Education===

During slavery, anti-literacy laws were enacted in the US that prohibited education for Black people. Slave owners saw literacy as a threat to the institution of slavery. As a North Carolina statute stated, &quot;Teaching slaves to read and write, tends to excite dissatisfaction in their minds, and to produce insurrection and rebellion.&quot;

When slavery was finally abolished in 1865, public educational systems were expanding across the country. By 1870, around seventy-four institutions in the south provided a form of advanced education for African American students. By 1900, over a hundred programs at these schools provided training for Black professionals, including teachers. Many of the students at Fisk University, including the young W. E. B. Du Bois, taught school during the summers to support their studies.

African Americans were very concerned to provide quality education for their children, but White supremacy limited their ability to participate in educational policymaking on the political level. State governments soon moved to undermine their citizenship by restricting their right to vote. By the late 1870s, Blacks were disenfranchised and segregated across the American South. White politicians in Mississippi and other states withheld financial resources and supplies from Black schools. Nevertheless, the presence of Black teachers, and their engagement with their communities both inside and outside the classroom, ensured that Black students had access to education despite these external constraints.

During World War II, demands for unity and racial tolerance on the home front provided an opening for the first Black history curriculum in the country. For example, during the early 1940s, Madeline Morgan, a Black teacher in the Chicago public schools, created a curriculum for students in grades one through eight highlighting the contributions of Black people to the history of the United States. At the close of the war, Chicago&#x27;s Board of Education downgraded the curriculum&#x27;s status from mandatory to optional.

Predominantly Black schools for kindergarten through twelfth grade students were common throughout the US before the 1970s. By 1972, however, desegregation efforts meant that only 25% of Black students were in schools with more than 90% non-White students. However, since then, a trend towards re-segregation affected communities across the country: by 2011, 2.9 million African American students were in such overwhelmingly minority schools, including 53% of Black students in school districts that were formerly under desegregation orders.

As late as 1947, about one third of African Americans over 65 were considered to lack the literacy to read and write their own names. By 1969, illiteracy as it had been traditionally defined, had been largely eradicated among younger African Americans.

US census surveys showed that by 1998, 89 percent of African Americans aged 25 to 29 had completed a high-school education, less than Whites or Asians, but more than Hispanics. On many college and university entrance exams or on standardized tests and grades, African Americans have historically lagged behind Whites, but some studies suggest that the achievement gap has been closing. Many policy makers have proposed that this gap can and will be eliminated through policies such as affirmative action, desegregation, and multiculturalism.
Between 1995 and 2009, freshmen college enrollment for African Americans increased by 73 percent and only 15 percent for Whites. Black women are enrolled in college more than any other race and gender group, leading all with 9.7% enrolled according to the 2011 US census. 
The average high school graduation rate of Blacks in the United States has steadily increased to 71% in 2013. Separating this statistic into component parts shows it varies greatly depending upon the state and the school district examined. 38% of Black males graduated in the state of New York but in Maine 97% graduated and exceeded the White male graduation rate by 11 percentage points. In much of the southeastern United States and some parts of the southwestern United States the graduation rate of White males was in fact below 70% such as in Florida where 62% of White males graduated from high school. Examining specific school districts paints an even more complex picture. In the Detroit school district, the graduation rate of Black males was 20% but 7% for White males. In the New York City school district 28% of Black males graduate from high school compared to 57% of White males. In Newark County 76% of Black males graduated compared to 67% for White males. Further academic improvement has occurred in 2015. Roughly 23% of all Blacks have bachelor&#x27;s degrees. In 1988, 21% of Whites had obtained a bachelor&#x27;s degree versus 11% of Blacks. In 2015, 23% of Blacks had obtained a bachelor&#x27;s degree versus 36% of Whites. Foreign born Blacks, 9% of the Black population, made even greater strides. They exceed native born Blacks by 10 percentage points.

College Board, which runs the official college-level advanced placement (AP) programs in American high schools, have has received criticism in recent years that its curricula have focused too much on Euro-centric history. In 2020, College Board reshaped some curricula among history-based courses to further reflect the African diaspora. In 2021, College Board announced it would be piloting an AP African American Studies course between 2022 and 2024. The course officially launched in August 2024.

====Historically Black colleges and universities====

Historically Black colleges and universities (HBCUs), which were founded when segregated institutions of higher learning did not admit African Americans, continue to thrive and educate students of all races today. There are 101 HBCUs representing three percent of the nation&#x27;s colleges and universities with the majority established in the Southeast. HBCUs have been largely responsible for establishing and expanding the African American middle-class by providing more career opportunities for African Americans.

===Economic status===
The economic disparity between the races in the US has marginally improved since the end of slavery. In 1863, two years prior to emancipation, Black people owned 0.5 percent of the national wealth, while in 2019 it is just over 1.5 percent. Racial disparity in poverty rates has narrowed since the civil rights era, with the poverty rate among African Americans decreasing from 24.7% in 2004 to 18.8% in 2020, compared to 10.5% for all Americans. Poverty is associated with higher rates of marital stress and dissolution, physical and mental health problems, disability, cognitive deficits, low educational attainment, and crime.

African Americans have a long and diverse history of business ownership. Although the first African American business is unknown, slaves captured from West Africa are believed to have established commercial enterprises as peddlers and skilled craftspeople as far back as the 17th century. Around 1900, Booker T. Washington became the most famous proponent of African American businesses. His critic and rival W. E. B. DuBois also commended business as a vehicle for African American advancement.

African Americans had a combined buying power of over $1.6 trillion as of 2021, a 171% increase of their buying power in 2000 but lagging significantly in growth behind American Latinos and Asians in the same timer period (with 288% and 383%, respectively; for reference, US growth overall was 144% in the same period); however, African American net worth had shrunk 14% in the previous year despite strong growth in property prices and the S&amp;P 500. In 2002, African American-owned businesses accounted for 1.2 million of the US&#x27;s 23 million businesses. , African American-owned businesses account for approximately 2 million US businesses. Black-owned businesses experienced the largest growth in number of businesses among minorities from 2002 to 2011.

Twenty-five percent of Blacks had white-collar occupations (management, professional, and related fields) in 2000, compared with 33.6% of Americans overall. In 2001, over half of African American households of married couples earned $50,000 or more. Although in the same year African Americans were over-represented among the nation&#x27;s poor, this was directly related to the disproportionate percentage of African American families headed by single women; such families are collectively poorer, regardless of ethnicity.

In 2006, the median earnings of African American men was more than Black and non-Black American women overall, and in all educational levels. At the same time, among American men, income disparities were significant; the median income of African American men was approximately 76 cents for every dollar of their European American counterparts, although the gap narrowed somewhat with a rise in educational level.

Overall, the median earnings of African American men were 72 cents for every dollar earned of their Asian American counterparts, and $1.17 for every dollar earned by Hispanic men. On the other hand, by 2006, among American women with post-secondary education, African American women have made significant advances; the median income of African American women was more than those of their Asian-, European- and Hispanic American counterparts with at least some college education.

The US public sector is the single most important source of employment for African Americans. During 2008–2010, 21.2% of all Black workers were public employees, compared with 16.3% of non-Black workers. Both before and after the onset of the Great Recession, African Americans were 30% more likely than other workers to be employed in the public sector. The public sector is also a critical source of decent-paying jobs for Black Americans. For both men and women, the median wage earned by Black employees is significantly higher in the public sector than in other industries.

In 1999, the median income of African American families was $33,255 compared to $53,356 of European Americans. In times of economic hardship for the nation, African Americans suffer disproportionately from job loss and underemployment, with the Black underclass being hardest hit. The phrase &quot;last hired and first fired&quot; is reflected in the Bureau of Labor Statistics unemployment figures. Nationwide, the October 2008 unemployment rate for African Americans was 11.1%, while the nationwide rate was 6.5%. In 2007, the average income for African Americans was approximately $34,000, compared to $55,000 for Whites. African Americans experience a higher rate of unemployment than the general population.

The income gap between Black and White families is also significant. In 2005, employed Blacks earned 65% of the wages of Whites, down from 82% in 1975. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported in 2006 that in Queens, New York, the median income among African American families exceeded that of White families, which the newspaper attributed to the growth in the number of two-parent Black families. It noted that Queens was the only county with more than 65,000 residents where that was true. In 2011, it was reported that 72% of Black babies were born to unwed mothers. The poverty rate among single-parent Black families was 39.5% in 2005, according to Walter E. Williams, while it was 9.9% among married-couple Black families. Among White families, the respective rates were 26.4% and 6% in poverty.

Collectively, African Americans are more involved in the American political process than other minority groups in the United States, indicated by the highest level of voter registration and participation in elections among these groups in 2004. African Americans also have the highest level of Congressional representation of any minority group in the US.

====African American homeownership====
Homeownership in the US is the strongest indicator of financial stability and the primary asset most Americans use to generate wealth. African Americans continue to lag behind other racial groups in homeownership. In the first quarter of 2021, 45.1% of African Americans owned their homes, compared to 65.3% of all Americans. The African American homeownership rate has remained relatively flat since the 1970s despite an increase in anti-discrimination housing laws and protections. The African American homeownership rate peaked in 2004 at 49.7%.

The average White high school drop-out still has a slightly better chance of owning a home than the average African American college graduate usually due to unfavorable debt-to-income ratios or credit scores among most African American college graduates. Since 2000, fast-growing housing costs in most cities have made it even more difficult for the US African American homeownership rate to significantly grow and reach over 50% for the first time in history. From 2000 to 2022, the median home price in the US grew 160%, outpacing average annual household income growth in that same period, which only grew about 30%. South Carolina is the state with the most African American homeownership, with about 55% of African Americans owning their own homes.

Black people, who make up 12 percent of the total U.S. population, make up 32 percent of all people experiencing homelessness, according to the data.

===Politics===

Since the mid 20th century, a large majority of African Americans support the Democratic Party. In the 2024 Presidential election, 86% of African American voters supported Democrat Kamala Harris, while 13% supported Republican Donald Trump. Although there is an African American lobby in foreign policy, it has not had the impact that African American organizations have had in domestic policy.

Many African Americans were excluded from electoral politics in the decades following the end of Reconstruction. For those that could participate, until the New Deal, African Americans were supporters of the Republican Party because it was Republican President Abraham Lincoln who helped in granting freedom to American slaves; at the time, the Republicans and Democrats represented the sectional interests of the North and South, respectively, rather than any specific ideology, and both conservative and liberal were represented equally in both parties.

The African American trend of voting for Democrats can be traced back to the 1930s during the Great Depression, when Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal program provided economic relief to African Americans. Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal coalition turned the Democratic Party into an organization of the working class and their liberal allies, regardless of region. The African American vote became even more solidly Democratic when Democratic presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson pushed for civil rights legislation during the 1960s. In 1960, nearly a third of African Americans voted for Republican Richard Nixon.

Conservatism has been steadily gaining traction among African Americans, particularly since the 2020 Presidential election. In the 2024 election, Trump secured a larger share of the African American vote compared to his 2020 performance. Notably, younger Black voters have increasingly leaned toward the Republican Party, adopting more conservative positions, such as supporting stricter crime policies and advocating for reduced social welfare spending, in contrast to previous generations.

====Black national anthem====
&quot;Lift Every Voice and Sing&quot; is often referred to as the Black national anthem in the United States. In 1919, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) had dubbed it the &quot;Negro national anthem&quot; for its power in voicing a cry for liberation and affirmation for African-American people.

===Sexuality===

According to a Gallup survey, 4.6% of Black or African Americans self-identified as LGBT in 2016, while the total portion of American adults in all ethnic groups identifying as LGBT was 4.1% in 2016. African Americans are more likely to identify themselves as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender than any other racial or ethnic group in the United States.

===Health===

====General health====
The life expectancy for Black men in 2008 was 70.8 years. Life expectancy for Black women was 77.5 years in 2008. In 1900, when information on Black life expectancy started being collated, a Black man could expect to live to 32.5 years and a Black woman 33.5 years. In 1900, White men lived an average of 46.3 years and White women lived an average of 48.3 years. African American life expectancy at birth is persistently five to seven years lower than European Americans. Black men have shorter lifespans than any other group in the US besides Native American men.

Black people have higher rates of obesity, diabetes, and hypertension than the US average. For adult Black men, the rate of obesity was 31.6% in 2010. For adult Black women, the rate of obesity was 41.2% in 2010. African Americans have higher rates of mortality than any other racial or ethnic group for 8 of the top 10 causes of death. In 2013, among men, Black men had the highest rate of getting cancer, followed by White, Hispanic, Asian/Pacific Islander (A/PI), and American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) men. Among women, White women had the highest rate of getting cancer, followed by Black, Hispanic, Asian/Pacific Islander, and American Indian/Alaska Native women. African Americans also have higher prevalence and incidence of Alzheimer&#x27;s disease compared to the overall average.

African-Americans are more likely than White Americans to die due to health-related problems developed by alcoholism. Alcohol abuse is the main contributor to the top 3 causes of death among African Americans.

In December 2020, African Americans were less likely to be vaccinated against COVID-19 due to mistrust in the US medical system. From 2021 to 2022, there was an increase in African Americans who became vaccinated. Still, in 2022, COVID-19 complications became the third leading cause of death for African Americans.

Violence is a major problem within the African American community. A report from the US Department of Justice states &quot;In 2005, homicide victimization rates for Blacks were 6 times higher than the rates for whites&quot;. The report also found that &quot;94% of Black victims were killed by Blacks.&quot; Of the nearly 20,000 recorded US homicides in 2022, African Americans made up the majority of offenders and victims despite making up less than 20% of the population. In 2024, all of the top 5 most dangerous US cities have a significant Black population and disturbing Black-on-Black violent crime rate. Black males age 15–44 are the only race/sex category for which homicide is a top 5 cause of death. Black women are 3 times more likely to be killed by an intimate partner than white women. Black children are 3 times more likely to die due to parental abuse and neglect than white children.

====Sexual health====
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, African Americans have higher rates of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) compared to Whites, with 5 times the rates of syphilis and chlamydia, and 7.5 times the rate of gonorrhea.

The disproportionately high incidence of HIV/AIDS among African Americans has been attributed to homophobic influences and lack of proper healthcare. The prevalence of HIV/AIDS among Black men is seven times higher than the prevalence for White men, and Black men are more than nine times as likely to die from HIV/AIDS-related illness than White men. The prevalence of HIV/AIDS among Black women is 20 times higher than White women, and Black women are more than 15 times as likely to die from HIV/AIDS-related illness than White women.

==== Mental health ====
African Americans have several barriers for accessing mental health services. Counseling has been frowned upon and distant in utility and proximity to many people in the African American community. In 2004, a qualitative research study explored the disconnect with African Americans and mental health. The study was conducted as a semi-structured discussion which allowed the focus group to express their opinions and life experiences. The results revealed a couple key variables that create barriers for many African American communities to seek mental health services such as the stigma, lack of four important necessities; trust, affordability, cultural understanding and impersonal services.

Historically, many African American communities did not seek counseling because religion was a part of the family values. African American who have a faith background are more likely to seek prayer as a coping mechanism for mental issues rather than seeking professional mental health services. In 2015 a study concluded, African Americans with high value in religion are less likely to utilize mental health services compared to those who have low value in religion.

In the United States, counseling approaches are based on the experience of White Americans and do not fit within the African American culture. African American families tend to resolve concerns within the family, and it is viewed by the family as a strength. On the other hand, when African Americans seek counseling, they face a social backlash and are criticized. They may be labeled &quot;crazy&quot;, viewed as weak, and their pride is diminished. Because of this, many African Americans instead seek mentorship within communities they trust.

Terminology is another barrier in relation to African Americans and mental health. There is more stigma on the term &quot;psychotherapy&quot; versus counseling. In one study, psychotherapy is associated with mental illness whereas counseling approaches problem-solving, guidance and help. More African Americans seek assistance when it is called counseling and not psychotherapy because it is more welcoming within the cultural and community. Counselors are encouraged to be aware of such barriers for the well-being of African American clients. Without cultural competency training in health care, many African Americans go unheard and misunderstood.

In 2021, African Americans had the third highest suicide rate trailing American Indians/Alaska Natives and White Americans. However, African Americans had the second highest increase of its suicide rate from 2011 to 2021, growing 58%. As of 2024, suicide is the second leading cause of death among African-Americans between the ages of 15 and 24, with Black men being four times more likely to kill themselves than Black women.

==Genetics==
=== Genome-wide studies ===
Recent studies of African Americans using genetic testing have found ancestry to vary by region and sex of ancestors. These studies found that on average, African Americans have 73.2–82.1% Sub-Saharan African, 16.7–24% European, and 0.8–1.2% Native American genetic ancestry, with large variation between individuals. Commercial testing services have reported similar variation, with ranges from 0.6 to 2 percent Native American, 19 to 29 percent European, and 65 to 80 percent Sub-Saharan African ancestry.

According to a genome-wide study by Bryc et al. (2009), the mixed ancestry of African Americans in varying ratios came about as the result of sexual contact between West/Central Africans (more frequently females) and Europeans (more frequently males). This can be understood as being the result of enslaved African American females being raped by White males. Historians estimate that 58% of enslaved women in the US aged 15–30 years were sexually assaulted by their slave owners and other White men. Consequently, the 365 African Americans in their sample have a genome-wide average of 78.1% West African ancestry and 18.5% European ancestry, with large variation among individuals (ranging from 99% to 1% West African ancestry). The West African ancestral component in African Americans is most similar to that in present-day speakers from the non-Bantu branches of the Niger-Congo family.

Correspondingly, Montinaro et al. (2014) observed that around 50% of the overall ancestry of African Americans traces comes from a population similar to the Niger-Congo-speaking Yoruba of southern Nigeria and southern Benin, reflecting the centrality of this West African region in the Atlantic slave trade. The next most frequent ancestral component found among African Americans was derived from Great Britain, in keeping with historical records. It constitutes a little over 10% of their overall ancestry and is most similar to the Northwest European ancestral component also carried by Barbadians. Zakharia et al. (2009) found a similar proportion of Yoruba-like ancestry in their African American samples, with a minority also drawn from Mandenka and Bantu populations. Additionally, the researchers observed an average European ancestry of 21.9%, again with significant variation between individuals. Bryc et al. (2009) note that populations from other parts of the continent may also constitute adequate proxies for the ancestors of some African American individuals; namely, ancestral populations from Guinea Bissau, Senegal and Sierra Leone in West Africa and Angola in Southern Africa. An individual African American person can have over fifteen African ethnic groups in their genetic makeup alone due to the slave trade covering such vast areas.

Altogether, genetic studies suggest that African Americans are a genetically diverse people. According to DNA analysis led in 2006 by Penn State geneticist Mark D. Shriver, around 58 percent of African Americans have at least 12.5% European ancestry (equivalent to one European great-grandparent and their forebears), 19.6 percent of African Americans have at least 25% European ancestry (equivalent to one European grandparent and their forebears), and 1 percent of African Americans have at least 50% European ancestry (equivalent to one European parent and their forebears). According to Shriver, around 5 percent of African Americans also have at least 12.5% Native American ancestry (equivalent to one Native American great-grandparent and their forebears). Research suggests that Native American ancestry among people who identify as African American is a result of relationships that occurred soon after slave ships arrived in the American colonies, and European ancestry is of more recent origin, often from the decades before the Civil War.

===Y-DNA===
Africans bearing the E-V38 (E1b1a) likely traversed across the Sahara, from east to west, approximately 19,000 years ago. E-M2 (E1b1a1) likely originated in West Africa or Central Africa. According to a Y-DNA study by Sims et al. (2007), the majority (≈60%) of African Americans belong to various subclades of the E-M2 (E1b1a1, formerly E3a) paternal haplogroup. This is the most common genetic paternal lineage found today among West/Central African males and is also a signature of the historical Bantu migrations. The next most frequent Y-DNA haplogroup observed among African Americans is the R1b clade, which around 15% of African Americans carry. This lineage is most common today among Northwestern European males. The remaining African Americans mainly belong to the paternal haplogroup I (≈7%), which is also frequent in Northwestern Europe.

===mtDNA===
According to an mtDNA study by Salas et al. (2005), the maternal lineages of African Americans are most similar to haplogroups that are today especially common in West Africa (&gt;55%), followed closely by West-Central Africa and Southwestern Africa (&lt;41%). The characteristic West African haplogroups L1b, L2b,c,d, and L3b,d and West-Central African haplogroups L1c and L3e in particular occur at high frequencies among African Americans. As with the paternal DNA of African Americans, contributions from other parts of the continent to their maternal gene pool are insignificant.

==Racism and social status==

Formal political, economic and social discrimination against minorities has been present throughout American history. Leland T. Saito, Associate Professor of Sociology and American Studies &amp; Ethnicity at the University of Southern California, writes, &quot;Political rights have been circumscribed by race, class and gender since the founding of the United States, when the right to vote was restricted to White men of property. Throughout the history of the United States, race has been used by Whites for legitimizing and creating difference and social, economic and political exclusion.&quot;

Although they have gained a greater degree of social equality since the civil rights movement, African Americans have remained stagnant economically, which has hindered their ability to break into the middle class and beyond. As of 2020, the racial wealth gap between Whites and Blacks remains as large as it was in 1968, with the typical net worth of a White household equivalent to that of 11.5 Black households. Despite this, African Americans have increased employment rates and gained representation in the highest levels of American government in the post–civil rights era. However, widespread racism remains an issue that continues to undermine the development of social status.

Economically, of all the racially Black ethnic groups on the globe, African Americans are the wealthiest and most successful, with one in every fifty African American families being millionaires. This equates in 2023 to approximately 1.79 million African American millionaires in the United States, which is more than the total amount of millionaires in any racially Black country, and many other countries, around the world.

===Policing and criminal justice===
In the US, which has the largest per-capita prison population in the world, African Americans are overrepresented as the second largest population of prison inmates (38%) in 2023, coming second to Whites who made up 57% of the prison population. According to the National Registry of Exonerations, Blacks are roughly 7.5 times more likely to be wrongfully convicted of murder in the US than Whites. In 2012, the New York City Police Department detained people more than 500,000 times under the city&#x27;s stop-and-frisk law. Of the total detained, 55% were African-Americans, while Black people made up 20% of the city&#x27;s population.
African American males are more likely to be killed by police when compared to other races. This is one of the factors that led to the creation of the Black Lives Matter movement in 2013. A historical issue in the US where women have weaponized their White privilege in the country by reporting on Black people, often instigating racial violence, difficult White women—who have been given a different name over the centuries by African Americans—calling the police on Black people became widely publicized in 2020. According to &quot;The Guardian&quot;, &quot;The specter of Karen persisted as Black Lives Matter protests and civil unrest spread around the country following Floyd’s murder and reckonings with racism began to roil institutions, toppling careers as well as statues&quot;.

Although there is not enough evidence that suggest Black people consume cannabis with greater regularity than Whites do, they have disproportionately higher arrest rates than Whites: in 2010, for example, Blacks were 3.73 times as likely to get arrested for using cannabis than Whites, despite not significantly more frequently being users. Even since the legalization of cannabis, there are still more arrests made for Black users than White, wasting taxpayer money, due to many of those cases being abandoned or dropped, with no charges being filed after the trivial, racially-biased arrests.

===Social issues===
After over 50 years, marriage rates for all Americans began to decline while divorce rates and out-of-wedlock births have climbed. These changes have been greatest among African Americans. After more than 70 years of racial parity Black marriage rates began to fall behind Whites. Single-parent households have become common, and according to US census figures released in January 2010, only 38 percent of Black children live with both their parents. In 2021, statistics show that over 80 percent marriages in the African American ethnic group marry within their ethnic group.

The first ever anti-miscegenation law was passed by the Maryland General Assembly in 1691, criminalizing interracial marriage. In a speech in Charleston, Illinois in 1858, Abraham Lincoln stated, &quot;I am not, nor ever have been in favor of making voters or jurors of negroes, nor of qualifying them to hold office, nor to intermarry with white people&quot;. By the late 1800s, 38 US states had anti-miscegenation statutes. By 1924, the ban on interracial marriage was still in force in 29 states. While interracial marriage had been legal in California since 1948, in 1957 actor Sammy Davis Jr. faced a backlash for his involvement with White actress Kim Novak. Harry Cohn, the president of Columbia Pictures, with whom Novak was under contract, gave in to his concerns that a racist backlash against the relationship could hurt the studio. Davis briefly married Black dancer Loray White in 1958 to protect himself from mob violence. Inebriated at the wedding ceremony, Davis despairingly said to his best friend, Arthur Silber Jr., &quot;Why won&#x27;t they let me live my life?&quot; The couple never lived together, and commenced divorce proceedings in September 1958. In 1958, officers in Virginia entered the home of Mildred and Richard Loving and dragged them out of bed for living together as an interracial couple, on the basis that &quot;any white person intermarry with a colored person&quot;—or vice versa—each party &quot;shall be guilty of a felony&quot; and face prison terms of five years. In 1967 the law was ruled unconstitutional (via the 14th Amendment adopted in 1868) by the US Supreme Court in &quot;Loving v. Virginia&quot;.

In 2008, Democrats overwhelmingly voted 70% against California Proposition 8, African Americans voted 58% in favor of it while 42% voted against Proposition 8. On May 9, 2012, Barack Obama, the first Black president, became the first US president to support same-sex marriage. Since Obama&#x27;s endorsement there has been a rapid growth in support for same-sex marriage among African Americans. As of 2012, 59% of African Americans support same-sex marriage, which is higher than support among the national average (53%) and White Americans (50%).

Polls in North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Missouri, Maryland, Ohio, Florida, and Nevada have also shown an increase in support for same sex marriage among African Americans. On November 6, 2012, Maryland, Maine, and Washington all voted for approve of same-sex marriage, along with Minnesota rejecting a constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage. Exit polls in Maryland show about 50% of African Americans voted for same-sex marriage, showing a vast evolution among African Americans on the issue and was crucial in helping pass same-sex marriage in Maryland.

Black Americans hold far more conservative opinions on abortion, extramarital sex, and raising children out of wedlock than Democrats as a whole. On financial issues, however, African Americans are in line with Democrats, generally supporting a more progressive tax structure to provide more government spending on social services.

===Political legacy===

African Americans have fought in every war in the history of the United States.

The gains made by African Americans in the civil rights movement and in the Black Power movement not only obtained certain rights for African Americans but changed American society in far-reaching and fundamentally important ways. Prior to the 1950s, Black Americans in the South were subject to de jure discrimination, or Jim Crow laws. They were often the victims of extreme cruelty and violence, sometimes resulting in deaths: by the post World War II era, African Americans became increasingly discontented with their long-standing inequality. In the words of Martin Luther King Jr., African Americans and their supporters challenged the nation to &quot;rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed that all men are created equal...&quot;

The civil rights movement marked an enormous change in American social, political, economic and civic life. It brought with it boycotts, sit-ins, nonviolent demonstrations and marches, court battles, bombings and other violence; prompted worldwide media coverage and intense public debate; forged enduring civic, economic and religious alliances; and disrupted and realigned the nation&#x27;s two major political parties.

Over time, it has changed in fundamental ways the manner in which Blacks and Whites interact with and relate to one another. The movement resulted in the removal of codified, &quot;de jure&quot; racial segregation and discrimination from American life and law, and heavily influenced other groups and movements in struggles for civil rights and social equality within American society, including the Free Speech Movement, the disabled, the women&#x27;s movement, and migrant workers. It also inspired the Native American rights movement, and in King&#x27;s 1964 book &quot;Why We Can&#x27;t Wait&quot; he wrote the US &quot;was born in genocide when it embraced the doctrine that the original American, the Indian, was an inferior race.&quot;

==Media and coverage==

Some activists and academics contend that American news media coverage of African American news, concerns, or dilemmas is inadequate, or that the news media present distorted images of African Americans.

To combat this, Robert L. Johnson founded Black Entertainment Television (BET), a network that targets young African Americans and urban audiences in the United States. Over the years, the network has aired such programming as rap and R&amp;B music videos, urban-oriented movies and television series, and some public affairs programs. On Sunday mornings, BET would broadcast Christian programming; the network would also broadcast non-affiliated Christian programs during the early morning hours daily. According to Viacom, BET is now a global network that reaches households in the United States, Caribbean, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The network has gone on to spawn several spin-off channels, including BET Her (originally launched as &quot;BET on Jazz&quot;).

Another network targeting African Americans is TV One. TV One is owned by Urban One, founded and controlled by Catherine Hughes. Urban One is one of the nation&#x27;s largest radio broadcasting companies and the largest African American-owned radio broadcasting company in the United States.

In June 2009, NBC News launched a new website named TheGrio. It is the first African American video news site that focuses on underrepresented stories in existing national news.

===Black-owned and oriented media outlets===
* The Africa Channel – Dedicated to programming about African culture.
* aspireTV – a digital cable and satellite channel owned by businessman and former basketball player Magic Johnson.
* ATTV – an independent public affairs and educational channel.
* BET Media Group – The most prominent multimedia outlet targeting Afro-Americans.
** BET
** BET Her
** VH1 – Originally a MTV spin-off focused on light genres of music, the network&#x27;s programming became slanted towards African American culture during the 2010s.
* Bounce TV – a digital multicast network owned by the E. W. Scripps Company.
* Fox Soul – a digital television and streaming network primarily airing original talk shows and syndicated programming
* Oprah Winfrey Network – a cable and satellite network founded by Oprah Winfrey and jointly owned by Warner Bros. Discovery and Harpo Studios. While not exclusively targeting African Americans, much of its original programming is geared towards a similar demographic.
* Revolt – a music channel and media company founded by Sean &quot;Puff Daddy&quot; Combs.
* Soul of the South Network – a regional broadcast network.
* TheGrio – a digital multicast network focused on news and opinion-based programming.
* TV One – a general entertainment network targeting adults.
** Cleo TV – a sister network targeting millennial and Generation X women
* We TV – Owned by AMC Networks, became slanted towards Black women during the 2010s

==Culture==


From their earliest presence in North America, African Americans have significantly contributed literature, art, agricultural skills, cuisine, clothing styles, music, language, and social and technological innovation to American culture. The cultivation and use of many agricultural products in the United States, such as yams, peanuts, rice, okra, sorghum, grits, watermelon, indigo dyes, and cotton, can be traced to West African and African American influences. Notable examples include George Washington Carver, who created nearly 500 products from peanuts, sweet potatoes, and pecans. Soul food is a variety of cuisine popular among African Americans. It is closely related to the cuisine of the Southern United States. The descriptive terminology may have originated in the mid-1960s, when &quot;&quot; was a common definer used to describe African American culture (for example, soul music). African Americans were the first peoples in the United States to make fried chicken, along with Scottish immigrants to the South. Although the Scottish had been frying chicken before they emigrated, they lacked the spices and flavor that African Americans had used when preparing the meal. The Scottish American settlers therefore adopted the African American method of seasoning chicken. However, fried chicken was generally a rare meal in the African American community and was usually reserved for special events or celebrations.

===Language===
African-American English is a variety (dialect, ethnolect, and sociolect) of American English, commonly spoken by urban working-class and largely middle-class African Americans.

African American English evolved during the antebellum period through interaction between speakers of 16th- and 17th-century English of Great Britain and Ireland and various West African languages. As a result, the variety shares parts of its grammar and phonology with the Southern American English dialect. African American English differs from Standard American English (SAE) in certain pronunciation characteristics, tense usage, and grammatical structures, which were derived from West African languages (particularly those belonging to the Niger–Congo family).

Virtually all habitual speakers of African American English can understand and communicate in Standard American English. As with all linguistic forms, AAVE&#x27;s usage is influenced by various factors, including geographical, educational and socioeconomic background, as well as formality of setting. Additionally, there are many literary uses of this variety of English, particularly in African American literature.

Other languages are spoken by specific sub-communities. The Gullah language is an English-based creole language spoken mostly in the coastal regions of South Carolina and Georgia by the Gullah; an off-shoot of this is Afro-Seminole Creole spoken by Black Seminoles mostly now in Mexico and Brackettville, Texas. Louisiana Creole is a French-based creole and spoken mostly in Louisiana.

====Traditional names====

African-American names are part of the cultural traditions of African Americans, most of these cultural names having no connection to Africa but strictly an African American cultural practice that developed in the United States during enslavement. This new evidence became apparent by census records which show African Americans and White Americans, though they spoke the same language, chose to use different names even during times of enslavement, which is where and when the development of African American cultural names began.

Prior to this newer information, it was only thought that before the 1950s, and 1960s, most African-American names closely resembled those used within European-American culture. Babies of that era were generally given a few common names, with children using nicknames to distinguish the various people with the same name. With the rise of 1960s civil rights movement, there was a dramatic increase in names of various origins.

By the 1970s, and 1980s, it had become common among African Americans to invent new names for themselves, although many of these invented names took elements from popular existing names. Prefixes such as La/Le, Da/De, Ra/Re and Ja/Je, and suffixes like -ique/iqua, -isha and -aun/-awn are common, as are inventive spellings for common names. The book &quot;Baby Names Now: From Classic to Cool—The Very Last Word on First Names&quot; places the origins of &quot;La&quot; names in African-American culture in New Orleans.

Even with the rise of inventive names, it is still common for African Americans to use biblical, historical, or traditional European names. Daniel, Christopher, Michael, David, James, Joseph, and Matthew were thus among the most frequent names for African-American boys in 2013.

The name LaKeisha is typically considered American in origin but has elements that were drawn from both French and West/Central African roots. Names such as LaTanisha, JaMarcus, DeAndre, and Shaniqua were created in the same way. Punctuation marks are seen more often within African American names than other American names, such as the names Mo&#x27;nique and D&#x27;Andre.

===Religion===


The majority of African Americans are Protestant, many of whom follow the historically Black churches. The term Black church refers to churches which minister to predominantly African American congregations. Black congregations were first established by freed slaves at the end of the 17th century, and later when slavery was abolished more African Americans were allowed to create a unique form of Christianity that was culturally influenced by African spiritual traditions. One of these early African American Christian cultural traditions in the Black Church is the Watchnight service, also called Freedom&#x27;s Eve, where African American congregations all over the nation come together on New Year&#x27;s Eve through New Years morning in remembrance of the eve and New Year of their emancipation, sharing testimonies, being baptized and partaking in praise and worship.

According to a 2007 survey, more than half of the African American population are part of the historically Black churches. The largest Protestant denomination among African Americans are the Baptists, distributed mainly in four denominations, the largest being the National Baptist Convention, USA and the National Baptist Convention of America. The second largest are the Methodists, the largest denominations are the African Methodist Episcopal Church and the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church.

Pentecostals are distributed among several different religious bodies, with the Church of God in Christ as the largest among them by far. About 16% of African American Christians are members of White Protestant communions, these denominations (which include the United Church of Christ) mostly have a 2 to 3% African American membership. There are also large numbers of Catholics, constituting 5% of the African American population. Of the total number of Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, 22% are Black.

Some African Americans follow Islam. Historically, between 15 and 30% of enslaved Africans brought to the Americas were Muslims, but most of these Africans were converted to Christianity during the era of American slavery. During the twentieth century, some African Americans converted to Islam, mainly through the influence of Black nationalist groups that preached with distinctive Islamic practices; including the Moorish Science Temple of America, and the largest organization, the Nation of Islam, founded in the 1930s, which attracted at least 20,000 people by 1963. Prominent members included activist Malcolm X and boxer Muhammad Ali.
Malcolm X is considered the first person to start the movement among African Americans towards mainstream Islam, after he left the Nation and made the pilgrimage to Mecca. In 1975, Warith Deen Mohammed, the son of Elijah Muhammad took control of the Nation after his father&#x27;s death and guided the majority of its members to orthodox Islam.

African American Muslims constitute 20% of the total US Muslim population, the majority are Sunni or orthodox Muslims, some of these identify under the community of W. Deen Mohammed. The Nation of Islam led by Louis Farrakhan has a membership ranging from 20,000 to 50,000 members.

There is also a small but growing group of African American Jews, making up less than 0.5% of African Americans or about 2% of the Jewish population in the United States. The majority of African-American Jews are Ashkenazi, while smaller numbers identify as Sephardi, Mizrahi, or other. Many African-American Jews are affiliated with denominations such as the Reform, Conservative, Reconstructionist, or Orthodox branches of Judaism, but the majority identify as &quot;Jews of no religion&quot;, commonly known as secular Jews. A significant number of people who identify themselves as &quot;Black Jews&quot; are affiliated with syncretic religious groups, largely the Black Hebrew Israelites, whose beliefs include the claim that African Americans are descended from the Biblical Israelites. Jews of all races typically do not accept Black Hebrew Israelites as Jews, in part because they are usually not Jewish according to Jewish law, and in part because these groups are sometimes associated with antisemitism. African-American Jews have criticized the Black Hebrew Israelites, regarding the movement as primarily composed of Black non-Jews who have appropriated Black-Jewish identity.

Confirmed atheists are less than one half of one percent, similar to numbers for Hispanics.

===Music===

African American music is one of the most pervasive African American cultural influences in the United States today and is among the most dominant in mainstream popular music. Hip hop, R&amp;B, funk, rock and roll, soul, blues, and other contemporary American musical forms originated in Black communities and evolved from other Black forms of music, including blues, doo-wop, barbershop, ragtime, bluegrass, jazz, and gospel music.

African American-derived musical forms have also influenced and been incorporated into virtually every other popular music genre in the world, including country and techno. African American genres are the most important ethnic vernacular tradition in America, as they have developed independent of African traditions from which they arise more so than any other immigrant groups, including Europeans; make up the broadest and longest lasting range of styles in America; and have, historically, been more influential, interculturally, geographically, and economically, than other American vernacular traditions.

===Dance===
African Americans have also had an important role in American dance. Bill T. Jones, a prominent modern choreographer and dancer, has included historical African American themes in his work, particularly in the piece &quot;Last Supper at Uncle Tom&#x27;s Cabin/The Promised Land&quot;. Likewise, Alvin Ailey&#x27;s artistic work, including his &quot;Revelations&quot; based on his experience growing up as an African American in the South during the 1930s, has had a significant influence on modern dance. Another form of dance, stepping, is an African American tradition whose performance and competition has been formalized through the traditionally Black fraternities and sororities at universities.

===Literature and academics===

Many African American authors have written stories, poems, and essays influenced by their experiences as African Americans. African American literature is a major genre in American literature. Famous examples include Langston Hughes, James Baldwin, Richard Wright, Zora Neale Hurston, Ralph Ellison, Nobel Prize winner Toni Morrison, and Maya Angelou.

African American inventors have created many widely used devices in the world and have contributed to international innovation. Norbert Rillieux created the technique for converting sugar cane juice into white sugar crystals. Moreover, Rillieux left Louisiana in 1854 and went to France, where he spent ten years working with the Champollions deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphics from the Rosetta Stone. Most slave inventors were nameless, such as the slave owned by the Confederate President Jefferson Davis who designed the ship propeller used by the Confederate navy.

By 1913, over 1,000 inventions were patented by Black Americans. Among the most notable inventors were Jan Matzeliger, who developed the first machine to mass-produce shoes, and Elijah McCoy, who invented automatic lubrication devices for steam engines. Granville Woods had 35 patents to improve electric railway systems, including the first system to allow moving trains to communicate. Garrett A. Morgan developed the first automatic traffic signal and gas mask.

Lewis Howard Latimer invented an improvement for the incandescent light bulb. More recent inventors include Frederick McKinley Jones, who invented the movable refrigeration unit for food transport in trucks and trains. Lloyd Quarterman worked with six other Black scientists on the creation of the atomic bomb (code named the Manhattan Project.) Quarterman also helped develop the first nuclear reactor, which was used in the atomically powered submarine called the Nautilus.

As part of the preservation of their culture, African Americans have continuously launched their own publications and publishing houses, such as Robert Sengstacke Abbott, founder of the Chicago Defender newspaper, and Carter G. Woodson, the founder of Black History Month who spent over thirty years documenting and publishing African American history in journals and books. The Johnson Publishing Company, founded by John H. Johnson in 1942, is a National Historic Landmark.

==Terminology==
===General===

The term &quot;African American&quot; was popularized by Jesse Jackson in the 1980s, although there are recorded uses from the 18th and 19th centuries, for example, in post-emancipation holidays and conferences. Earlier terms also used to describe Americans of African ancestry referred more to skin color than to ancestry. Other terms (such as &quot;colored&quot;, &quot;person of color&quot;, or &quot;negro&quot;) were included in the wording of various laws and legal decisions which some thought were being used as tools of White supremacy and oppression.

A 16-page pamphlet entitled &quot;A Sermon on the Capture of Lord Cornwallis&quot; is notable for the attribution of its authorship to &quot;An &quot;African American&quot;&quot;. Published in 1782, the book&#x27;s use of this phrase predates any other yet identified by more than 50 years.

In the 1980s, the term &quot;African American&quot; was advanced on the model of, for example, German American or Irish American, to give descendants of American slaves, and other American Blacks who lived through the slavery era, a heritage and a cultural base. The term was popularized in Black communities around the country via word of mouth and ultimately received mainstream use after Jesse Jackson publicly used the term in front of a national audience in 1988. Subsequently, major media outlets adopted its use.

Surveys in the 1990s and the first decade of the 21st century showed that the majority of Black Americans had no preference for &quot;African American&quot; versus &quot;Black American&quot;, although they had a slight preference for the latter in personal settings and the former in more formal settings. By 2021, according to polling from Gallup, 58% of Black Americans expressed no preference for what their group should be called, with 17% each preferring &quot;Black&quot; and &quot;African-American&quot;. Among those with no preference, Gallup found a slight majority favored &quot;Black&quot; &quot;if [they] had to choose.&quot;

In 2020, the Associated Press updated its AP Stylebook to direct its writers to capitalize the first letter of &quot;Black&quot; when it is used &quot;in a racial, ethnic or cultural sense, conveying an essential and shared sense of history, identity and community among people who identify as Black, including those in the African diaspora and within Africa.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; and other outlets made similar changes at the same time, to put &quot;Black&quot; on the same footing as other racial and ethnic terms, such as Latino, Asian, and African-American.

In 2023, the government released a new more detailed breakdown due to the rise in racially Black immigration into the US, listing African American as a compound termed ethnicity, distinguished from other racially Black ethnicities such as Nigerian, Jamaican etc.

The term &quot;African American&quot; embraces pan-Africanism as earlier enunciated by prominent African thinkers such as Marcus Garvey, W. E. B. Du Bois, and George Padmore. The term &quot;Afro-Usonian&quot;, and variations of such, are more rarely used.

===Official identity===

Since 1977, in an attempt to keep up with changing social opinion, the United States government has officially classified Black people (revised to &quot;Black&quot; or &quot;African American&quot; in 1997) as &quot;having origins in any of the Black racial groups of Africa.&quot; Other federal offices, such as the US Census Bureau, adhere to the Office of Management and Budget standards on race in their data collection and tabulation efforts. In preparation for the 2010 US census, a marketing and outreach plan called &quot;2010 Census Integrated Communications Campaign Plan&quot; (ICC) recognized and defined African Americans as Black people born in the United States. From the ICC perspective, African Americans are one of three groups of Black people in the United States.

The ICC plan was to reach the three groups by acknowledging that each group has its own sense of community that is based on geography and ethnicity. The best way to market the census process toward any of the three groups is to reach them through their own unique communication channels and not treat the entire Black population of the US as though they are all African Americans with a single ethnic and geographical background. The Federal Bureau of Investigation of the US Department of Justice categorizes Black or African American people as &quot;[a] person having origins in any of the Black racial groups of Africa&quot; through racial categories used in the UCR Program adopted from the Statistical Policy Handbook (1978) and published by the Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards, US Department of Commerce, derived from the 1977 Office of Management and Budget classification.

===Admixture===

Historically, &quot;race mixing&quot; between Black and White people was taboo in the United States. So-called anti-miscegenation laws, barring Blacks and Whites from marrying or having sex, were established in colonial America as early as 1691, and endured in many Southern states until the Supreme Court ruled them unconstitutional in &quot;Loving v. Virginia&quot; (1967). The taboo among American Whites surrounding White-Black relations is a historical consequence of the oppression and racial segregation of African Americans. Historian David Brion Davis notes the racial mixing that occurred during slavery was frequently attributed by the planter class to the &quot;lower-class white males&quot; but Davis concludes that &quot;there is abundant evidence that many slaveowners, sons of slaveowners, and overseers took Black mistresses or in effect raped the wives and daughters of slave families.&quot; A famous example was Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s mistress, Sally Hemings. Although publicly opposed to race mixing, Jefferson, in his &quot;Notes on the State of Virginia&quot; published in 1785, wrote: &quot;The improvement of the Blacks in body and mind, in the first instance of their mixture with the whites, has been observed by every one, and proves that their inferiority is not the effect merely of their condition of life&quot;.

Harvard University historian Henry Louis Gates Jr. wrote in 2009 that &quot;African Americans...are a racially mixed or mulatto people—deeply and overwhelmingly so&quot; (see genetics). After the Emancipation Proclamation, Chinese American men married African American women in high proportions to their total marriage numbers due to few Chinese American women being in the United States. African slaves and their descendants have also had a history of cultural exchange and intermarriage with Native Americans, although they did not necessarily retain social, cultural or linguistic ties to Native peoples. There are also increasing intermarriages and offspring between non-Hispanic Blacks and Hispanics of any race, especially between Puerto Ricans and African Americans (American-born Blacks). According to author M. M. Drymon, many African Americans identify as having Scots-Irish ancestry.

Racially mixed marriages have become increasingly accepted in the United States since the civil rights movement and up to the present day. Approval in national opinion polls has risen from 36% in 1978, to 48% in 1991, 65% in 2002, 77% in 2007. A Gallup poll conducted in 2013 found that 84% of Whites and 96% of Blacks approved of interracial marriage, and 87% overall. Black men are more than twice as likely to date and marry interracially than Black women.

At the end of World War II, some African American military men stationed in Japan and Germany impregnated local non-Black women, resulting in the birth of thousands of mixed-race children. Many of these families later immigrated to the United States.

===Terminology dispute===
In her book &quot;The End of Blackness&quot;, as well as in an essay for &quot;Salon&quot;, author Debra Dickerson has argued that the term &quot;Black&quot; should refer strictly to the descendants of Africans who were brought to America as slaves, and not to the sons and daughters of Black immigrants who lack that ancestry. Thus, under her definition, President Barack Obama, who is the son of a Kenyan, is not Black. She makes the argument that grouping all people of African descent together regardless of their unique ancestral circumstances would inevitably deny the lingering effects of slavery within the American community of slave descendants, in addition to denying Black immigrants recognition of their own unique ancestral backgrounds. &quot;Lumping us all together&quot;, Dickerson wrote, &quot;erases the significance of slavery and continuing racism while giving the appearance of progress.&quot; Similar comments have been made concerning Kamala Harris, the daughter of a Caribbean immigrant, who was elected vice president in 2020.

Similar viewpoints to Dickerson&#x27;s have been expressed by author Stanley Crouch in a &quot;New York Daily News&quot; piece, Charles Steele Jr. of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and African American columnist David Ehrenstein of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, who accused White liberals of flocking to Blacks who were &quot;Magic Negros&quot;, a term that refers to a Black person with no past who simply appears to assist the mainstream White (as cultural protagonists/drivers) agenda. Ehrenstein went on to say &quot;He&#x27;s there to assuage white &#x27;guilt&#x27; they feel over the role of slavery and racial segregation in American history.&quot;

The American Descendants of Slavery (ADOS) movement coalesces around this view, arguing that Black descendants of American slavery deserve a separate ethnic category that distinguishes them from other Black groups in the United States. Their terminology has gained popularity in some circles, but others have criticized the movement for a perceived bias against (especially poor and Black) immigrants, and for its often inflammatory rhetoric. Politicians such as Obama and Harris have received especially pointed criticism from the movement, as neither are ADOS and have spoken out at times against policies specific to them.

Many Pan-African movements and organizations that are ideologically Black nationalist, anti-imperialist, anti-Zionist, and Scientific socialist like The All-African People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party (A-APRP), have argued that African (relating to the diaspora) or New Afrikan should be used instead of African American. Most notably, Malcolm X and Kwame Ture expressed similar views that African Americans are Africans who &quot;happen to be in America&quot;, and should not claim or identify as being American if they are fighting for Black (New Afrikan) liberation. Historically, this is due to the enslavement of Africans during the Trans-Atlantic slave trade, ongoing anti-Black violence, and structural racism in countries like the United States.

===Terms no longer in common use===
Before the independence of the Thirteen Colonies until the abolition of slavery in 1865, an African American slave was commonly known as a &quot;negro&quot;. &quot;Free negro&quot; was the legal status in the territory of an African American person who was not enslaved. In response to the project of the American Colonization Society to transport free Blacks to the future Liberia, a project most Blacks strongly rejected, the Blacks at the time said they were no more African than White Americans were European, and referred to themselves with what they considered a more acceptable term, &quot;colored Americans&quot;. The term was used until the second quarter of the 20th century, when it was considered outmoded and generally gave way again to the exclusive use of &quot;negro&quot;. By the 1940s, the term was commonly capitalized (&quot;Negro&quot;); but by the mid-1960s, it was considered disparaging. By the end of the 20th century, &quot;negro&quot; had come to be considered inappropriate and was rarely used and perceived as a pejorative. The term is rarely used by younger Black people, but remained in use by many older African Americans who had grown up with the term, particularly in the Southern US. The term remains in use in some contexts, such as the United Negro College Fund, an American philanthropic organization that funds scholarships for Black students and general scholarship funds for 39 private historically Black colleges and universities.

There are many other deliberately insulting terms, many of which were in common use (e.g., &quot;nigger&quot;), but had become unacceptable in normal discourse before the end of the 20th century. One exception is the use, among the Black community, of the slur &quot;nigger&quot; rendered as &quot;nigga&quot;, representing the pronunciation of the word in African American English. This usage has been popularized by American rap and hip-hop music cultures and is used as part of an in-group lexicon and speech. It is not necessarily derogatory and, when used among Black people, the word is often used to mean &quot;&quot; or &quot;friend&quot;.

Acceptance of intra-group usage of the word &quot;nigga&quot; is still debated, although it has established a foothold among younger generations. The NAACP denounces the use of both &quot;nigga&quot; and &quot;nigger&quot;. Mixed-race usage of &quot;nigga&quot; is still considered taboo, particularly if the speaker is White. However, trends indicate that usage of the term in intragroup settings is increasing even among White youth due to the popularity of rap and hip hop culture.

==See also==
* African-American art
* African American cinema
* African-American middle class
* African-American neighborhood
* African-American upper class
* African diaspora in the Americas
* Afrophobia
* AP African American Studies
* Black Belt in the American South
* Black Hispanic and Latino Americans
* Black mecca
* Black Ozarkers
* Black Southerners
*Brown Babies
* Civil rights movement (1865–1896)
* Civil rights movement (1896–1954)
* Juneteenth
* National Museum of African American History and Culture
* North Africans in the United States
* Society and Black people in the Spanish Colonial Americas
* South African Americans
* Stereotypes of African Americans
* Timeline of the civil rights movement
* African immigration to the United States
* West Indian Americans
* African American–Jewish relations
* African American–Korean American relations
===Diaspora===

* African Americans in Africa
** African Americans in Ghana
** Americo-Liberian people
** Sierra Leone Creole people
* African Americans in Canada
* African Americans in France
* African Americans in Israel
* Black Nova Scotians
* Samaná Americans
* Haitian emigration
* Merikins
===Lists===

* Index of articles related to African Americans
* List of African-American neighborhoods
* List of majority-Black counties in the United States
* List of African-American newspapers and media outlets
* List of historically black colleges and universities
* List of African-American astronauts
* List of African-American inventors and scientists
* List of African-American LGBT people
* List of African American poets
* List of African-American visual artists
* List of monuments to African Americans
* List of populated places in the United States with African-American plurality populations
* List of topics related to the African diaspora
* List of African-American holidays
* Lists of African Americans

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Finkelman, Paul, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of African American History, 1619–1895: From the Colonial Period to the Age of Frederick Douglass&quot; (3 vol Oxford University Press, 2006).
** Finkelman, Paul, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of African American History, 1896 to the Present: From the Age of Segregation to the Twenty-first Century&quot; (5 vol. Oxford University Press, US, 2009).
* John Hope Franklin, Alfred Moss, &quot;From Slavery to Freedom. A History of African Americans&quot;, McGraw-Hill Education 2001, standard work, first edition in 1947.
* Gates, Henry L. and Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham (eds), &quot;African American Lives&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2004 – more than 600 biographies.
* Hine, Darlene Clark, Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, Elsa Barkley Brown (eds), &quot;Black Women in America: An Historical Encyclopedia&quot;, (Indiana University Press 2005).
* Horton, James Oliver, and Lois E. Horton. &quot;Hard Road to Freedom: The Story of African America, African Roots Through the Civil War. Vol. 1&quot; (Rutgers University Press, 2002); &quot;Hard Road to Freedom: The Story of African America: Volume 2: From the Civil War to the Millennium&quot; (2002). online
* Kranz, Rachel. &quot;African-American Business Leaders and Entrepreneurs&quot; (Infobase Publishing, 2004).
* Salzman, Jack, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of Afro-American culture and history&quot;, New York City: Macmillan Library Reference US, 1996.
* 
==External links==

* Richard Thompson Ford Name Games, &quot;Slate&quot;, September 16, 2004. Article discussing the problems of defining &quot;African American&quot;
* &quot;Scientific American&quot; Magazine (June 2006) Trace Elements Reconnecting African Americans to an ancestral past
* Black History related original documents and photos
* Frank Newport, &quot;Black or African American?&quot; , Gallup, September 28, 2007
* &quot;The Long Journey of Black Americans&quot; – slideshow by &quot;The First Post&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="0" end="17" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="33" end="48" title="African Americans" label="Black Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="74" end="88" title="African Americans" label="Afro-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021105" start="97" end="128" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States" label="American racial or ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="143" end="152" title="Americans" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="200" end="205" title="Black people" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="223" end="229" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="314" end="329" title="White Americans" label="White Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="402" end="440" title="Slavery in the United States" label="Africans enslaved in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="780" end="791" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="805" end="819" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="855" end="869" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="876" end="891" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q162881" start="903" end="927" title="African-American history" label="African-American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="1027" end="1049" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="European slave traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500942" start="1054" end="1085" title="Middle Passage" label="transported across the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="1089" end="1111" title="Slavery in the colonial history of the United States" label="the Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="1135" end="1143" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="1155" end="1169" title="slavery in the colonial history of the United States" label="sold as slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="1211" end="1221" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="1237" end="1261" title="plantation complexes in the Southern United States" label="in the southern colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="1306" end="1317" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="1387" end="1406" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="1458" end="1495" title="slavery in the United States" label="Black people continued to be enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="1527" end="1541" title="Southern United States" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="1582" end="1591" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="liberated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1621" end="1630" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="1647" end="1661" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="1675" end="1686" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="1707" end="1720" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="1776" end="1791" title="White supremacy in the United States" label="White supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243712" start="1822" end="1842" title="second-class citizen" label="second-class citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="1870" end="1898" title="Disfranchisement after the Reconstruction era" label="disenfranchised in the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857543" start="1956" end="1995" title="Military history of African Americans" label="military conflicts of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="2009" end="2035" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="migration out of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="2062" end="2080" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="2090" end="2111" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q106830522" start="2164" end="2196" title="racism against African Americans" label="racism against African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279585" start="2201" end="2231" title="Racial inequality in the United States" label="racial socioeconomic disparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="2519" end="2531" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="2630" end="2643" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007177" start="2717" end="2741" title="African-American culture" label="African-American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689680" start="2829" end="2840" title="African-American art" label="visual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q388170" start="2842" end="2852" title="African-American literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q123050602" start="2876" end="2886" title="Africana philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q555997" start="2898" end="2905" title="Soul food" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278945" start="2907" end="2913" title="African Americans in sports" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q388207" start="2919" end="2924" title="African-American music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267955" start="3002" end="3016" title="Music of the United States" label="American music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="3028" end="3032" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="3034" end="3040" title="Gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="3042" end="3047" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="3049" end="3062" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="3064" end="3068" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="3070" end="3075" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="3077" end="3082" title="house music" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="3084" end="3090" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="3092" end="3099" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="3101" end="3108" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913982" start="3110" end="3114" title="Trap music" label="trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="3120" end="3124" title="Soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="3307" end="3332" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="transatlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="3358" end="3365" title="Middle Africa" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="3370" end="3381" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185974" start="3724" end="3742" title="Juan Ponce de León" label="Juan Ponce de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="3795" end="3810" title="Spanish Florida" label="Spanish Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573404" start="3866" end="3885" title="Spanish settlement of Puerto Rico" label="Spanish Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919465" start="3911" end="3924" title="Captaincy General of Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="3932" end="3941" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784722" start="3949" end="3971" title="San Miguel de Gualdape" label="San Miguel de Gualdape"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026651" start="4007" end="4017" title="Winyah Bay" label="Winyah Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="4038" end="4052" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028779" start="4083" end="4106" title="Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón" label="Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="4278" end="4294" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="4479" end="4489" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370004" start="4536" end="4543" title="Estevanico" label="Esteban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277677" start="4572" end="4590" title="Narváez expedition" label="Narváez expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505587" start="4669" end="4682" title="Spanish Texas" label="Spanish Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="4691" end="4700" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="4800" end="4807" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="4839" end="4846" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q487988" start="4872" end="4885" title="St. Augustine, Florida" label="St. Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="5042" end="5057" title="British America" label="English America"/>
<link wikidata="Q69525019" start="5108" end="5138" title="First Africans in Virginia" label="&amp;quot;20 and odd negroes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="5154" end="5163" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="5165" end="5173" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881525" start="5178" end="5190" title="Old Point Comfort" label="Cape Comfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="5209" end="5227" title="indentured servant" label="indentured servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="6151" end="6163" title="Interracial marriage" label="intermarried"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="6198" end="6205" title="settler" label="settler"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="6277" end="6286" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253543" start="6494" end="6504" title="John Punch (slave)" label="John Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131276049" start="6554" end="6563" title="Hugh Gwyn" label="Hugh Gwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="6587" end="6602" title="Spanish Florida" label="Spanish Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="6609" end="6616" title="Spaniards" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983486" start="6632" end="6643" title="Placage" label="unions with"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807320" start="6644" end="6653" title="Pensacola people" label="Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="6655" end="6660" title="Muscogee" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="6664" end="6671" title="List of ethnic groups of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="6760" end="6767" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="6773" end="6780" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="6822" end="6839" title="Province of Georgia" label="colony of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6920" end="6931" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36174" start="6933" end="6948" title="Charles II of Spain" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q487988" start="7090" end="7103" title="St. Augustine, Florida" label="St. Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="7188" end="7195" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772839" start="7280" end="7295" title="Anthony Johnson (American Colonial)" label="Anthony Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203017" start="7356" end="7366" title="John Casor" label="John Casor"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="7520" end="7544" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="7621" end="7634" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7648" end="7661" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="7750" end="7763" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="7985" end="7995" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896875" start="8035" end="8058" title="partus sequitur ventrum" label="partus sequitur ventrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="8466" end="8483" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Spanish Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600115" start="8602" end="8624" title="Coartación (slavery)" label="&amp;quot;coartación&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q115681851" start="8857" end="8871" title="French creoles" label="French creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="8899" end="8909" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539196" start="9107" end="9119" title="slave patrol" label="slave patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155622" start="9284" end="9299" title="slave rebellion" label="slave rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="9529" end="9538" title="rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344888" start="9677" end="9692" title="First Great Awakening" label="Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="9749" end="9766" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="9822" end="9839" title="English Americans" label="English Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="10041" end="10067" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128823" start="10172" end="10187" title="James Armistead" label="James Armistead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244270" start="10189" end="10203" title="Prince Whipple" label="Prince Whipple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087468" start="10209" end="10224" title="Oliver Cromwell (American soldier)" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264431" start="10240" end="10254" title="Black Loyalist" label="Black Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921389" start="10377" end="10396" title="Black Nova Scotians" label="Black Nova Scotians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983498" start="10405" end="10431" title="Sierra Leone Creole people" label="Sierra Leone Creole people"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="10441" end="10458" title="Spanish Louisiana" label="Spanish Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q386687" start="10469" end="10487" title="Bernardo de Gálvez" label="Bernardo de Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="10558" end="10569" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="10657" end="10668" title="Baton Rouge" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="10759" end="10765" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="10767" end="10774" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="10780" end="10789" title="Pensacola" label="Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081883" start="11055" end="11097" title="Francisco Luis Héctor de Carondelet" label="Francisco Luis Héctor, baron of Carondelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130244" start="11326" end="11331" title="pardo" label="pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="11688" end="11703" title="US Constitution" label="US Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256823" start="11785" end="11799" title="3/5 compromise" label="3/5 compromise"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11828" end="11847" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clause 1: Slave trade" label="Section 9, Clause 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q343039" start="11880" end="11917" title="Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves" label="Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921545" start="11930" end="11949" title="Fugitive slave laws in the United States" label="Fugitive slave laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507275" start="11968" end="11989" title="Fugitive Slave Clause" label="Fugitive Slave Clause"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12010" end="12041" title="Article Four of the United States Constitution#Clause 3: Fugitive Slave Clause" label="Article IV, Section 2, Clause 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895269" start="12075" end="12079" title="Fugitive Slave Act of 1793" label="1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q535519" start="12084" end="12088" title="Fugitive Slave Act of 1850" label="1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="12494" end="12518" title="Antebellum United States" label="Antebellum United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="12583" end="12602" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="12608" end="12626" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="12641" end="12660" title="Dred Scott decision" label="Dred Scott decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223430" start="12666" end="12705" title="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry" label="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="12721" end="12730" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="12964" end="12984" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="13201" end="13211" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="13307" end="13314" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210911" start="13391" end="13420" title="American Colonization Society" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197048" start="13775" end="13781" title="King Cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="13882" end="13903" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="13909" end="13920" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299277" start="13931" end="13953" title="Slavery in the District of Columbia" label="Washington, D.C.–based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="14006" end="14018" title="slave states and free states" label="slave states"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14034" end="14054" title="Slavery in the United States#Domestic slave trade and forced migration" label="domestic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167733" start="14346" end="14356" title="Ira Berlin" label="Ira Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169929" start="15008" end="15020" title="Wilson Chinn" label="Wilson Chinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200625" start="15085" end="15091" title="Gordon (slave)" label="Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="15410" end="15415" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="15666" end="15676" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000084" start="15724" end="15742" title="Wilberforce Colony" label="Wilberforce Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="16061" end="16079" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="16091" end="16106" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="16118" end="16143" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="16409" end="16429" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612823" start="16458" end="16484" title="Naturalization Act of 1790" label="Naturalization Act of 1790"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="16528" end="16542" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="14th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="16589" end="16603" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="15th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="17042" end="17060" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="17065" end="17083" title="disfranchisement after the American Civil War" label="disenfranchisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="17390" end="17417" title="ethnic violence" label="racially motivated violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773230" start="17482" end="17497" title="Anthony Overton" label="Anthony Overton"/>
<link wikidata="Q291068" start="17502" end="17521" title="Mary McLeod Bethune" label="Mary McLeod Bethune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="17551" end="17558" title="Historically Black colleges and universities" label="schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922295" start="17560" end="17568" title="Black church" label="churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163519" start="17810" end="17842" title="nadir of American race relations" label="nadir of American race relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q656660" start="17964" end="17982" title="Plessy v. Ferguson" label="Plessy v. Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101979" start="18092" end="18109" title="voter suppression in the United States" label="voter suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="18465" end="18480" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="18576" end="18584" title="Northern United States" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981049" start="18782" end="18792" title="Red Summer" label="Red Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091648" start="18955" end="18980" title="Chicago race riot of 1919" label="Chicago race riot of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846324" start="18989" end="19012" title="Omaha race riot of 1919" label="Omaha race riot of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q106830522" start="19073" end="19096" title="Racism against Black Americans" label="systemic discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q98686765" start="19268" end="19292" title="Hampton Negro Conference" label="Hampton Negro Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335929" start="19595" end="19616" title="Exclusionary covenants" label="restrictive covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="19618" end="19627" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279592" start="19632" end="19647" title="racial steering" label="racial steering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="19870" end="19882" title="White flight" label="White flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q777636" start="20107" end="20119" title="Urban League" label="Urban League"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="20121" end="20126" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q829895" start="20283" end="20301" title="Harlem Renaissance" label="Harlem Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957374" start="20303" end="20328" title="Chicago Black Renaissance" label="Chicago Black Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136776" start="20335" end="20346" title="Cotton Club" label="Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="20411" end="20425" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="20589" end="20597" title="Jim Crow" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="20618" end="20639" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q506878" start="20734" end="20745" title="Emmett Till" label="Emmett Till"/>
<link wikidata="Q11013713" start="20817" end="20835" title="Money, Mississippi" label="Money, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118082" start="20874" end="20886" title="wolf-whistle" label="wolf-whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="21225" end="21240" title="White supremacy" label="White supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728463" start="21334" end="21348" title="all-White jury" label="all-White jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q41921" start="21400" end="21410" title="Rosa Parks" label="Rosa Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982838" start="21501" end="21511" title="Mamie Till" label="Mamie Till"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128871" start="21675" end="21715" title="March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom" label="March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824562" start="21812" end="21827" title="Presidency of John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824563" start="21832" end="21849" title="Presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="21897" end="21921" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="21991" end="22003" title="Trade union" label="labor unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="22013" end="22030" title="Voting Rights Act" label="Voting Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q880483" start="22211" end="22222" title="Black Power" label="Black Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="23564" end="23581" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q66789308" start="23593" end="23615" title="List of African-American federal judges" label="first African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q239657" start="23648" end="23664" title="Shirley Chisholm" label="Shirley Chisholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="23709" end="23720" title="United States Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q881154" start="23731" end="23745" title="Douglas Wilder" label="Douglas Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="23812" end="23827" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q289396" start="23925" end="23944" title="Carol Moseley-Braun" label="Carol Moseley-Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="23948" end="23956" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="24012" end="24021" title="United States Senate" label="US Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="24346" end="24366" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="24389" end="24399" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="24400" end="24407" title="United States Senator" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="24408" end="24420" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="24476" end="24484" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="24485" end="24495" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="24504" end="24515" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="24726" end="24732" title="Asian Americans" label="Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="24738" end="24747" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="24977" end="24989" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="25001" end="25010" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="reelected"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="25028" end="25038" title="term limit" label="final term"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="25090" end="25103" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="25224" end="25238" title="Asian American" label="Asian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="25251" end="25286" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312521" start="25302" end="25312" title="Juneteenth" label="Juneteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004345" start="25433" end="25448" title="1790 United States census" label="first US census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="25587" end="25596" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="25807" end="25814" title="Freedman" label="freemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="26060" end="26073" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="26099" end="26114" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="26215" end="26227" title="Black people" label="Black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007852" start="26269" end="26288" title="New Great Migration" label="that trend reversed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="26338" end="26346" title="Sun Belt" label="Sun Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="26756" end="26770" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 US census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="26812" end="26817" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="26873" end="26882" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="26900" end="26907" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="26938" end="26945" title="Western United States" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920978" start="27233" end="27293" title="Black Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="African Americans identified as Hispanic or Latino in origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="27318" end="27327" title="Afro-Brazilians" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904259" start="27329" end="27341" title="Afro–Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290725" start="27343" end="27352" title="Dominican Americans" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q388467" start="27354" end="27359" title="Afro-Cubans" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639720" start="27361" end="27368" title="Haitian Americans" label="Haitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036435" start="27379" end="27393" title="Afro–Latin Americans" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="27493" end="27498" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="27503" end="27510" title="German Americans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="27529" end="27540" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985442" start="27663" end="27711" title="West Indian Americans" label="non-Hispanic Black immigrants from the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920978" start="27929" end="27944" title="Black Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Black Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="28709" end="28736" title="Multiracial Americans" label="people of mixed-race origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032863" start="29283" end="29301" title="Nigerian Americans" label="Nigerian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403534" start="29306" end="29325" title="Ethiopian Americans" label="Ethiopian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="29553" end="29558" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="29634" end="29641" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="29665" end="29672" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="29692" end="29703" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="29810" end="29819" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="30027" end="30042" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007852" start="30085" end="30104" title="New Great Migration" label="New Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="30234" end="30243" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="30245" end="30252" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="30254" end="30260" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="30262" end="30272" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="30274" end="30284" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="30286" end="30293" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="30295" end="30300" title="Tampa" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="30302" end="30313" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="30315" end="30326" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="30328" end="30335" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="30337" end="30346" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="30348" end="30360" title="Jacksonville" label="Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="30528" end="30541" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754965" start="30543" end="30550" title="Chicago metropolitan area" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="30556" end="30567" title="Greater Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q971998" start="30640" end="30647" title="Metro Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="30649" end="30655" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="30661" end="30668" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="30868" end="30899" title="New York City metropolitan area" label="New York City metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600887" start="31046" end="31071" title="List of U.S. cities with large Black populations" label="cities of 100,000 or more"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567323" start="31073" end="31094" title="South Fulton, Georgia" label="South Fulton, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28198" start="31241" end="31261" title="Jackson, Mississippi" label="Jackson, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="31269" end="31286" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="31294" end="31313" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q721455" start="31321" end="31343" title="Miami Gardens, Florida" label="Miami Gardens, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="31351" end="31369" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="31377" end="31396" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="31404" end="31423" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="31431" end="31447" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80517" start="31455" end="31476" title="Shreveport, Louisiana" label="Shreveport, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="31484" end="31506" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q219656" start="31514" end="31528" title="Macon, Georgia" label="Macon, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="31536" end="31558" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q342043" start="31566" end="31583" title="Hampton, Virginia" label="Hampton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="31591" end="31609" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="31617" end="31632" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="31640" end="31655" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49193" start="31663" end="31686" title="Brockton, Massachusetts" label="Brockton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="31698" end="31715" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q492488" start="31724" end="31753" title="Claiborne County, Mississippi" label="Claiborne County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="31770" end="31776" title="county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q108418" start="31811" end="31832" title="Cook County, Illinois" label="Cook County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q261383" start="32006" end="32041" title="View Park–Windsor Hills, California" label="View Park–Windsor Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="32159" end="32186" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County"/>
<link wikidata="Q753993" start="32195" end="32208" title="Mitchellville, Maryland" label="Mitchellville"/>
<link wikidata="Q753530" start="32210" end="32218" title="Woodmore, Maryland" label="Woodmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q753334" start="32220" end="32234" title="Upper Marlboro, Maryland" label="Upper Marlboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q501319" start="32240" end="32254" title="Charles County, Maryland" label="Charles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q486398" start="32268" end="32281" title="DeKalb County, Georgia" label="Dekalb County"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456847" start="32290" end="32300" title="Stonecrest, Georgia" label="Stonecrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409037" start="32302" end="32310" title="Lithonia, Georgia" label="Lithonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545865" start="32312" end="32322" title="Smoke Rise, Georgia" label="Smoke Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q337348" start="32353" end="32372" title="Charles City County, Virginia" label="Charles City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q804862" start="32386" end="32399" title="Baldwin Hills, Los Angeles" label="Baldwin Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682743" start="32415" end="32424" title="Hillcrest, Rockland County, New York" label="Hillcrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q985341" start="32429" end="32438" title="Uniondale, New York" label="Uniondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q976904" start="32456" end="32466" title="Cedar Hill, Texas" label="Cedar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q981771" start="32468" end="32474" title="DeSoto, Texas" label="DeSoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q980055" start="32480" end="32493" title="Missouri City, Texas" label="Missouri City"/>
<link wikidata="Q108418" start="32600" end="32621" title="Cook County, Illinois" label="Cook County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432178" start="32867" end="32881" title="Olympia Fields, Illinois" label="Olympia Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q404614" start="32883" end="32896" title="South Holland, Illinois" label="South Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265697" start="32898" end="32907" title="Flossmoor, Illinois" label="Flossmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998830" start="32909" end="32917" title="Matteson, Illinois" label="Matteson"/>
<link wikidata="Q600928" start="32923" end="32930" title="Lynwood, Illinois" label="Lynwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="32932" end="32955" title="Queens" label="Queens County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441982" start="33096" end="33113" title="Seatack, Virginia" label="Seatack, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774388" start="33282" end="33300" title="Anti-literacy laws in the United States" label="anti-literacy laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155622" start="33594" end="33603" title="slave rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="34016" end="34032" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="34812" end="34824" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="36019" end="36029" title="illiteracy" label="illiteracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673675" start="36482" end="36497" title="Achievement gap in the United States" label="achievement gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="36615" end="36633" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109023" start="38326" end="38339" title="College Board" label="College Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q379676" start="38379" end="38397" title="Advanced Placement" label="advanced placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q376717" start="38526" end="38538" title="Euro-centric" label="Euro-centric"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="38646" end="38662" title="African diaspora" label="African diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q113168948" start="38721" end="38748" title="AP African American Studies" label="AP African American Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="38959" end="38982" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="segregated institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="39226" end="39235" title="southeastern United States" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279585" start="39664" end="39697" title="Racial inequality in the United States" label="Racial disparity in poverty rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019421" start="39748" end="39784" title="African-American poverty" label="poverty rate among African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314000" start="39945" end="39953" title="physical disorder" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="39958" end="39971" title="mental disorder" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281187" start="39982" end="39992" title="disability and poverty" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141203" start="39994" end="40011" title="cognitive deficit" label="cognitive deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673675" start="40014" end="40040" title="Achievement gap in the United States" label="low educational attainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="40729" end="40736" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="40741" end="40747" title="Asian Americans" label="Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q242345" start="40992" end="41003" title="S&amp;amp;P 500" label="S&amp;amp;P 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="41186" end="41199" title="US businesses" label="US businesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="41350" end="41362" title="White-collar worker" label="white-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="42742" end="42755" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="42978" end="42993" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931244" start="43534" end="43549" title="underemployment" label="underemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928428" start="43666" end="43692" title="Bureau of Labor Statistics" label="Bureau of Labor Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="44237" end="44243" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019421" start="44551" end="44597" title="African-American family structure" label="72% of Black babies were born to unwed mothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964738" start="44683" end="44701" title="Walter E. Williams" label="Walter E. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="45126" end="45154" title="United States Congress" label="Congressional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844584" start="45228" end="45251" title="Home-ownership in the United States" label="Homeownership in the US"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916205" start="45662" end="45710" title="Housing discrimination in the United States" label="anti-discrimination housing laws and protections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248585" start="45947" end="45967" title="debt-to-income ratio" label="debt-to-income ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183784" start="45972" end="45985" title="Credit score in the United States" label="credit scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="46398" end="46412" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="46778" end="46794" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="46803" end="46829" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2024 Presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="46881" end="46894" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="46927" end="46939" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="47253" end="47261" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136690" start="47483" end="47492" title="Sectionalism" label="sectional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="47510" end="47515" title="Northern United States" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="47520" end="47525" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="47585" end="47597" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="47602" end="47609" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="47747" end="47763" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="47770" end="47791" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="47799" end="47807" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975718" start="47880" end="47898" title="New Deal coalition" label="New Deal coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="48106" end="48121" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="48126" end="48143" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="48264" end="48277" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922301" start="48280" end="48292" title="Black conservatism in the United States" label="Conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069020" start="48809" end="48834" title="Lift Every Voice and Sing" label="Lift Every Voice and Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="49169" end="49182" title="Gallup survey" label="Gallup survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q664194" start="49238" end="49242" title="LGBT rights in the United States" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="50004" end="50022" title="European Americans" label="European Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="50152" end="50159" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="50161" end="50169" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="50175" end="50187" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="51019" end="51029" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="51183" end="51193" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="vaccinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="51202" end="51210" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="51526" end="51550" title="US Department of Justice" label="US Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="52383" end="52425" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="52466" end="52497" title="sexually transmitted infections" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="52551" end="52559" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="52564" end="52573" title="Chlamydia infection" label="chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="52601" end="52610" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099260" start="52654" end="52686" title="HIV/AIDS in the United States" label="HIV/AIDS among African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003274" start="52710" end="52720" title="Homophobia in the African American community" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="52781" end="52789" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856816" start="53207" end="53243" title="Obstacles to receiving mental health services among African American youth" label="barriers for accessing mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817463" start="53254" end="53264" title="Mental health counselor" label="Counseling"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="54417" end="54432" title="White Americans" label="White Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="55012" end="55025" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206313" start="55444" end="55463" title="Cultural competence in healthcare" label="cultural competency"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="55592" end="55599" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56860" end="56865" title="History of sexual slavery in the United States#Under chattel slavery" label="raped"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="57372" end="57377" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="57394" end="57405" title="Niger-Congo languages" label="Niger-Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="57593" end="57599" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="57612" end="57619" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="57633" end="57638" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858580" start="58005" end="58015" title="Barbadians" label="Barbadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q819186" start="58158" end="58166" title="Mandinka people" label="Mandenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="58171" end="58176" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="58525" end="58538" title="Guinea Bissau" label="Guinea Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="58540" end="58547" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="58552" end="58564" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="58584" end="58590" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="58907" end="58917" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Penn State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767250" start="58929" end="58944" title="Mark D. Shriver" label="Mark D. Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651795" start="59857" end="59862" title="Haplogroup E-V38" label="E-V38"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="59899" end="59905" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="59912" end="59916" title="East Africa" label="east"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="59920" end="59924" title="West Africa" label="west"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613372" start="59958" end="59962" title="Haplogroup E-M2" label="E-M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="60039" end="60044" title="Y chromosome" label="Y-DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613372" start="60150" end="60154" title="Haplogroup E-M2" label="E-M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251" start="60335" end="60350" title="Bantu migration" label="Bantu migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q674896" start="60433" end="60436" title="Haplogroup R1b (Y-DNA)" label="R1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q429334" start="60620" end="60632" title="Haplogroup I-M170" label="haplogroup I"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="60716" end="60721" title="Mitochondrial DNA" label="mtDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q122595" start="61005" end="61008" title="Haplogroup L1 (mtDNA)" label="L1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629931" start="61010" end="61017" title="Haplogroup L2 (mtDNA)" label="L2b,c,d"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584176" start="61023" end="61028" title="Haplogroup L3 (mtDNA)" label="L3b,d"/>
<link wikidata="Q122595" start="61066" end="61069" title="Haplogroup L1 (mtDNA)" label="L1c"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584176" start="61074" end="61077" title="Haplogroup L3 (mtDNA)" label="L3e"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="61528" end="61561" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279585" start="62159" end="62176" title="Racial inequality in the United States" label="racial wealth gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q106830522" start="62517" end="62523" title="racism against African Americans" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978009" start="63330" end="63363" title="National Registry of Exonerations" label="National Registry of Exonerations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847734" start="63573" end="63587" title="stop-and-frisk" label="stop-and-frisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688614" start="63751" end="63767" title="police use of deadly force in the United States" label="killed by police"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="63857" end="63875" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64097" end="64130" title="Karen (slang)#Origin" label="different name over the centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q95530210" start="64281" end="64286" title="Karen (slang)" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="64381" end="64395" title="Murder of George Floyd" label="Floyd’s murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="64567" end="64575" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405745" start="65392" end="65405" title="Single parents in the United States" label="Single-parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q181589" start="65704" end="65726" title="anti-miscegenation law" label="anti-miscegenation law"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566065" start="65745" end="65770" title="Maryland General Assembly" label="Maryland General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="65794" end="65814" title="interracial marriage" label="interracial marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q577909" start="65831" end="65851" title="Charleston, Illinois" label="Charleston, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="65861" end="65876" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q297816" start="66271" end="66286" title="Sammy Davis Jr." label="Sammy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q212879" start="66343" end="66352" title="Kim Novak" label="Kim Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586470" start="66354" end="66364" title="Harry Cohn" label="Harry Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="66885" end="66893" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66914" end="66940" title="Loving v. Virginia#Plaintiffs" label="Mildred and Richard Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="67249" end="67263" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="14th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345835" start="67314" end="67332" title="Loving v. Virginia" label="Loving v. Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q589889" start="67393" end="67417" title="California Proposition 8" label="California Proposition 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="67900" end="67914" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="67916" end="67928" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="67930" end="67938" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="67940" end="67948" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="67950" end="67954" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="67969" end="67975" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781419" start="68083" end="68091" title="Maryland Question 6" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736425" start="68093" end="68098" title="Maine Question 1, 2012" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972154" start="68104" end="68114" title="Washington Referendum 74" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q25645" start="68192" end="68242" title="Minnesota Amendment 1" label="constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772698" start="68523" end="68539" title="Affair" label="extramarital sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="68708" end="68723" title="progressive tax" label="progressive tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857543" start="68815" end="68857" title="Military history of African Americans" label="African Americans have fought in every war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483473" start="68865" end="68893" title="Military history of the United States" label="history of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="68939" end="68960" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21260516" start="68972" end="68992" title="Black Power movement" label="Black Power movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="69219" end="69232" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="69460" end="69482" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q179366" start="69773" end="69780" title="boycott" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="69783" end="69789" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="69792" end="69802" title="nonviolent" label="nonviolent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412282" start="70469" end="70489" title="Free Speech Movement" label="Free Speech Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="70495" end="70503" title="Disability" label="disabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q15580856" start="70509" end="70530" title="Feminist movement" label="women&amp;#x27;s movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15320003" start="70536" end="70551" title="migrant workers" label="migrant workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304751" start="70574" end="70605" title="Native American rights movement" label="Native American rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997883" start="70642" end="70664" title="Why We Can&amp;#x27;t Wait" label="Why We Can&amp;#x27;t Wait"/>
<link wikidata="Q464962" start="71058" end="71075" title="Robert L. Johnson" label="Robert L. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="71116" end="71119" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="71269" end="71272" title="Hip hop music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="71277" end="71284" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q214346" start="71559" end="71565" title="Viacom (2005–2019)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876998" start="71754" end="71761" title="BET Her" label="BET Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503321" start="71860" end="71866" title="TV One (Radio One)" label="TV One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280957" start="71887" end="71896" title="Urban One" label="Urban One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053441" start="71924" end="71940" title="Cathy Hughes" label="Catherine Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877626" start="72120" end="72128" title="NBC News" label="NBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738314" start="72158" end="72165" title="TheGrio" label="TheGrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153191" start="72206" end="72215" title="news site" label="news site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712777" start="72332" end="72350" title="The Africa Channel" label="The Africa Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808089" start="72403" end="72411" title="Aspire (TV network)" label="aspireTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q134183" start="72502" end="72515" title="Magic Johnson" label="Magic Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835498" start="72583" end="72598" title="BET Media Group" label="BET Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="72667" end="72670" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876998" start="72674" end="72681" title="BET Her" label="BET Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="72685" end="72688" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="72704" end="72707" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922164" start="72850" end="72859" title="Bounce TV" label="Bounce TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q283457" start="72903" end="72924" title="E. W. Scripps Company" label="E. W. Scripps Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081974" start="72928" end="72936" title="Fox Soul" label="Fox Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573619" start="73048" end="73069" title="Oprah Winfrey Network" label="Oprah Winfrey Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="73113" end="73126" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q107074885" start="73148" end="73170" title="Warner Bros. Discovery" label="Warner Bros. Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012913" start="73175" end="73188" title="Harpo Studios" label="Harpo Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318582" start="73317" end="73323" title="Revolt (TV network)" label="Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="73371" end="73404" title="Sean Combs" label="Sean &amp;quot;Puff Daddy&amp;quot; Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149527" start="73408" end="73433" title="Soul of the South Network" label="Soul of the South Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738314" start="73468" end="73475" title="TheGrio" label="TheGrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503321" start="73555" end="73561" title="TV One (U.S. TV network)" label="TV One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73617" end="73624" title="TV One (American TV channel)#Cleo TV" label="Cleo TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q277633" start="73654" end="73664" title="millennial" label="millennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="73669" end="73681" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949152" start="73690" end="73695" title="We TV" label="We TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652575" start="73707" end="73719" title="AMC Networks" label="AMC Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="74110" end="74114" title="Sweet potato" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q80531" start="74131" end="74135" title="okra" label="okra"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="74137" end="74144" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543770" start="74146" end="74151" title="grits" label="grits"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="74153" end="74163" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q422662" start="74165" end="74175" title="indigo dye" label="indigo dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q296898" start="74278" end="74302" title="George Washington Carver" label="George Washington Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q555997" start="74378" end="74387" title="Soul food" label="Soul food"/>
<link wikidata="Q381416" start="74474" end="74511" title="cuisine of the Southern United States" label="cuisine of the Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="74674" end="74684" title="soul music" label="soul music"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="74783" end="74791" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767245" start="75236" end="75260" title="African-American English" label="African-American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="75266" end="75273" title="Variety (linguistics)" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="75275" end="75282" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q951873" start="75284" end="75293" title="ethnolect" label="ethnolect"/>
<link wikidata="Q207101" start="75299" end="75308" title="sociolect" label="sociolect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="75313" end="75329" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="75356" end="75369" title="working class" label="working-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="75382" end="75394" title="middle class" label="middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="75658" end="75665" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="75670" end="75679" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="75689" end="75714" title="Southern American English" label="Southern American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="75961" end="75972" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger–Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q388170" start="76372" end="76399" title="African-American literature" label="African American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q33395" start="76462" end="76477" title="Gullah language" label="Gullah language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="76498" end="76504" title="Creole language" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="76554" end="76568" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="76573" end="76580" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560779" start="76588" end="76594" title="Gullah" label="Gullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q27867" start="76620" end="76640" title="Afro-Seminole Creole" label="Afro-Seminole Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315711" start="76651" end="76666" title="Black Seminoles" label="Black Seminoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="76681" end="76687" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q973984" start="76692" end="76712" title="Brackettville, Texas" label="Brackettville, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185127" start="76714" end="76730" title="Louisiana Creole" label="Louisiana Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q33260" start="76736" end="76755" title="French-based creole languages" label="French-based creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="76777" end="76786" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002012" start="76816" end="76838" title="African-American names" label="African-American names"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="78285" end="78296" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="79010" end="79020" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922295" start="79084" end="79096" title="Black church" label="Black church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973180" start="79541" end="79559" title="Watchnight service" label="Watchnight service"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="80040" end="80048" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q496651" start="80114" end="80146" title="National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc." label="National Baptist Convention, USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970937" start="80155" end="80193" title="National Baptist Convention of America, Inc." label="National Baptist Convention of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="80222" end="80231" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="80268" end="80302" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q384125" start="80311" end="80350" title="African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="80353" end="80365" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q391499" start="80433" end="80456" title="Church of God in Christ" label="Church of God in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="80615" end="80638" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="80723" end="80732" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="80809" end="80833" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="80881" end="80886" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="80971" end="80977" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="81179" end="81196" title="Black nationalism" label="Black nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400211" start="81268" end="81301" title="Moorish Science Temple of America" label="Moorish Science Temple of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q220222" start="81337" end="81352" title="Nation of Islam" label="Nation of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="81460" end="81469" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="81480" end="81492" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="81645" end="81664" title="Hajj" label="pilgrimage to Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030011" start="81675" end="81695" title="Warith Deen Mohammed" label="Warith Deen Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q345182" start="81708" end="81723" title="Elijah Muhammad" label="Elijah Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="81823" end="81837" title="Sunni Islam" label="orthodox Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219783" start="81840" end="81864" title="African-American Muslims" label="African American Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735001" start="81893" end="81913" title="Islam in the United States" label="US Muslim population"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="81932" end="81937" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030011" start="82005" end="82021" title="W. Deen Mohammed" label="W. Deen Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q49075" start="82050" end="82065" title="Louis Farrakhan" label="Louis Farrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149615" start="82166" end="82187" title="African-American Jews" label="African American Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="82254" end="82292" title="American Jews" label="Jewish population in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="82336" end="82345" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="82381" end="82389" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="82391" end="82398" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="82483" end="82489" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="82491" end="82503" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q339284" start="82505" end="82522" title="Reconstructionist Judaism" label="Reconstructionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="82527" end="82535" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q21652002" start="82752" end="82761" title="religious syncretism" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415143" start="82792" end="82815" title="Black Hebrew Israelites" label="Black Hebrew Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="82904" end="82914" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147832" start="83035" end="83058" title="who is a Jew" label="according to Jewish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="83323" end="83331" title="Atheism" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="83394" end="83402" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q388207" start="83419" end="83441" title="African-American music" label="African American music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="83595" end="83602" title="Hip hop music" label="Hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="83604" end="83611" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="83613" end="83617" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="83619" end="83632" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="83634" end="83638" title="soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="83640" end="83645" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="83780" end="83785" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q546359" start="83787" end="83794" title="doo-wop" label="doo-wop"/>
<link wikidata="Q807820" start="83796" end="83806" title="Barbershop music" label="barbershop"/>
<link wikidata="Q185652" start="83808" end="83815" title="ragtime" label="ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="83817" end="83826" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="83828" end="83832" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="83838" end="83850" title="gospel music" label="gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="83962" end="83975" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="84006" end="84013" title="Country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="84018" end="84024" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903368" start="84546" end="84559" title="Bill T. Jones" label="Bill T. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q449037" start="84772" end="84783" title="Alvin Ailey" label="Alvin Ailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611114" start="85005" end="85013" title="Stepping (African-American)" label="stepping"/>
<link wikidata="Q388170" start="85336" end="85363" title="African-American literature" label="African American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q188093" start="85429" end="85444" title="Langston Hughes" label="Langston Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q273210" start="85446" end="85459" title="James Baldwin (writer)" label="James Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319820" start="85461" end="85475" title="Richard Wright (author)" label="Richard Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q220480" start="85477" end="85495" title="Zora Neale Hurston" label="Zora Neale Hurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q299965" start="85497" end="85510" title="Ralph Ellison" label="Ralph Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q72334" start="85531" end="85544" title="Toni Morrison" label="Toni Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q19526" start="85550" end="85562" title="Maya Angelou" label="Maya Angelou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560680" start="85565" end="85590" title="African-American inventor" label="African American inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="85681" end="85691" title="innovation" label="innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297386" start="85693" end="85709" title="Norbert Rillieux" label="Norbert Rillieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="85815" end="85824" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="85920" end="85942" title="Egyptian hieroglyphs" label="Egyptian hieroglyphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48584" start="85952" end="85965" title="Rosetta Stone" label="Rosetta Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="86034" end="86045" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="86056" end="86071" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983192" start="86238" end="86252" title="Jan Matzeliger" label="Jan Matzeliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329419" start="86313" end="86325" title="Elijah McCoy" label="Elijah McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115447" start="86389" end="86404" title="Granville Woods" label="Granville Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316686" start="86523" end="86540" title="Garrett A. Morgan" label="Garrett A. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q732229" start="86601" end="86621" title="Lewis Howard Latimer" label="Lewis Howard Latimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498379" start="86709" end="86733" title="Frederick McKinley Jones" label="Frederick McKinley Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662696" start="86820" end="86836" title="Lloyd Quarterman" label="Lloyd Quarterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="86927" end="86944" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="87046" end="87055" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349688" start="87223" end="87247" title="Robert Sengstacke Abbott" label="Robert Sengstacke Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047158" start="87296" end="87313" title="Carter G. Woodson" label="Carter G. Woodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q458206" start="87330" end="87349" title="Black History Month" label="Black History Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268401" start="87457" end="87483" title="Johnson Publishing Company" label="Johnson Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="87643" end="87656" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149038" start="87937" end="87944" title="colored" label="colored"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="87958" end="87973" title="person of color" label="person of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="87990" end="87995" title="negro" label="negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="88115" end="88130" title="White supremacy" label="White supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q252000" start="88135" end="88145" title="oppression" label="oppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="88269" end="88279" title="authorship" label="authorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="88535" end="88550" title="German Americans" label="German American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="88554" end="88568" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="88593" end="88608" title="Slavery in the United States" label="American slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="88673" end="88681" title="Cultural heritage" label="heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="88772" end="88785" title="word of mouth" label="word of mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="88831" end="88844" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="89302" end="89308" title="Gallup, Inc." label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="89613" end="89629" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291321" start="89642" end="89654" title="AP Stylebook" label="AP Stylebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="89972" end="89990" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="90490" end="90504" title="pan-Africanism" label="pan-Africanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="90565" end="90578" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="90580" end="90596" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q737469" start="90602" end="90616" title="George Padmore" label="George Padmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032468" start="90638" end="90644" title="Usonia" label="Usonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="90796" end="90820" title="Federal government of the United States" label="United States government"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="91073" end="91104" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="91195" end="91209" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 US census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="91943" end="91974" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="91982" end="92006" title="United States Department of Justice" label="US Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="92312" end="92337" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="US Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="92361" end="92392" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="92447" end="92458" title="Miscegenation" label="race mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="92500" end="92505" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q181589" start="92538" end="92561" title="anti-miscegenation laws" label="anti-miscegenation laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848246" start="92594" end="92602" title="Interracial marriage in the United States" label="marrying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="92638" end="92654" title="colonial America" label="colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="92693" end="92708" title="Southern United States" label="Southern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="92719" end="92732" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345835" start="92770" end="92788" title="Loving v. Virginia" label="Loving v. Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="92919" end="92937" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173832" start="92970" end="92987" title="David Brion Davis" label="David Brion Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="93074" end="93087" title="Plantations in the American South" label="planter class"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="93358" end="93374" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q257464" start="93392" end="93405" title="Sally Hemings" label="Sally Hemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261404" start="93473" end="93503" title="Notes on the State of Virginia" label="Notes on the State of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="93772" end="93790" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q561458" start="93801" end="93822" title="Henry Louis Gates Jr." label="Henry Louis Gates Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="93892" end="93899" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93947" end="93955" title="#Genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="93968" end="93993" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="93995" end="94011" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="94247" end="94260" title="Miscegenation" label="intermarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="94509" end="94522" title="Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="94645" end="94656" title="Scotch-Irish American" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848246" start="95081" end="95126" title="Interracial marriage in the United States" label="date and marry interracially than Black women"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="95205" end="95210" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="95215" end="95222" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="95486" end="95491" title="Salon.com" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248456" start="95506" end="95521" title="Debra Dickerson" label="Debra Dickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="95553" end="95558" title="Black people" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q355531" start="96529" end="96543" title="Stanley Crouch" label="Stanley Crouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="96555" end="96574" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082647" start="96588" end="96606" title="Charles Steele Jr." label="Charles Steele Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q605130" start="96614" end="96654" title="Southern Christian Leadership Conference" label="Southern Christian Leadership Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233310" start="96686" end="96702" title="David Ehrenstein" label="David Ehrenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="96716" end="96733" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q738600" start="96805" end="96816" title="Magic Negro" label="Magic Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059155" start="97141" end="97172" title="American Descendants of Slavery" label="American Descendants of Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="97769" end="97780" title="Pan-Africanism" label="Pan-African"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="97832" end="97849" title="Black nationalism" label="Black nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="97851" end="97867" title="Anti-imperialism" label="anti-imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q584548" start="97869" end="97881" title="Anti-Zionism" label="anti-Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q865354" start="97887" end="97907" title="Scientific socialism" label="Scientific socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727764" start="97917" end="97971" title="All-African People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party" label="All-African People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party (A-APRP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="97990" end="97997" title="African diaspora" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458580" start="98028" end="98039" title="Republic of New Afrika" label="New Afrikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="98098" end="98107" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q509860" start="98112" end="98122" title="Stokely Carmichael" label="Kwame Ture"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="98400" end="98426" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Trans-Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="98584" end="98601" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="98698" end="98703" title="negro" label="negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534615" start="98717" end="98727" title="Free negro" label="Free negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q210911" start="98858" end="98887" title="American Colonization Society" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149038" start="99150" end="99157" title="colored" label="colored"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="99594" end="99604" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q735469" start="99826" end="99851" title="United Negro College Fund" label="United Negro College Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="100124" end="100130" title="nigger" label="nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117010" start="100325" end="100330" title="nigga" label="nigga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767245" start="100384" end="100408" title="African-American English" label="African American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="100454" end="100457" title="rap" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="100462" end="100469" title="Hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267955" start="100470" end="100484" title="Music of the United States" label="music cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="100511" end="100519" title="In-group and out-group" label="in-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="100520" end="100527" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="100562" end="100572" title="Pejorative" label="derogatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="100826" end="100831" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689680" start="101177" end="101197" title="African-American art" label="African-American art"/>
<link wikidata="Q124693085" start="101200" end="101223" title="African American cinema" label="African American cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922381" start="101226" end="101255" title="African-American middle class" label="African-American middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689646" start="101258" end="101287" title="African-American neighborhood" label="African-American neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743182" start="101290" end="101318" title="African-American upper class" label="African-American upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242628" start="101321" end="101353" title="African diaspora in the Americas" label="African diaspora in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906231" start="101356" end="101366" title="Afrophobia" label="Afrophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113168948" start="101369" end="101396" title="AP African American Studies" label="AP African American Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q880087" start="101399" end="101431" title="Black Belt in the American South" label="Black Belt in the American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920978" start="101434" end="101469" title="Black Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Black Hispanic and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922378" start="101472" end="101483" title="Black mecca" label="Black mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q115862364" start="101486" end="101500" title="Black Ozarkers" label="Black Ozarkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060614" start="101503" end="101520" title="Black Southerners" label="Black Southerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q991031" start="101522" end="101534" title="Brown Babies" label="Brown Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689617" start="101537" end="101570" title="Civil rights movement (1865–1896)" label="Civil rights movement (1865–1896)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10579095" start="101573" end="101606" title="Civil rights movement (1896–1954)" label="Civil rights movement (1896–1954)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312521" start="101609" end="101619" title="Juneteenth" label="Juneteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073495" start="101622" end="101677" title="National Museum of African American History and Culture" label="National Museum of African American History and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053671" start="101680" end="101715" title="North Africans in the United States" label="North Africans in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="101718" end="101775" title="Criollo people#Spanish colonial caste system" label="Society and Black people in the Spanish Colonial Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565427" start="101778" end="101801" title="South African Americans" label="South African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611285" start="101804" end="101836" title="Stereotypes of African Americans" label="Stereotypes of African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065301" start="101839" end="101876" title="Timeline of the civil rights movement" label="Timeline of the civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690023" start="101879" end="101919" title="African immigration to the United States" label="African immigration to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985442" start="101922" end="101943" title="West Indian Americans" label="West Indian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689650" start="101946" end="101979" title="African American–Jewish relations" label="African American–Jewish relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123982952" start="101982" end="102024" title="African American–Korean American relations" label="African American–Korean American relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690161" start="102043" end="102070" title="African Americans in Africa" label="African Americans in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715263" start="102074" end="102100" title="African Americans in Ghana" label="African Americans in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267945" start="102104" end="102127" title="Americo-Liberian people" label="Americo-Liberian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983498" start="102131" end="102157" title="Sierra Leone Creole people" label="Sierra Leone Creole people"/>
<link wikidata="Q122573951" start="102160" end="102187" title="African Americans in Canada" label="African Americans in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689696" start="102190" end="102217" title="African Americans in France" label="African Americans in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q108730617" start="102220" end="102247" title="African Americans in Israel" label="African Americans in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921389" start="102250" end="102269" title="Black Nova Scotians" label="Black Nova Scotians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408766" start="102272" end="102288" title="Samaná Americans" label="Samaná Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210587" start="102291" end="102309" title="Haitian emigration" label="Haitian emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906870" start="102312" end="102320" title="Merikins" label="Merikins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018802" start="102336" end="102382" title="Index of articles related to African Americans" label="Index of articles related to African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560685" start="102385" end="102423" title="List of African-American neighborhoods" label="List of African-American neighborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600919" start="102426" end="102478" title="List of majority-Black counties in the United States" label="List of majority-Black counties in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277446" start="102481" end="102534" title="List of African-American newspapers and media outlets" label="List of African-American newspapers and media outlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623377" start="102537" end="102589" title="List of historically black colleges and universities" label="List of historically black colleges and universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722344" start="102592" end="102627" title="List of African-American astronauts" label="List of African-American astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560680" start="102630" end="102679" title="List of African-American inventors and scientists" label="List of African-American inventors and scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136839" start="102682" end="102718" title="List of African-American LGBT people" label="List of African-American LGBT people"/>
<link wikidata="Q125758557" start="102721" end="102751" title="List of African American poets" label="List of African American poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560690" start="102754" end="102793" title="List of African-American visual artists" label="List of African-American visual artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851191" start="102796" end="102834" title="List of monuments to African Americans" label="List of monuments to African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974350" start="102837" end="102926" title="List of populated places in the United States with African-American plurality populations" label="List of populated places in the United States with African-American plurality populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643464" start="102929" end="102975" title="List of topics related to the African diaspora" label="List of topics related to the African diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q116846602" start="102978" end="103011" title="List of African-American holidays" label="List of African-American holidays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997243" start="103014" end="103040" title="Lists of African Americans" label="Lists of African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367397" start="103477" end="103495" title="John Hope Franklin" label="John Hope Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17523844" start="103798" end="103817" title="Darlene Clark Hine" label="Hine, Darlene Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367283" start="103819" end="103839" title="Rosalyn Terborg-Penn" label="Rosalyn Terborg-Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734174" start="105026" end="105040" title="The First Post" label="The First Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2161" wikidata="Q713244" url="?curid=2161" title="Artistic License">
<text>The Artistic License is an open-source license used for certain free and open-source software packages, most notably the standard implementation of the Perl programming language and most CPAN modules, which are dual-licensed under the Artistic License and the GNU General Public License (GPL).

== History ==

=== Artistic License 1.0 ===
The original Artistic License was written by Larry Wall. The name of the license is a reference to the concept of artistic license.

Whether or not the original Artistic License is a free software license is largely unsettled. The Free Software Foundation explicitly called the original Artistic License a non-free license, criticizing it as being &quot;too vague; some passages are too clever for their own good, and their meaning is not clear&quot;. The FSF recommended that the license not be used on its own, but approved the common AL/GPL dual-licensing approach for Perl projects.

In response to this, Bradley Kuhn, who later worked for the Free Software Foundation, made a minimal redraft to clarify the ambiguous passages. This was released as the Clarified Artistic License and was approved by the FSF. It is used by the Paros Proxy, the JavaFBP toolkit and NcFTP.

The terms of the Artistic License 1.0 were at issue in &quot;Jacobsen v. Katzer&quot; in the initial 2009 ruling by the United States District Court for the Northern District of California declared that FOSS-like licenses could only be enforced through contract law rather than through copyright law, in contexts where contract damages would be difficult to establish. On appeal, a federal appellate court &quot;determined that the terms of the Artistic License are enforceable copyright conditions&quot;. The case was remanded to the District Court, which did not apply the superior court&#x27;s criteria on the grounds that, in the interim, the governing Supreme Court precedent applicable to the case had changed. However, this left undisturbed the finding that a free and open-source license nonetheless has economic value. Jacobsen ultimately prevailed in 2010, and the Case established a new standard making terms and conditions under Artistic License 1.0 enforceable through copyright statutes and relevant precedents.

=== Artistic License 2.0 ===
In response to the Request for Comments (RFC) process for improving the licensing position for Raku, Kuhn&#x27;s draft was extensively rewritten by Roberta Cairney and Allison Randal for readability and legal clarity, with input from the Perl community. This resulted in the Artistic License 2.0, which has been approved as both a free software and open source license.

The Artistic license 2.0 is also notable for its excellent license compatibility with other FOSS licenses due to a relicensing clause, a property other licenses like the GPL lack.

It has been adopted by some of the Raku implementations, the Mojolicious framework and the NPM. It is also used by the SNEeSe emulator, which was formerly licensed under the Clarified Artistic License.

The OSI recommends that all developers and projects licensing their products with the Artistic License adopt Artistic License 2.0.

== See also ==
*Software using the Artistic license (category)

== References ==
== External links ==
* Version 1.0
** The Artistic LicenseThe original Artistic License 1.0, the one which is still used by Perl and CPAN; They use a disjunction of the Artistic License 1.0 and the GNU GPL for Perl 5 and above.
** The Clarified Artistic License
* Version 2.0
** The Artistic License 2.0It&#x27;s e.g. used by Parrot.
** 2.0 revision RFC process
* Prominent uses
** DuskThe first online Novel and Blog written under Artistic License 2.0.
** Is about R.E.M.&#x27;s choice of the Artistic License 2.0 for videos from one of their albums.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q713244" start="4" end="20" title="Artistic License" label="Artistic License"/>
<link wikidata="Q97044024" start="27" end="46" title="open-source license" label="open-source license"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="64" end="93" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="152" end="177" title="Perl" label="Perl programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q841507" start="187" end="191" title="CPAN" label="CPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367082" start="211" end="224" title="dual-licensed" label="dual-licensed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="260" end="286" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q92597" start="384" end="394" title="Larry Wall" label="Larry Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q922131" start="453" end="469" title="artistic license" label="artistic license"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943414" start="522" end="543" title="free software license" label="free software license"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="570" end="594" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367082" start="883" end="897" title="dual-licensing" label="dual-licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305639" start="948" end="960" title="Bradley Kuhn" label="Bradley Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1170" end="1181" title="Paros Proxy" label="Paros Proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172543" start="1187" end="1202" title="Dataflow programming" label="JavaFBP toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q955865" start="1207" end="1212" title="NcFTP" label="NcFTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119806" start="1276" end="1294" title="Jacobsen v. Katzer" label="Jacobsen v. Katzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889830" start="1335" end="1403" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of California" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="1418" end="1422" title="FOSS" label="FOSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="1468" end="1480" title="contract law" label="contract law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="1501" end="1514" title="copyright law" label="copyright law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="1597" end="1620" title="United States court of appeals" label="federal appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="2290" end="2310" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052676" start="2366" end="2370" title="Raku (programming language)" label="Raku"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2419" end="2434" title="Roberta Cairney" label="Roberta Cairney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296638" start="2439" end="2453" title="Allison Randal" label="Allison Randal"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="2602" end="2615" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q97044024" start="2620" end="2631" title="Open-source license" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q19092" start="2701" end="2722" title="license compatibility" label="license compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885225" start="2757" end="2768" title="Software relicensing" label="relicensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052676" start="2858" end="2878" title="Raku (programming language)" label="Raku implementations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075011" start="2884" end="2895" title="Mojolicious" label="Mojolicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067518" start="2914" end="2917" title="Npm (software)" label="NPM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2942" end="2948" title="SNEeSe" label="SNEeSe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="2949" end="2957" title="emulator" label="emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q845918" start="3030" end="3033" title="Open Source Initiative" label="OSI"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3174" end="3220" title=":Category:Software using the Artistic license" label="Software using the Artistic license (category)"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="3705" end="3711" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2162" wikidata="Q14196" url="?curid=2162" title="Afrikaans">
<text>Afrikaans is a West Germanic language spoken in South Africa, Namibia and (to a lesser extent) Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe. It evolved from the Dutch vernacular of South Holland (Hollandic dialect) spoken by the predominantly Dutch settlers and enslaved population of the Dutch Cape Colony, where it gradually began to develop distinguishing characteristics in the 17th and 18th centuries.

Although Afrikaans has adopted words from other languages including German, Malay and Khoisan languages, an estimated 90 to 95% of the vocabulary of Afrikaans is of Dutch origin. Differences between Afrikaans and Dutch often lie in the more analytic morphology and grammar of Afrikaans, and different spellings. There is a large degree of mutual intelligibility between the two languages, especially in written form.

== Etymology ==

The name of the language comes directly from the Dutch word (now spelled ) meaning &#x27;African&#x27;. It was previously referred to as &#x27;Cape Dutch&#x27; ( or ), a term also used to refer to the early Cape settlers collectively, or the derogatory &#x27;kitchen Dutch&#x27; () from its use by slaves of colonial settlers &quot;in the kitchen&quot;.

==History==

===Origin===

The Afrikaans language arose in the Dutch Cape Colony, through a gradual divergence from European Dutch dialects, during the course of the 18th century. As early as the mid-18th century and as recently as the early-20th century, pre-standardized Afrikaans was still viewed by the many in Southern Africa as &#x27;kitchen Dutch&#x27; (), lacking the prestige accorded an officially recognised language like Dutch and English, at that time. In the 19th century Boer republics, proto-Afrikaans was not yet widely seen by the Afrikaner population itself, nor by its leaders, as a separate language to standard Dutch. Dutch was expressly the sole and only legally recognised language at that time. Other early epithets, in Southern Africa, setting apart (&#x27;Cape Dutch&#x27;, i.e. Proto-Afrikaans) as putatively beneath official Dutch language standards included , and (&#x27;mutilated, broken, or uncivilised Dutch&#x27;), as well as (&#x27;incorrect Dutch&#x27;).
Historical linguist Hans den Besten theorises that modern Standard Afrikaans derives from two sources:
* Cape Dutch, a direct transplantation of European Dutch to Southern Africa, and
* &#x27;Hottentot Dutch&#x27;, a pidgin that descended from &#x27;Foreigner Talk&#x27; and ultimately from the Dutch pidgin spoken by slaves, via hypothetical Dutch-based creole languages.

So Afrikaans, in his view, is neither a creole nor a direct descendant of Dutch, but a fusion of two transmission pathways.

=== Development ===

Most of the first settlers whose descendants today are the Afrikaners were from the United Provinces (now Netherlands), with up to one-sixth of the community of French Huguenot origin, and a seventh from Germany.

African and Asian workers, Cape Coloured children of European settlers and Khoikhoi women, and slaves contributed to the development of Afrikaans. The slave population was made up of people from East Africa, West Africa, Mughal India, Madagascar, and the Dutch East Indies (modern Indonesia). A number were also indigenous Khoisan people, who were valued as interpreters, domestic servants, and labourers. Many free and enslaved women married or cohabited with the male Dutch settlers. M. F. Valkhoff argued that 75% of children born to female slaves in the Dutch Cape Colony between 1652 and 1672 had a Dutch father. Sarah Grey Thomason and Terrence Kaufman argue that Afrikaans&#x27; development as a separate language was &quot;heavily conditioned by nonwhites who learned Dutch imperfectly as a second language.&quot;

Beginning in about 1815, Afrikaans started to replace Malay as the language of instruction in Muslim schools in South Africa, written with the Arabic alphabet: see Arabic Afrikaans. Later, Afrikaans, now written with the Latin script, started to appear in newspapers and political and religious works in around 1850 (alongside the already established Dutch).

In 1875 a group of Afrikaans-speakers from the Cape formed the (&#x27;Society for Real Afrikaners&#x27;), and published a number of books in Afrikaans including grammars, dictionaries, religious materials and histories.

Until the early 20th century Afrikaans was considered a Dutch dialect, alongside Standard Dutch, which it eventually replaced as an official language. Before the Boer wars, &quot;and indeed for some time afterwards, Afrikaans was regarded as inappropriate for educated discourse. Rather, Afrikaans was described derogatorily as &#x27;a kitchen language&#x27; or &#x27;a bastard jargon&#x27;, suitable for communication mainly between the Boers and their servants.&quot;

=== Recognition ===

In 1925 Afrikaans was recognised by the South African government as a distinct language, rather than simply a vernacular of Dutch. On 8 May 1925, that is 23 years after the Second Boer War ended, the Official Languages of the Union Act, 1925 was passed—mostly due to the efforts of the Afrikaans-language movement—at a joint sitting of the House of Assembly and the Senate, in which the Afrikaans language was declared a variety of Dutch. The Constitution of 1961 reversed the position of Afrikaans and Dutch, so that English and Afrikaans were the official languages, and Afrikaans was deemed to include Dutch. The Constitution of 1983 removed any mention of Dutch altogether.

The Afrikaans Language Monument is on a hill overlooking Paarl in the Western Cape Province. Officially opened on 10 October 1975, it was erected on the 100th anniversary of the founding of the Society of Real Afrikaners, and the 50th anniversary of Afrikaans being declared an official language of South Africa in distinction to Dutch.

===Standardisation===

The earliest Afrikaans texts were some doggerel verse from 1795 and a dialogue transcribed by a Dutch traveller in 1825. Afrikaans used the Latin alphabet around this time, although the Cape Muslim community used the Arabic script. In 1861, L.H. Meurant published his (&quot;Conversation between Nicholas Truthsayer and John Doubter&quot;), which is considered to be the first book published in Afrikaans.

The first grammar book was published in 1876; a bilingual dictionary was later published in 1902. The main modern Afrikaans dictionary in use is the (HAT). A new authoritative dictionary, called (WAT), was under development The official orthography of Afrikaans is the , compiled by .

===The Afrikaans Bible===
The Afrikaners primarily were Protestants, of the Dutch Reformed Church of the 17th century. Their religious practices were later influenced in South Africa by British ministries during the 1800s. A landmark in the development of the language was the translation of the whole Bible into Afrikaans. While significant advances had been made in the textual criticism of the Bible, especially the Greek New Testament, the 1933 translation followed the Textus Receptus and was closely akin to the . Before this, most Cape Dutch-Afrikaans speakers had to rely on the Dutch . This had its origins with the Synod of Dordrecht of 1618 and was thus in an archaic form of Dutch. This was hard for Dutch speakers to understand, and increasingly unintelligible for Afrikaans speakers.

C. P. Hoogehout, , and Stephanus Jacobus du Toit were the first Afrikaans Bible translators. Important landmarks in the translation of the Scriptures were in 1878 with C. P. Hoogehout&#x27;s translation of the (Gospel of Mark, lit. &#x27;Gospel according to Mark&#x27;); however, this translation was never published. The manuscript is to be found in the South African National Library, Cape Town.

The first official translation of the entire Bible into Afrikaans was in 1933 by J. D. du Toit, E. E. van Rooyen, J. D. Kestell, H. C. M. Fourie, and BB Keet. This monumental work established Afrikaans as , that is &quot;a pure and proper language&quot; for religious purposes, especially among the deeply Calvinist Afrikaans religious community that previously had been sceptical of a Bible translation that varied from the Dutch version that they were used to.

In 1983 a fresh translation marked the 50th anniversary of the 1933 version. The final editing of this edition was done by E. P. Groenewald, A. H. van Zyl, P. A. Verhoef, J. L. Helberg and W. Kempen. This translation was influenced by Eugene Nida&#x27;s theory of dynamic equivalence which focused on finding the nearest equivalent in the receptor language to the idea that the Greek, Hebrew or Aramaic wanted to convey.

A new translation, was released in November 2020. It is the first truly ecumenical translation of the Bible in Afrikaans as translators from various churches, including the Roman Catholic and Anglican Churches, were involved.

=== Classification ===
* Indo-European languages
** Germanic
*** West Germanic
**** Low Franconian
***** Dutch
****** Afrikaans

Afrikaans descended from Dutch dialects in the 17th century. It belongs to a West Germanic sub-group, the Low Franconian languages. Other West Germanic languages related to Afrikaans are German, English, the Frisian languages, Yiddish, and the unstandardised language Low German.

==Geographic distribution==
===Statistics===


===Sociolinguistics===

Besides South-Africa, Afrikaans is also widely spoken in Namibia. Before independence, Afrikaans had equal status with German as an official language. Since independence in 1990, Afrikaans has had constitutional recognition as a national, but not official, language. There is a much smaller number of Afrikaans speakers among Zimbabwe&#x27;s white minority, as most have left the country since 1980. Afrikaans was also a medium of instruction for schools in Bophuthatswana, an Apartheid-era Bantustan. Eldoret in Kenya was founded by Afrikaners.

There are also around 30,000 South-Africans in the Netherlands, of which the majority are of Afrikaans-speaking Afrikaner and Coloured South-African descent. A much smaller and unknown number of Afrikaans speakers also reside in the Dutch Caribbean.

Contrary to popular belief, the majority of Afrikaans speakers today are not Afrikaners or Boers, but Coloureds.

In 1976, secondary-school pupils in Soweto began a rebellion in response to the government&#x27;s decision that Afrikaans be used as the language of instruction for half the subjects taught in non-White schools (with English continuing for the other half). Although English is the mother tongue of only 8.2% of the population, it is the language most widely understood, and the second language of a majority of South Africans. Afrikaans is more widely spoken than English in the Northern and Western Cape provinces, several hundred kilometres from Soweto. The Black community&#x27;s opposition to Afrikaans and preference for continuing English instruction was underlined when the government rescinded the policy one month after the uprising: 96% of Black schools chose English (over Afrikaans or native languages) as the language of instruction. Afrikaans-medium schools were also accused of using language policy to deter Black African parents. Some of these parents, in part supported by provincial departments of education, initiated litigation which enabled enrolment with English as language of instruction. By 2006 there were 300 single-medium Afrikaans schools, compared to 2,500 in 1994, after most converted to dual-medium education. Due to Afrikaans being viewed as the &quot;language of the white oppressor&quot; by some, pressure has been increased to remove Afrikaans as a teaching language in South African universities, resulting in bloody student protests in 2015.

Under South Africa&#x27;s Constitution of 1996, Afrikaans remains an official language, and has equal status to English and nine other languages. The new policy means that the use of Afrikaans is now often reduced in favour of English, or to accommodate the other official languages. In 1996, for example, the South African Broadcasting Corporation reduced the amount of television airtime in Afrikaans, while South African Airways dropped its Afrikaans name from its livery. Similarly, South Africa&#x27;s diplomatic missions overseas now display the name of the country only in English and their host country&#x27;s language, and not in Afrikaans. Meanwhile, the constitution of the Western Cape, which went into effect in 1998, declares Afrikaans to be an official language of the province alongside English and Xhosa.

The Afrikaans-language general-interest family magazine has the largest readership of any magazine in the country.

When the British design magazine &quot;Wallpaper&quot; described Afrikaans as &quot;one of the world&#x27;s ugliest languages&quot; in its September 2005 article about the monument, South African billionaire Johann Rupert (chairman of the Richemont Group), responded by withdrawing advertising for brands such as Cartier, Van Cleef &amp; Arpels, Montblanc and Alfred Dunhill from the magazine. The author of the article, Bronwyn Davies, was an English-speaking South African.

=== Mutual intelligibility with Dutch ===

An estimated 90 to 95 percent of the Afrikaans lexicon is ultimately of Dutch origin, and there are few lexical differences between the two languages. Afrikaans has a considerably more regular morphology, grammar, and spelling. There is a high degree of mutual intelligibility between the two languages, particularly in written form.

Afrikaans acquired some lexical and syntactical borrowings from other languages such as Malay, Khoisan languages, Portuguese, German and Bantu languages. Afrikaans has also been significantly influenced by South African English, especially in the Western Cape. Dutch speakers are confronted with fewer non-cognates when listening to Afrikaans than the other way round. Mutual intelligibility thus tends to be asymmetrical, as it is easier for Dutch speakers to understand Afrikaans than for Afrikaans speakers to understand Dutch.

In general, mutual intelligibility between Dutch and Afrikaans is far better than between Dutch and Frisian or between Danish and Swedish. The South African poet writer Breyten Breytenbach, attempting to visualise the language distance for Anglophones once remarked that the differences between (Standard) Dutch and Afrikaans are comparable to those between the Received Pronunciation and Southern American English.

==Current status==

Afrikaans is an official language of the Republic of South Africa and a recognised national language of the Republic of Namibia. Post-apartheid South Africa has seen a loss of preferential treatment by the government for Afrikaans, in terms of education, social events, media (TV and radio), and general status throughout the country, given that it now shares its place as official language with ten other languages. Nevertheless, Afrikaans remains more prevalent in the media – radio, newspapers and television – than any of the other official languages, except English. More than 300 book titles in Afrikaans are published annually. South African census figures suggest a decreasing number of first language Afrikaans speakers in South Africa from 13.5% in 2011 to 10.6% in 2022. The South African Institute of Race Relations (SAIRR) projects that a growing majority of Afrikaans speakers will be Coloured. Afrikaans speakers experience higher employment rates than other South African language groups, though half a million were unemployed.

Despite the challenges of demotion and emigration that it faces in South Africa, the Afrikaans vernacular remains competitive, being popular in DSTV pay channels and several internet sites, while generating high newspaper and music CD sales. A resurgence in Afrikaans popular music since the late 1990s has invigorated the language, especially among a younger generation of South Africans. A recent trend is the increased availability of pre-school educational CDs and DVDs. Such media also prove popular with the extensive Afrikaans-speaking emigrant communities who seek to retain language proficiency in a household context.

Afrikaans-language cinema showed signs of new vigour in the early 21st century. The 2007 film , the first full-length Afrikaans movie since in 1998, is seen as the dawn of a new era in Afrikaans cinema. Several short films have been created and more feature-length movies, such as &quot;Poena Is Koning&quot; and (both in 2008) have been produced, besides the 2011 Afrikaans-language film , which was the first Afrikaans film to screen at the Cannes Film Festival. The film was also released in 2011. The Afrikaans film industry started gaining international recognition via the likes of big Afrikaans Hollywood film stars, like Charlize Theron (&quot;Monster&quot;) and Sharlto Copley (&quot;District 9&quot;) promoting their mother tongue.

SABC 3 announced early in 2009 that it would increase Afrikaans programming due to the &quot;growing Afrikaans-language market and [their] need for working capital as Afrikaans advertising is the only advertising that sells in the current South African television market&quot;. In April 2009, SABC3 started screening several Afrikaans-language programmes. There is a groundswell movement within Afrikaans to be inclusive, and to promote itself along with the indigenous official languages. In Namibia, the percentage of Afrikaans speakers declined from 11.4% (2001 Census) to 10.4% (2011 Census). The major concentrations are in Hardap (41.0%), ǁKaras (36.1%), Erongo (20.5%), Khomas (18.5%), Omaheke (10.0%), Otjozondjupa (9.4%), Kunene (4.2%), and Oshikoto (2.3%).

Some native speakers of Bantu languages and English also speak Afrikaans as a second language. It is widely taught in South African schools, with about 10.3 million second-language students.

Afrikaans is offered at many universities outside South Africa, including in the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, Poland, Russia and the United States.

==Grammar==
In Afrikaans grammar, there is no distinction between the infinitive and present forms of verbs, with the exception of the verbs &#x27;to be&#x27; and &#x27;to have&#x27;.
In addition, verbs do not conjugate differently depending on the subject. For example,
Only a handful of Afrikaans verbs have a preterite, namely the auxiliary (&#x27;to be&#x27;), the modal verbs, and the verb (&#x27;to think&#x27;). The preterite of (&#x27;may&#x27;) is rare in contemporary Afrikaans.

All other verbs use the perfect tense, het + past participle (ge-), for the past. Therefore, there is no distinction in Afrikaans between &quot;I drank&quot; and &quot;I have drunk&quot;. (In colloquial German, the past tense is also often replaced with the perfect.)

When telling a longer story, Afrikaans speakers usually avoid the perfect and simply use the present tense, or historical present tense instead (as is possible, but less common, in English as well).

A particular feature of Afrikaans is its use of the double negative; it is classified in Afrikaans as &quot;&quot; and is something that is absent from the other West Germanic standard languages. For example:
: 
: English: He can not speak Afrikaans. / He can&#x27;t speak Afrikaans.

Both French and San origins have been suggested for double negation in Afrikaans. While double negation is still found in Low Franconian dialects in West Flanders and in some &quot;isolated&quot; villages in the centre of the Netherlands (such as Garderen), it takes a different form, which is not found in Afrikaans. The following is an example:
: * (&quot;lit.&quot; I want not this do not.)
: English: I do not want to do this.

* Compare with , which changes the meaning to &#x27;I want not to do this&#x27;. Whereas emphasizes a lack of desire to act, emphasizes the act itself.

The was the Middle Dutch way to negate but it has been suggested that since became highly non-voiced, or was needed to complement the . With time the disappeared in most Dutch dialects.

The double negative construction has been fully grammaticalised in standard Afrikaans and its proper use follows a set of fairly complex rules as the examples below show:

A notable exception to this is the use of the negating grammar form that coincides with negating the English present participle. In this case there is only a single negation.
: 
: English: He is in [the] hospital, though he doesn&#x27;t eat.

Certain words in Afrikaans would be contracted. For example, , which literally means &#x27;must not&#x27;, usually becomes ; although one does not have to write or say it like this, virtually all Afrikaans speakers will change the two words to in the same way as &quot;do not&quot; is contracted to &quot;don&#x27;t&quot; in English.

The Dutch word (&#x27;it&#x27; in English) does not correspond to in Afrikaans. The Dutch words corresponding to Afrikaans are , , and .
==Phonology==

===Vowels===

* As phonemes, and occur only in the words &#x27;mirror&#x27; and &#x27;bullet&#x27;, which used to be pronounced with sequences and , respectively. In other cases, and occur as allophones of, respectively, and before .
* is phonetically long before .
* is always stressed and occurs only in the word &#x27;wedges&#x27;.
* The closest unrounded counterparts of are central , rather than front .
* occur only in a few words.
* occurs as an allophone of before , though this occurs primarily dialectally, most commonly in the former Transvaal and Free State provinces.

====Diphthongs====

* occur mainly in loanwords.

=== Consonants ===

* All obstruents at the ends of words are devoiced, so that e.g. a final is realized as .
* occur only in loanwords. is also an allophone of in some environments.
* is most often uvular . Velar occurs only in some speakers.
* The rhotic is usually an alveolar trill or tap . In some parts of the former Cape Province, it is realized uvularly, either as a trill or a fricative .

==Dialects==
Following early dialectal studies of Afrikaans, it was theorised that three main historical dialects probably existed after the Great Trek in the 1830s. These dialects are the Northern Cape, Western Cape, and Eastern Cape dialects. Northern Cape dialect may have resulted from contact between Dutch settlers and the Khoekhoe people between the Great Karoo and the Kunene, and Eastern Cape dialect between the Dutch and the Xhosa. Remnants of these dialects still remain in present-day Afrikaans, although the standardising effect of Standard Afrikaans has contributed to a great levelling of differences in modern times.

There is also a prison cant, known as Sabela, which is based on Afrikaans, yet heavily influenced by Zulu. This language is used as a secret language in prison and is taught to initiates.

=== Patagonian Afrikaans ===

Patagonian Afrikaans is a distinct dialect of Afrikaans is spoken by the 650-strong South African community of Argentina, in the region of Patagonia.

=== Namibian Afrikaans ===

Namibian Afrikaans is a variety of Afrikaans spoken in Namibia. The country was governed by South Africa until 1990, which had favoured Afrikaans. Before that, Dutch had been introduced when the Dutch occupied Walvis Bay and the surrounding area.

== Influences on Afrikaans from other languages ==

=== Malay ===
Due to the early settlement of a Cape Malay community in Cape Town, who are now known as Coloureds, numerous Classical Malay words were brought into Afrikaans. Some of these words entered Dutch via people arriving from what is now known as Indonesia as part of their colonial heritage. Malay words in Afrikaans include:
* , which means &#x27;very&#x27;/&#x27;much&#x27;/&#x27;many&#x27; (from ) is a very commonly used Afrikaans word, different from its Dutch equivalent or .
* , Afrikaans for jacket (from , ultimately from Persian), used where Dutch would use or . The word &quot; in Dutch is now considered archaic and only used in written, literary texts.
* , a traditional Cape-Malay dish, made from spiced minced meat baked with an egg-based topping.
* , which means banana. This is different from the common Dutch word &quot;. The Indonesian word is also used in Dutch, though usage is less common.
* , which means saucer (from , also from Persian).
* , a dish similar to shish kebab.

=== Portuguese ===
Some words originally came from Portuguese such as (&#x27;umbrella&#x27;) from the Portuguese , (&#x27;pen/cattle enclosure&#x27;) from the Portuguese and (&#x27;corn&#x27;, from ). Some of these words also exist in Dutch, like &#x27;parasol&#x27;, though usage is less common and meanings can slightly differ.

=== Khoisan languages ===
* , meaning cannabis
* , meaning lizard, diminutive adapted from a Khoekhoe word
* , meaning insect, from the Khoisan 
* , blanket of animal hides
* , walking stick from Khoekhoe

Some of these words also exist in Dutch, though with a more specific meaning: for example means &#x27;South-African tribal javelin&#x27; and means &#x27;South-African tribal blanket of animal hides&#x27;.

=== Bantu languages ===
Loanwords from Bantu languages in Afrikaans include the names of indigenous birds, such as and , and indigenous plants, such as and .
* , from the Zulu word meaning &#x27;scholar&#x27; or &#x27;student&quot;&#x27;, but used to mean someone who is a student of/expert on a certain subject, i.e. &quot;He is a language &quot;.
* , meaning bride price, from (and referring to) &quot;lobolo&quot; of the Nguni languages
* , the grey crowned crane, known in Latin as &quot;Balearica regulorum&quot;
* , medium-sized dioecious tree known in Latin as &quot;Sclerocarya birrea&quot;
* , species of thatching grass known as &quot;Hyparrhenia&quot;
* , deciduous tree also known by its Latin name, &quot;Spirostachys africana&quot;
* / , an adaption of the word &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;to go home&quot; or &quot;to knock off (from work)&quot;.

=== French ===
The revoking of the Edict of Nantes on 22 October 1685 was a milestone in the history of South Africa, for it marked the beginning of the great Huguenot exodus from France. It is estimated that between 250,000 and 300,000 Protestants left France between 1685 and 1700; out of these, according to Louvois, 100,000 had received military training. A measure of the calibre of these immigrants and of their acceptance by host countries (in particular South Africa) is given by H. V. Morton in his book: &quot;In Search of South Africa&quot; (London, 1948). The Huguenots were responsible for a great linguistic contribution to Afrikaans, particularly in terms of military terminology as many of them fought on the battlefields during the wars of the Great Trek.

Most of the words in this list are descendants from Dutch borrowings from French, Old French or Latin, and are not direct influences from French on Afrikaans.

==Orthography==
The Afrikaans writing system is based on Dutch, using the 26 letters of the ISO basic Latin alphabet, plus 16 additional vowels with diacritics. The hyphen (e.g. in a compound like &#x27;sea duck&#x27;), apostrophe (e.g. &#x27;mothers&#x27;), and a whitespace character (e.g. in multi-word units like &#x27;Dead Sea&#x27;) is part of the orthography of words, while the indefinite article is a ligature. All the alphabet letters, including those with diacritics, have capital letters as allographs; the does not have a capital letter allograph. This means that Afrikaans has 88 graphemes with allographs in total.

In Afrikaans, many consonants are dropped from the earlier Dutch spelling. For example, &#x27; (&#x27;only&#x27;) in Dutch becomes &#x27; in Afrikaans. Also, Afrikaans and some Dutch dialects make no distinction between and , having merged the latter into the former; while the word for &quot;south&quot; is written &#x27; in Dutch, it is spelled &#x27; in Afrikaans (as well as dialectal Dutch writings) to represent this merger. Similarly, the Dutch digraph &#x27;, normally pronounced as , corresponds to Afrikaans &#x27;, except where it replaces the Dutch suffix &quot;&quot; which is pronounced as , as in &quot; &gt; &quot;.

Another difference is the indefinite article, &#x27; in Afrikaans and in Dutch. &quot;A book&quot; is &#x27; in Afrikaans, whereas it is either &#x27; or &#x27; in Dutch. This &quot;&quot; is usually pronounced as just a weak vowel, , just like English &quot;a&quot;.

The diminutive suffix in Afrikaans is &#x27;, &#x27; or &#x27;, whereas in Dutch it is &#x27; or &quot;&quot;, hence a &quot;bit&quot; is ŉ in Afrikaans and in Dutch.

The letters &quot;c&quot;, &quot;q&quot;, &quot;x&quot;, and &quot;z&quot; occur almost exclusively in borrowings from French, English, Greek and Latin. This is usually because words that had &quot;c&quot; and &quot;ch&quot; in the original Dutch are spelled with &quot;k&quot; and &quot;g&quot;, respectively, in Afrikaans. Similarly original &quot;qu&quot; and &quot;x&quot; are most often spelt &quot;kw&quot; and &quot;ks&quot;, respectively. For example, &#x27; instead of &quot;equatoriaal&quot;, and &#x27; instead of &quot;excuus&quot;.

The vowels with diacritics in non-loanword Afrikaans are: &quot;á&quot;, &quot;ä&quot;, &quot;é&quot;, &quot;è&quot;, &quot;ê&quot;, &quot;ë&quot;, &quot;í&quot;, &quot;î&quot;, &quot;ï&quot;, &quot;ó&quot;, &quot;ô&quot;, &quot;ö&quot;, &quot;ú&quot;, &quot;û&quot;, &quot;ü&quot;, &quot;ý&quot;. Diacritics are ignored when alphabetising, though they are still important, even when typing the diacritic forms may be difficult. For example, &#x27; (&quot;ate&quot;) instead of the 3 e&#x27;s alongside each other: &quot;*&quot;, which can never occur in Afrikaans, or &#x27;, which translates to &quot;say&quot;, whereas &#x27; is a possessive form. The acute&#x27;s (&quot;á&quot;, &quot;é&quot;, &quot;í&quot;, &quot;ó&quot;, &quot;ú, ý)&quot; primary function is to place emphasis on a word (i.e. for emphatic reasons), by adding it to the emphasised syllable of the word. For example, &quot;sál&quot; (&quot;will&quot; (verb)), &quot;néé&quot; (&#x27;no&#x27;), &quot;móét&quot; (&quot;must&quot;), &quot;hý&quot; (&quot;he&quot;), &quot;gewéét&quot; (&quot;knew&quot;). The acute is only placed on the &quot;i&quot; if it is the only vowel in the emphasised word: &quot;wil&quot; (&#x27;want&#x27; (verb)) becomes &quot;wíl&quot;, but &quot;lui&quot; (&#x27;lazy&#x27;) becomes &quot;lúi.&quot; Only a few non-loan words are spelled with acutes, e.g. &quot;dié&quot; (&#x27;this&#x27;), &quot;ná&quot; (&#x27;after&#x27;), &quot;óf ... óf&quot; (&#x27;either ... or&#x27;), &quot;nóg ... nóg&quot; (&#x27;neither ... nor&#x27;), etc. Only four non-loan words are spelled with the grave: &#x27; (&#x27;yes?&#x27;, &#x27;right?&#x27;, &#x27;eh?&#x27;), &quot;&quot; (&#x27;here, take this!&#x27; or &#x27;[this is] yours!&#x27;), &quot;hè&quot; (&#x27;huh?&#x27;, &#x27;what?&#x27;, &#x27;eh?&#x27;), and &quot;appèl&quot; (&#x27;(formal) appeal&#x27; (noun)).

=== Initial apostrophes ===
A few short words in Afrikaans take initial apostrophes. In modern Afrikaans, these words are always written in lower case (except if the entire line is uppercase), and if they occur at the beginning of a sentence, the next word is capitalised. Three examples of such apostrophed words are &#x27;. The last (the indefinite article) is the only apostrophed word that is common in modern written Afrikaans, since the other examples are shortened versions of other words (&#x27; and &quot;&quot;, respectively) and are rarely found outside of a poetic context.

Here are a few examples:
The apostrophe and the following letter are regarded as two separate characters, and are never written using a single glyph, although a single character variant of the indefinite article appears in Unicode, .

===Table of characters===
For more on the pronunciation of the letters below, see &quot;&quot;.

== Sample text ==
Psalm 23 1953 translation:

&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 1em; font-style: italic;&quot; lang=&quot;af&quot;&gt;
Die Here is my Herder, niks sal my ontbreek nie.
Hy laat my neerlê in groen weivelde; na waters waar rus is, lei Hy my heen.
Hy verkwik my siel; Hy lei my in die spore van geregtigheid, om sy Naam ontwil.
Al gaan ek ook in &#x27;n dal van doodskaduwee, ek sal geen onheil vrees nie; want U is met my: u stok en u staf die vertroos my. 
&lt;/poem&gt;

Psalm 23 1983 translation:

&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 1em; font-style: italic;&quot; lang=&quot;af&quot;&gt;
Die Here is my Herder, ek kom niks kort nie.
Hy laat my rus in groen weivelde. Hy bring my by waters waar daar vrede is.
Hy gee my nuwe krag. Hy lei my op die regte paaie tot eer van Sy naam.
Selfs al gaan ek deur donker dieptes, sal ek nie bang wees nie, want U is by my. In U hande is ek veilig.
&lt;/poem&gt;

Lord&#x27;s Prayer (Afrikaans New Living Version translation):

&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 1em; font-style: italic;&quot; lang=&quot;af&quot;&gt;
Ons Vader in die hemel, laat u Naam geheilig word.
Laat u koninkryk kom.
Laat u wil hier op aarde uitgevoer word soos in die hemel.
Gee ons die porsie brood wat ons vir vandag nodig het.
En vergeef ons ons sondeskuld soos ons ook óns skuldenaars vergewe het.
Bewaar ons sodat ons nie aan verleiding sal toegee nie; maar bevry ons van die greep van die bose.
Want aan U behoort die koningskap,
en die krag,
en die heerlikheid,
vir altyd.
Amen.
&lt;/poem&gt;

Lord&#x27;s Prayer (Original translation):

&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 1em; font-style: italic;&quot; lang=&quot;af&quot;&gt;
Onse Vader wat in die hemel is,
laat U Naam geheilig word;
laat U koninkryk kom;
laat U wil geskied op die aarde,
net soos in die hemel.
Gee ons vandag ons daaglikse brood;
en vergeef ons ons skulde
soos ons ons skuldenaars vergewe
en laat ons nie in die versoeking nie
maar verlos ons van die bose
Want aan U behoort die koninkryk
en die krag
en die heerlikheid
tot in ewigheid.
Amen
&lt;/poem&gt;

== See also ==

* &quot; Arts Festival
* Afrikaans literature
* Afrikaans speaking population in South Africa
* Arabic Afrikaans
* &quot; (Afrikaans Dictionary)
* Differences between Afrikaans and Dutch
* &quot;&quot; (Arts Festival)
* Languages of South Africa
* List of Afrikaans language poets
* List of Afrikaans singers
* List of English words of Afrikaans origin
* South African Translators&#x27; Institute

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* Grieshaber, Nicky. 2011. &quot;Diacs and Quirks in a Nutshell – Afrikaans spelling explained&quot;. Pietermaritzburg. ; e-.
* 

== External links ==


* afrikaans.com
* Afrikaans English Online Dictionary at Hablaa (archived 4 June 2012)
* Afrikaans-English Online Dictionary at majstro.com
* Learn Afrikaans Online (Open Learning Environment)
* Federasie van Afrikaanse Kultuurvereniginge (FAK) – Federation of Afrikaans Cultural Associations
* &quot;Dutch Writers from South Africa: A Cultural-Historical Study, Part I&quot; from the World Digital Library
* &quot;Afrikaans Literature and Language&quot; Web dossier African Studies Centre, Leiden (2011) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="0" end="9" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="15" end="37" title="West Germanic languages" label="West Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="48" end="60" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="62" end="69" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="95" end="103" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="105" end="111" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="116" end="124" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="146" end="162" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q694" start="166" end="179" title="South Holland" label="South Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q512444" start="181" end="198" title="Hollandic dialect" label="Hollandic dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084707" start="214" end="242" title="free Burghers" label="predominantly Dutch settlers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="247" end="266" title="slavery in South Africa#Dutch rule" label="enslaved population"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807130" start="274" end="291" title="Dutch Cape Colony" label="Dutch Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="461" end="467" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="469" end="474" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q33614" start="479" end="496" title="Khoisan languages" label="Khoisan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q784694" start="572" end="611" title="Differences between Afrikaans and Dutch" label="Differences between Afrikaans and Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q209544" start="634" end="642" title="analytic language" label="analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="643" end="653" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="732" end="754" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="796" end="808" title="#Orthography" label="written form"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357983" start="1029" end="1048" title="Cape Dutch" label="early Cape settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807130" start="1246" end="1263" title="Dutch Cape Colony" label="Dutch Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323611" start="1308" end="1322" title="Dutch dialects" label="Dutch dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357983" start="1966" end="1976" title="Cape Dutch" label="Cape Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357983" start="2279" end="2289" title="Cape Dutch" label="Cape Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="2391" end="2397" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="2475" end="2481" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792622" start="2517" end="2545" title="Dutch-based creole languages" label="Dutch-based creole languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084707" start="2712" end="2719" title="free Burghers" label="settler"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="2753" end="2762" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="2778" end="2794" title="Republic of the Seven United Provinces of the Netherlands" label="United Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="2862" end="2870" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q402525" start="2935" end="2948" title="Cape Coloureds" label="Cape Coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="2983" end="2991" title="Khoekhoe" label="Khoikhoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="3129" end="3141" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071439" start="3143" end="3153" title="Merina Kingdom" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="3163" end="3180" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="3231" end="3238" title="Khoisan" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="3785" end="3790" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="3825" end="3839" title="Madrasa" label="Muslim schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="3874" end="3889" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357249" start="3895" end="3911" title="Arabic Afrikaans" label="Arabic Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="3952" end="3964" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323611" start="4368" end="4381" title="Dutch dialect" label="Dutch dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="4393" end="4407" title="Standard Dutch" label="Standard Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857636" start="4474" end="4483" title="Boer wars" label="Boer wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="4977" end="4992" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079530" start="5004" end="5045" title="Official Languages of the Union Act, 1925" label="Official Languages of the Union Act, 1925"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5090" end="5117" title="Afrikaans-language movement" label="Afrikaans-language movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993581" start="5144" end="5161" title="House of Assembly (South Africa)" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450034" start="5170" end="5176" title="Senate of South Africa" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591217" start="5247" end="5267" title="South African Constitution of 1961" label="Constitution of 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591198" start="5420" end="5440" title="South African Constitution of 1983" label="Constitution of 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q385577" start="5487" end="5514" title="Afrikaans Language Monument" label="Afrikaans Language Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018144" start="5540" end="5545" title="Paarl" label="Paarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q127167" start="5553" end="5574" title="Western Cape Province" label="Western Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465079" start="5677" end="5703" title="Society of Real Afrikaners" label="Society of Real Afrikaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030485" start="5883" end="5897" title="doggerel" label="doggerel verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276753" start="6030" end="6041" title="Cape Malays" label="Cape Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="6488" end="6499" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="6613" end="6634" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Dutch Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="6909" end="6926" title="textual criticism" label="textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="6962" end="6975" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130001" start="7011" end="7026" title="Textus Receptus" label="Textus Receptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q901769" start="7162" end="7180" title="Synod of Dordrecht" label="Synod of Dordrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q181970" start="7208" end="7215" title="archaism" label="archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401026" start="7359" end="7384" title="Stephanus Jacobus du Toit" label="Stephanus Jacobus du Toit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903139" start="7400" end="7415" title="Bible translations (Afrikaans)" label="Afrikaans Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="7547" end="7561" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospel of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q726338" start="7816" end="7829" title="Totius (poet)" label="J. D. du Toit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835103" start="7885" end="7892" title="BB Keet" label="BB Keet"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="8041" end="8050" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q86860" start="8121" end="8138" title="Bible translation" label="Bible translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q716492" start="8434" end="8445" title="Eugene Nida" label="Eugene Nida"/>
<link wikidata="Q978442" start="8463" end="8482" title="Dynamic and formal equivalence" label="dynamic equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="8693" end="8703" title="ecumenism" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8794" end="8808" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="8813" end="8821" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="8873" end="8896" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="8900" end="8908" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="8913" end="8926" title="West Germanic languages" label="West Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q153050" start="8932" end="8946" title="Low Franconian languages" label="Low Franconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="8953" end="8958" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="9054" end="9067" title="West Germanic languages" label="West Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q153050" start="9083" end="9107" title="Low Franconian languages" label="Low Franconian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325" start="9185" end="9202" title="Frisian languages" label="Frisian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="9204" end="9211" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="9245" end="9255" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q158236" start="9787" end="9801" title="Bophuthatswana" label="Bophuthatswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q190354" start="9820" end="9829" title="Bantustan" label="Bantustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q322149" start="9831" end="9838" title="Eldoret" label="Eldoret"/>
<link wikidata="Q109451643" start="9905" end="9938" title="South Africans in the Netherlands" label="South-Africans in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317255" start="10109" end="10124" title="Dutch Caribbean" label="Dutch Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="10204" end="10214" title="Afrikaners" label="Afrikaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="10218" end="10223" title="Boers" label="Boers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="10229" end="10238" title="Coloureds" label="Coloureds"/>
<link wikidata="Q217426" start="10277" end="10283" title="Soweto" label="Soweto"/>
<link wikidata="Q153081" start="10290" end="10301" title="Soweto riots" label="a rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156228" start="10507" end="10514" title="South African English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="10522" end="10535" title="First language" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="10619" end="10634" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q60567" start="11730" end="11762" title="Constitution of South Africa" label="South Africa&amp;#x27;s Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454806" start="11793" end="11810" title="languages of South Africa" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419926" start="12034" end="12072" title="South African Broadcasting Corporation" label="South African Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q223763" start="12134" end="12155" title="South African Airways" label="South African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298339" start="12192" end="12198" title="livery" label="livery"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="12231" end="12249" title="diplomatic mission" label="diplomatic mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164271" start="12389" end="12421" title="constitution of the Western Cape" label="constitution of the Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="12539" end="12544" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031192" start="12702" end="12711" title="Wallpaper (magazine)" label="Wallpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q385577" start="12835" end="12843" title="Afrikaans Language Monument" label="monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216224" start="12871" end="12884" title="Johann Rupert" label="Johann Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q689240" start="12902" end="12917" title="Richemont" label="Richemont Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q538587" start="12976" end="12983" title="Cartier SA" label="Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708181" start="12985" end="13007" title="Van Cleef &amp;amp; Arpels" label="Van Cleef &amp;amp; Arpels"/>
<link wikidata="Q142691" start="13009" end="13018" title="Montblanc (pens)" label="Montblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999295" start="13023" end="13037" title="Alfred Dunhill" label="Alfred Dunhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156228" start="13107" end="13114" title="South African English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="13437" end="13459" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="13606" end="13611" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q33614" start="13613" end="13630" title="Khoisan languages" label="Khoisan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="13655" end="13670" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156228" start="13724" end="13745" title="South African English" label="South African English"/>
<link wikidata="Q27175" start="14150" end="14157" title="West Frisian language" label="Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14161" end="14168" title="North Germanic languages#Mutual intelligibility" label="between"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="14180" end="14187" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q364207" start="14219" end="14238" title="Breyten Breytenbach" label="Breyten Breytenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="14290" end="14301" title="English-speaking world" label="Anglophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985" start="14412" end="14434" title="Received Pronunciation" label="Received Pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="14439" end="14464" title="Southern American English" label="Southern American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136857" start="14616" end="14643" title="Post-apartheid South Africa" label="Post-apartheid South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805937" start="14757" end="14762" title="mass media in South Africa" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304307" start="15273" end="15314" title="South African Institute of Race Relations" label="South African Institute of Race Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="15386" end="15394" title="Coloured" label="Coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155790" start="15676" end="15680" title="DSTV" label="DSTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13035837" start="16448" end="16463" title="Poena Is Koning" label="Poena Is Koning"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="16604" end="16624" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q80046" start="16790" end="16805" title="Charlize Theron" label="Charlize Theron"/>
<link wikidata="Q459057" start="16813" end="16820" title="Monster (2003 film)" label="Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q512353" start="16832" end="16846" title="Sharlto Copley" label="Sharlto Copley"/>
<link wikidata="Q201819" start="16854" end="16864" title="District 9" label="District 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459137" start="16904" end="16910" title="SABC 3" label="SABC 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697058" start="17143" end="17167" title="Television in South Africa" label="South African television"/>
<link wikidata="Q752676" start="17533" end="17539" title="Hardap Region" label="Hardap"/>
<link wikidata="Q573467" start="17549" end="17555" title="ǁKaras Region" label="ǁKaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q648753" start="17565" end="17571" title="Erongo Region" label="Erongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q834508" start="17581" end="17587" title="Khomas Region" label="Khomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q838775" start="17597" end="17604" title="Omaheke Region" label="Omaheke"/>
<link wikidata="Q876506" start="17614" end="17626" title="Otjozondjupa Region" label="Otjozondjupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q834513" start="17635" end="17641" title="Kunene Region" label="Kunene"/>
<link wikidata="Q876512" start="17654" end="17662" title="Oshikoto Region" label="Oshikoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156228" start="17716" end="17723" title="South African English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="18085" end="18095" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="18225" end="18234" title="grammatical conjugation" label="conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q442485" start="18327" end="18336" title="preterite" label="preterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q560570" start="18384" end="18395" title="modal verbs" label="modal verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621027" start="18885" end="18909" title="historical present tense" label="historical present tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q48964" start="19026" end="19041" title="double negative" label="double negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q153050" start="19381" end="19404" title="Low Franconian" label="Low Franconian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113" start="19408" end="19421" title="West Flanders" label="West Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q171267" start="19506" end="19514" title="Garderen" label="Garderen"/>
<link wikidata="Q178806" start="19856" end="19868" title="Middle Dutch" label="Middle Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="20312" end="20330" title="present participle" label="present participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190959" start="21478" end="21487" title="Transvaal Province" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160284" start="21492" end="21502" title="Free State (South African province)" label="Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148563" start="21591" end="21600" title="obstruent" label="obstruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q779384" start="21627" end="21635" title="final-obstruent devoicing" label="devoiced"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="21888" end="21901" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="22293" end="22301" title="Khoekhoe" label="Khoekhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005" start="22622" end="22626" title="cant (language)" label="cant"/>
<link wikidata="Q105062703" start="22637" end="22643" title="Sabela" label="Sabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="22700" end="22704" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916661" start="22902" end="22925" title="South African Argentines" label="South African community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="22957" end="22966" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="23052" end="23059" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="23207" end="23217" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276753" start="23344" end="23354" title="Cape Malay" label="Cape Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="23368" end="23377" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="23400" end="23408" title="Coloured" label="Coloured"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23420" end="23435" title="History of the Malay language#Classical Malay" label="Classical Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="23836" end="23843" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400960" start="24023" end="24034" title="ground meat" label="minced meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422576" start="24233" end="24239" title="saucer" label="saucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20655532" start="24290" end="24301" title="shish kebab" label="shish kebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="24673" end="24681" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="24728" end="24736" title="Khoekhoe" label="Khoekhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33614" start="24771" end="24778" title="Khoisan languages" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="24831" end="24839" title="Khoekhoe" label="Khoekhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="25086" end="25101" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="25218" end="25222" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q58423" start="25451" end="25457" title="lobolo" label="lobolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q961559" start="25471" end="25486" title="Nguni languages" label="Nguni languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q335992" start="25495" end="25513" title="grey crowned crane" label="grey crowned crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="25582" end="25591" title="dioecy" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q675778" start="25621" end="25639" title="Sclerocarya birrea" label="Sclerocarya birrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q311848" start="25692" end="25703" title="Hyparrhenia" label="Hyparrhenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="25747" end="25752" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578203" start="25765" end="25786" title="Spirostachys africana" label="Spirostachys africana"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="25945" end="25960" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="26069" end="26077" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q441378" start="26221" end="26228" title="François-Michel le Tellier, Marquis de Louvois" label="Louvois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729591" start="26398" end="26410" title="H. V. Morton" label="H. V. Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q338949" start="26671" end="26681" title="Great Trek" label="Great Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="26874" end="26888" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="26901" end="26906" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974462" start="26936" end="26960" title="ISO basic Latin alphabet" label="ISO basic Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="26993" end="27002" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180309" start="27009" end="27015" title="hyphen" label="hyphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q436048" start="27064" end="27074" title="apostrophe" label="apostrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q591615" start="27109" end="27129" title="whitespace character" label="whitespace character"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="27198" end="27209" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="27254" end="27262" title="ligature (writing)" label="ligature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118549" start="27347" end="27356" title="allograph" label="allograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="27438" end="27446" title="grapheme" label="grapheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="28036" end="28042" title="affix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="28329" end="28339" title="weak vowel" label="weak vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="28381" end="28391" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q384663" start="28515" end="28516" title="ŉ" label="ŉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="28691" end="28696" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q383102" start="31894" end="31902" title="Psalm 23" label="Psalm 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q383102" start="32362" end="32370" title="Psalm 23" label="Psalm 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="32792" end="32810" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="33403" end="33421" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642428" start="33977" end="33997" title="Afrikaans literature" label="Afrikaans literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311576" start="34000" end="34045" title="Afrikaans speaking population in South Africa" label="Afrikaans speaking population in South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357249" start="34048" end="34064" title="Arabic Afrikaans" label="Arabic Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q784694" start="34099" end="34138" title="Differences between Afrikaans and Dutch" label="Differences between Afrikaans and Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454806" start="34172" end="34197" title="Languages of South Africa" label="Languages of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560733" start="34200" end="34232" title="List of Afrikaans language poets" label="List of Afrikaans language poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056367" start="34235" end="34260" title="List of Afrikaans singers" label="List of Afrikaans singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570166" start="34263" end="34304" title="List of English words of Afrikaans origin" label="List of English words of Afrikaans origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565804" start="34307" end="34348" title="South African Translators&amp;#x27; Institute" label="South African Translators&amp;#x27; Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q475225" start="35054" end="35075" title="World Digital Library" label="World Digital Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2163" wikidata="Q42318741" url="?curid=2163" title="Aeolus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Aeolus or Aiolos (; , ) is a name shared by three mythical characters. These three personages are often difficult to tell apart, and even the ancient mythographers appear to have been perplexed about which Aeolus was which. Diodorus Siculus made an attempt to define each of these three (although it is clear that he also became muddled), and his opinion is followed here. 
* The first Aeolus was a son of Hellen and the eponymous founder of the Aeolian race.
* The second Aeolus was a son of Poseidon, who led a colony to islands in the Tyrrhenian Sea.
* The third Aeolus was a son of Hippotes who is mentioned in the &quot;Odyssey&quot; and the &quot;Aeneid&quot; as the ruler of the winds.

All three men named Aeolus appear to be connected genealogically, although the precise relationship, especially regarding the second and third Aeolus, is often ambiguous as their identities seem to have been merged by many ancient writers.

Aeolus was also the name of the following minor characters:
* Aeolus, a defender of Thebes in the war of the Seven against Thebes. He was killed by Parthenopaeus.
* Aeolus, a Trojan companion of Aeneas in Italy, where he was killed by Turnus, King of the Rutulians. Aeolus was the father of Clytius and Misenus.

==See also==
*Aeolia (mythical island), island kingdom of Aeolus, ruler of the winds

== Notes ==

== References ==
* Apollodorus, &quot;Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.&quot; Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hyginus, Gaius Julius, &quot;Fabulae&quot;, in &quot;The Myths of Hyginus&quot;, edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960. Online version at ToposText.
* Homer, &quot;The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Kerényi, Karl, &quot;The Gods of the Greeks&quot;, Thames and Hudson, London, 1951. Internet Archive.
* Parada, Carlos, &quot;Genealogical Guide to Greek Mythology&quot;, Jonsered, Paul Åströms Förlag, 1993. .
* Rose, H. J., s.v. Aeolus (2) in the &quot;Oxford Classical Dictionary&quot;, second edition, Hammond, N.G.L. and Howard Hayes Scullard (editors), Oxford University Press, 1992. .
* Smith, William, &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology&quot;, London (1873). Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Statius, &quot;Statius with an English Translation by J. H. Mozley&quot;, Volume II, &quot;Thebaid&quot;, Books V–XII, &quot;Achilleid&quot;, Loeb Classical Library No. 207, London: William Heinemann, Ltd., New York: G. P. Putnamm&#x27;s Sons, 1928. . Internet Archive.
* Thomas, Richard. F., &quot;The Isolation of Turnus, &quot;Aeneid&quot;, book 12&quot;, in &quot;Vergil&#x27;s Aeneid: Augustan Epic and Political Context&quot;, Hans-Peter Stahl (ed.), Classical Press of Wales, pp. 271–303. .
* Virgil, &quot;Aeneid&quot;, Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* de Weever, Jaqueline, &quot;Chaucer Name Dictionary&quot;, Garland Publishing, Inc., New York and London, 1988, 1996.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42318741" start="20" end="26" title="Aeolus" label="Aeolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42318741" start="30" end="36" title="Aeolus" label="Aiolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="244" end="260" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q406388" start="406" end="412" title="Aeolus (son of Hellen)" label="Aeolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q336428" start="426" end="432" title="Hellen" label="Hellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="441" end="447" title="eponym" label="eponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q406336" start="466" end="473" title="Aeolians" label="Aeolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10396307" start="493" end="499" title="Aeolus (son of Poseidon)" label="Aeolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="513" end="521" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="558" end="572" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q172549" start="586" end="592" title="Aeolus (son of Hippotes)" label="Aeolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138832" start="606" end="614" title="Hippotes" label="Hippotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="645" end="652" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="673" end="679" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="1039" end="1045" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119061" start="1064" end="1084" title="Seven against Thebes" label="Seven against Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128942" start="1103" end="1116" title="Parthenopeus" label="Parthenopaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="1130" end="1136" title="Troy" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="1150" end="1156" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1160" end="1165" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q633549" start="1190" end="1196" title="Turnus" label="Turnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q579014" start="1210" end="1216" title="Rutuli" label="Rutuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q58337310" start="1246" end="1253" title="Clytius" label="Clytius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777717" start="1258" end="1265" title="Misenus" label="Misenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q406345" start="1282" end="1306" title="Aeolia (mythical island)" label="Aeolia (mythical island)"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1386" end="1397" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="1548" end="1572" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="1662" end="1683" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus, Gaius Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="1691" end="1698" title="Fabulae" label="Fabulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1858" end="1863" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="1981" end="2005" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="2094" end="2107" title="Károly Kerényi" label="Kerényi, Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q472873" start="2306" end="2317" title="H. J. Rose" label="Rose, H. J."/>
<link wikidata="Q430486" start="2348" end="2375" title="Oxford Classical Dictionary" label="Oxford Classical Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978546" start="2399" end="2414" title="N. G. L. Hammond" label="Hammond, N.G.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q252051" start="2419" end="2440" title="Howard Hayes Scullard" label="Howard Hayes Scullard"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="2452" end="2475" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="2487" end="2501" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="2509" end="2562" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="2634" end="2641" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="2776" end="2798" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q29613614" start="2906" end="2925" title="Richard F. Thomas" label="Thomas, Richard. F."/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="3134" end="3140" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="3148" end="3154" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2166" wikidata="Q286874" url="?curid=2166" title="ABC">
<text>ABC are the first three letters of the Latin script.

ABC or abc may also refer to:

==Arts, entertainment and media==
===Broadcasting===

* Aliw Broadcasting Corporation, Philippine broadcast company
* American Broadcasting Company, a commercial U.S. TV broadcaster
** Disney–ABC Television Group, the former name of the parent organization of ABC
* Australian Broadcasting Corporation, one of the national publicly funded broadcasters of Australia
** ABC Television (Australian TV network), the national television network of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation
*** ABC TV (Australian TV channel), the flagship TV station of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation
*** ABC Canberra (TV station), Canberra, and other ABC TV local stations in state capitals
*** ABC Australia (Southeast Asian TV channel), an international pay TV channel
* ABC Radio (disambiguation), several radio stations
* Associated Broadcasting Corporation, the former name of TV5 Network, Inc., a Philippine media company
** ABC-5, the former name of TV5, a Philippine free-to-air television network
* &quot;ABC&quot; (Swedish TV programme), a former Swedish regional news programme
* ABC Weekend TV, a former British television company
* Asahi Broadcasting Corporation, a Japanese commercial television and radio station
* Associated Broadcasting Company, a former name of Associated Television, a British television company
* African Barter Company, a pan-African barter broadcast syndication company

===Music===
==== Albums ====
* &quot;ABC&quot; (Jin album), a 2007 album by rapper MC Jin
* &quot;ABC&quot; (Kreidler album), a 2014 album by Kreidler
* &quot;ABC&quot; (The Jackson 5 album), a 1970 album by The Jackson 5

====Groups====
* A.B.C., the former name of Japanese boy band A.B.C-Z
* ABC (band), an English pop band
* Acid Black Cherry, a Japanese rock band
* Alien Beat Club, a Danish pop and R&amp;B band
* Another Bad Creation, an American hip hop and new jack swing group

====Labels====
* ABC Classics, an Australian record label
* ABC Records, an American record label

====Other music====
* ABC song (disambiguation), several songs
* ABC notation, a musical notation language
* O2 ABC Glasgow, a music venue

===Periodicals===
* &quot;ABC&quot; (magazine), an Italian magazine published between 1960 and 1977
* &quot;ABC&quot; (newspaper), a Spanish daily newspaper founded in 1903
* &quot;ABC&quot; (Monterrey newspaper), a Mexican newspaper founded in 1985
* &quot;ABC Color&quot;, a Paraguayan newspaper founded in 1967

===Other arts, entertainment and media===
* ABC Cinemas, a UK cinema chain
* Alphabet book, a type of children&#x27;s book depicting the alphabet
* &quot;America&#x27;s Best Comics&quot;, an imprint of DC Comics

==Aviation==
* ABC Motors, an English manufacturer of aircraft, aero engines and cars
* Advance Booking Charter, a type of air travel
* Aircraft Builders Council, a provider of aviation products liability insurance
* IATA airport code for Albacete Airport in Community of Castilla–La Mancha, Spain

==Companies==

===Financial===
* Agricultural Bank of China, a bank in the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* Arab Banking Corporation, an international bank headquartered in Bahrain

===Food and beverage===
* ABC (food), an Indonesian-based food division of the H. J. Heinz Company
* Aerated Bread Company, a British bakery and tea-room chain
* Alcoholic Beverage Control (disambiguation), or Alcoholic Beverage Commission, U.S. states&#x27; regulation over alcohol sales
* Appalachian Brewing Company, an American brewery

===Transport===
* &quot;ABC Rail Guide&quot;, British railway guide published between 1853 and 2007
* ABC motorcycles, a British motorcycle manufacturer

===Other companies===
* ABC Learning, a former Australian childcare business
* ABC (Lebanon), a chain of department stores and shopping centers, and operator of fashion boutiques in Lebanon
* ABC Stores, a chain of convenience stores in Hawaii
* Anglo Belgian Corporation, a diesel engine manufacturer
* Audit Bureau of Circulations (disambiguation), publication circulation auditing companies
** Audit Bureau of Circulations (India), a non-profit circulation-auditing organisation
** Audit Bureau of Circulations, former name for the North American non-profit industry organization Alliance for Audited Media
** Audit Bureau of Circulations (UK), a non-profit organisation

==Economics and law==
* ABC analysis, an inventory categorization technique
* Activity-based costing, an accounting method
* Assignment for the benefit of creditors, a concept in bankruptcy law

==Organizations==
===Politics and unions===
* Abantu Batho Congress, a South African political party
* ABC (Cuba), Cuban political organization 1931–1952, named after the system for labeling its clandestine cells
* ABC Vancouver, a municipal political party in Canada
* All Basotho Convention, a political party in Lesotho
* Alliance for Barangay Concerns, a political party in the Philippines
* American Bakery and Confectionery Workers&#x27; International Union, a predecessor of the Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers&#x27; International Union
* Americans Battling Communism, an anti-communist organization founded in 1947
* Anarchist Black Cross, an anarchist support organization
* Anything But Conservative, a 2008 Canadian political campaign
* Armagh City, Banbridge and Craigavon Borough Council, a local government council in Northern Ireland
* Association of Barangay Captains or Association of Barangay Councils, former names of the Philippine organization League of Barangays
* Association of British Counties, a non-party-political society

===Religious===
* American Baptist Convention, former name of American Baptist Churches USA
* Association of Baptist Churches in Ireland, in Ireland and the United Kingdom

===Sports===
* ABC Futebol Clube, a football (soccer) club based in Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil
* American Bowling Congress, which merged in 2005 with other bowling organizations to form the United States Bowling Congress
* Association of Boxing Commissions, a North American not-for-profit professional boxing and mixed martial arts organization
* Indianapolis ABCs, a 1900s Negro league baseball team

===Other organizations===
* Academia Británica Cuscatleca, a school in Santa Tecla, El Salvador
* Accessible Books Consortium, a subunit of the World Intellectual Property Organization
* Afrikan Black Coalition, a University of California student organization
* American Bird Conservancy, a non-profit membership organization
* Andres Bonifacio College, in Dipolog City, Philippines
* Association of Black Cardiologists, a North American non-profit
* Australian Bird Count, a project of the Royal Australasian Ornithologists Union

==Places==
* ABC countries, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile
* ABC Islands (Alaska), Admiralty Island, Baranof Island, and Chichagof Island
* ABC islands (Leeward Antilles), Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao
* ABC Region, an industrial area outside of São Paulo, Brazil
* Altnabreac railway station, Scotland, by National Rail code
* Appa Balwant Chowk, area of Pune, India, noted for its bookshops

==Science and technology==
===Biology and medicine===
* Abacavir, an antiretroviral drug used to treat HIV/AIDS
* ABC (medicine), a mnemonic for &quot;Airway, Breathing, Circulation&quot;
* ABC model of flower development, a genetic model
* Abortion–breast cancer hypothesis, a posited connection between breast cancer and abortion
* Alien big cat, a large feline outside its indigenous range
* Aneurysmal bone cyst, a kind of lesion
* ATP-binding cassette transporter, a transmembrane protein

===Computing===
====Hardware====
* ABC, a line of computers by Dataindustrier AB
* Acorn Business Computer, a series of microcomputers announced at the end of 1983 by the British company Acorn Computers
* Atanasoff–Berry computer, an early electronic digital computer

====Software====
* ABC (computer virus), a memory-resident, file-infecting computer virus
* ABC (programming language), a programming language and environment
* ABC (stream cipher), a stream cipher algorithm
* Abstract base class, a programming language concept
* Artificial bee colony algorithm, a search algorithm
* .abc, several file formats

===Mathematics===
* ABC formula
* Approximate Bayesian computation, a family of statistical techniques
* &quot;abc&quot; conjecture, a concept in number theory

===Other science and technology===
* ABC dry chemical, a fire extinguishing agent
* ABC weapon (atomic, biological, and chemical), a weapon of mass destruction 
* Accelerated bridge construction, a technique for building bridges
* Aerial bundled cable, for power lines
* Airborne Cigar, a British military electronic countermeasure system used during World War II
* Atomic, biological, and chemical defense; now CBRN defense (chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear)

==Psychology==
* ABC data collection, a descriptive functional behavior assessment method in applied behavior analysis
* Affective-behavioral-cognitive model, an attitude component model

==Transportation==
* Active Body Control, a type of automobile suspension technology
* Automatic Buffer Couplers, a type of railway couplers

===Cars===
* ABC (1906 automobile), an American car by Albert Bledsoe Cole
* ABC (1920 automobile), an English car by ABC Motors
* ABC (1922 automobile), a planned American car

==Other uses==
* ABC strategy, for &quot;abstinence, be faithful, use a condom&quot;, a sex-education strategy
* ABC trial of Crispin Aubrey, John Berry and Duncan Campbell in 1978 in the United Kingdom
* Abecedarium, an inscription consisting of the letters of an alphabet
* &quot;Air batu campur&quot;, also known as &quot;ais kacang&quot;, a Malaysian dessert
* American-born Chinese, people of Chinese ethnicity born in the United States
* Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope (1883–1963), nicknamed ABC, British WWII admiral
* Architectural, building and construction, an industry; for example, see Industry Foundation Classes
* Australian-born Chinese, people of Chinese ethnicity born in Australia

==See also==
* 
* ABCC (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q286874" start="0" end="3" title="ABC" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="39" end="51" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q286874" start="54" end="57" title="ABC" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q286874" start="61" end="64" title="ABC" label="abc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727488" start="141" end="170" title="Aliw Broadcasting Corporation" label="Aliw Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="203" end="232" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="American Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q654073" start="270" end="297" title="Disney–ABC Television Group" label="Disney–ABC Television Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="351" end="386" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="453" end="491" title="ABC Television (Australian TV network)" label="ABC Television (Australian TV network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="572" end="602" title="ABC TV (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC TV (Australian TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650110" start="675" end="700" title="ABC Canberra (TV station)" label="ABC Canberra (TV station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231014" start="766" end="808" title="ABC Australia (Southeast Asian TV channel)" label="ABC Australia (Southeast Asian TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650222" start="844" end="870" title="ABC Radio (disambiguation)" label="ABC Radio (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q400566" start="897" end="932" title="TV5 Network" label="Associated Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015057" start="1002" end="1007" title="TV5 (Philippine TV network)" label="ABC-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650114" start="1079" end="1117" title="ABC (Swedish TV programme)" label="&amp;quot;ABC&amp;quot; (Swedish TV programme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q664991" start="1162" end="1176" title="ABC Weekend TV" label="ABC Weekend TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064900" start="1216" end="1246" title="Asahi Broadcasting Corporation" label="Asahi Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="1351" end="1372" title="Associated Television" label="Associated Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q126737104" start="1405" end="1427" title="African Barter Company" label="African Barter Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650112" start="1512" end="1539" title="ABC (Jin album)" label="&amp;quot;ABC&amp;quot; (Jin album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451786" start="1573" end="1605" title="ABC (Kreidler album)" label="&amp;quot;ABC&amp;quot; (Kreidler album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q45777" start="1634" end="1671" title="ABC (The Jackson 5 album)" label="&amp;quot;ABC&amp;quot; (The Jackson 5 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051706" start="1766" end="1773" title="A.B.C-Z" label="A.B.C-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q287078" start="1776" end="1786" title="ABC (band)" label="ABC (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q341342" start="1810" end="1827" title="Acid Black Cherry" label="Acid Black Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726413" start="1852" end="1867" title="Alien Beat Club" label="Alien Beat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852347" start="1901" end="1921" title="Another Bad Creation" label="Another Bad Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28487642" start="1986" end="1998" title="ABC Classics" label="ABC Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q287177" start="2029" end="2040" title="ABC Records" label="ABC Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650280" start="2090" end="2115" title="ABC song (disambiguation)" label="ABC song (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q287067" start="2133" end="2145" title="ABC notation" label="ABC notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072247" start="2177" end="2191" title="O2 ABC Glasgow" label="O2 ABC Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600477" start="2228" end="2254" title="ABC (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;ABC&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q287076" start="2310" end="2337" title="ABC (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;ABC&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107259905" start="2383" end="2420" title="ABC (Monterrey newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;ABC&amp;quot; (Monterrey newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065725" start="2466" end="2475" title="ABC Color" label="ABC Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q742958" start="2567" end="2578" title="ABC Cinemas" label="ABC Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q595801" start="2600" end="2613" title="Alphabet book" label="Alphabet book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251870" start="2677" end="2703" title="America&amp;#x27;s Best Comics" label="America&amp;#x27;s Best Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q262737" start="2751" end="2761" title="ABC Motors" label="ABC Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686052" start="2824" end="2847" title="Advance Booking Charter" label="Advance Booking Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698499" start="2872" end="2897" title="Aircraft Builders Council" label="Aircraft Builders Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q974415" start="2975" end="2991" title="Albacete Airport" label="Albacete Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q26298" start="3068" end="3094" title="Agricultural Bank of China" label="Agricultural Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783149" start="3144" end="3168" title="Arab Banking Corporation" label="Arab Banking Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871383" start="3244" end="3254" title="ABC (food)" label="ABC (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687954" start="3319" end="3340" title="Aerated Bread Company" label="Aerated Bread Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713318" start="3380" end="3423" title="Alcoholic Beverage Control (disambiguation)" label="Alcoholic Beverage Control (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780837" start="3509" end="3536" title="Appalachian Brewing Company" label="Appalachian Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082095" start="3583" end="3597" title="ABC Rail Guide" label="ABC Rail Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q282218" start="3661" end="3676" title="ABC motorcycles" label="ABC motorcycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650182" start="3737" end="3749" title="ABC Learning" label="ABC Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q123858043" start="3792" end="3805" title="ABC (Lebanon)" label="ABC (Lebanon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650251" start="3905" end="3915" title="ABC Stores" label="ABC Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856289" start="3959" end="3984" title="Anglo Belgian Corporation" label="Anglo Belgian Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116979982" start="4017" end="4062" title="Audit Bureau of Circulations (disambiguation)" label="Audit Bureau of Circulations (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819942" start="4110" end="4146" title="Audit Bureau of Circulations (India)" label="Audit Bureau of Circulations (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q751041" start="4198" end="4226" title="Audit Bureau of Circulations (North America)" label="Audit Bureau of Circulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819941" start="4326" end="4359" title="Audit Bureau of Circulations (UK)" label="Audit Bureau of Circulations (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166086" start="4412" end="4424" title="ABC analysis" label="ABC analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q754331" start="4466" end="4488" title="Activity-based costing" label="Activity-based costing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532317" start="4513" end="4552" title="Assignment for the benefit of creditors" label="Assignment for the benefit of creditors"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760130" start="4629" end="4650" title="Abantu Batho Congress" label="Abantu Batho Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q48783116" start="4686" end="4696" title="ABC (Cuba)" label="ABC (Cuba)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113372077" start="4798" end="4811" title="ABC Vancouver" label="ABC Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346132" start="4853" end="4875" title="All Basotho Convention" label="All Basotho Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732341" start="4908" end="4938" title="Alliance for Barangay Concerns" label="Alliance for Barangay Concerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q112967684" start="4979" end="5046" title="American Bakery and Confectionery Workers&amp;#x27; International Union" label="American Bakery and Confectionery Workers&amp;#x27; International Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745602" start="5154" end="5182" title="Americans Battling Communism" label="Americans Battling Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q486289" start="5233" end="5254" title="Anarchist Black Cross" label="Anarchist Black Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778306" start="5292" end="5317" title="Anything But Conservative" label="Anything But Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975327" start="5356" end="5408" title="Armagh City, Banbridge and Craigavon Borough Council" label="Armagh City, Banbridge and Craigavon Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508998" start="5459" end="5491" title="Association of Barangay Captains" label="Association of Barangay Captains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809654" start="5595" end="5626" title="Association of British Counties" label="Association of British Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q463455" start="5677" end="5704" title="American Baptist Convention" label="American Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587876" start="5753" end="5795" title="Association of Baptist Churches in Ireland" label="Association of Baptist Churches in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q287129" start="5847" end="5864" title="ABC Futebol Clube" label="ABC Futebol Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993046" start="5937" end="5962" title="American Bowling Congress" label="American Bowling Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590017" start="6063" end="6096" title="Association of Boxing Commissions" label="Association of Boxing Commissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023793" start="6188" end="6205" title="Indianapolis ABCs" label="Indianapolis ABCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671050" start="6271" end="6300" title="Academia Británica Cuscatleca" label="Academia Británica Cuscatleca"/>
<link wikidata="Q108685559" start="6341" end="6368" title="Accessible Books Consortium" label="Accessible Books Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689710" start="6430" end="6453" title="Afrikan Black Coalition" label="Afrikan Black Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743178" start="6505" end="6530" title="American Bird Conservancy" label="American Bird Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104282381" start="6571" end="6595" title="Andres Bonifacio College" label="Andres Bonifacio College"/>
<link wikidata="Q50039207" start="6628" end="6662" title="Association of Black Cardiologists" label="Association of Black Cardiologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823887" start="6694" end="6715" title="Australian Bird Count" label="Australian Bird Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q286946" start="6788" end="6801" title="ABC countries" label="ABC countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q286877" start="6834" end="6854" title="ABC Islands (Alaska)" label="ABC Islands (Alaska)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19386" start="6913" end="6943" title="ABC islands (Leeward Antilles)" label="ABC islands (Leeward Antilles)"/>
<link wikidata="Q287199" start="6975" end="6985" title="ABC Region" label="ABC Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094412" start="7037" end="7063" title="Altnabreac railway station" label="Altnabreac railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591367" start="7099" end="7117" title="Appa Balwant Chowk" label="Appa Balwant Chowk"/>
<link wikidata="Q304330" start="7221" end="7229" title="Abacavir" label="Abacavir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668011" start="7279" end="7293" title="ABC (medicine)" label="ABC (medicine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528776" start="7355" end="7386" title="ABC model of flower development" label="ABC model of flower development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668515" start="7406" end="7439" title="Abortion–breast cancer hypothesis" label="Abortion–breast cancer hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q837084" start="7499" end="7512" title="Alien big cat" label="Alien big cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761773" start="7560" end="7580" title="Aneurysmal bone cyst" label="Aneurysmal bone cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q286958" start="7601" end="7633" title="ATP-binding cassette transporter" label="ATP-binding cassette transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227443" start="7723" end="7740" title="Dataindustrier AB" label="Dataindustrier AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674545" start="7743" end="7766" title="Acorn Business Computer" label="Acorn Business Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q522906" start="7865" end="7889" title="Atanasoff–Berry computer" label="Atanasoff–Berry computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297442" start="7948" end="7968" title="ABC (computer virus)" label="ABC (computer virus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057802" start="8021" end="8047" title="ABC (programming language)" label="ABC (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q57295167" start="8090" end="8109" title="ABC (stream cipher)" label="ABC (stream cipher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="8139" end="8158" title="Abstract base class" label="Abstract base class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801057" start="8193" end="8224" title="Artificial bee colony algorithm" label="Artificial bee colony algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545418" start="8247" end="8251" title=".abc" label=".abc"/>
<link wikidata="Q41299" start="8295" end="8306" title="ABC formula" label="ABC formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q21045424" start="8309" end="8341" title="Approximate Bayesian computation" label="Approximate Bayesian computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q306393" start="8380" end="8406" title="abc conjecture" label="&amp;quot;abc&amp;quot; conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118097" start="8473" end="8489" title="ABC dry chemical" label="ABC dry chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="8569" end="8595" title="weapon of mass destruction" label="weapon of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294207" start="8599" end="8630" title="Accelerated bridge construction" label="Accelerated bridge construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406830" start="8667" end="8687" title="Aerial bundled cable" label="Aerial bundled cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q98139646" start="8707" end="8721" title="Airborne Cigar" label="Airborne Cigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q265653" start="8848" end="8860" title="CBRN defense" label="CBRN defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q621607" start="9005" end="9030" title="applied behavior analysis" label="applied behavior analysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9074" end="9098" title="attitude (psychology)#Attitude component model" label="attitude component model"/>
<link wikidata="Q344008" start="9121" end="9140" title="Active Body Control" label="Active Body Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501648" start="9187" end="9212" title="Automatic Buffer Couplers" label="Automatic Buffer Couplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650107" start="9255" end="9276" title="ABC (1906 automobile)" label="ABC (1906 automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650113" start="9319" end="9340" title="ABC (1920 automobile)" label="ABC (1920 automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650108" start="9373" end="9394" title="ABC (1922 automobile)" label="ABC (1922 automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101537" start="9437" end="9449" title="ABC strategy" label="ABC strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650285" start="9533" end="9542" title="ABC trial" label="ABC trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q998818" start="9625" end="9636" title="Abecedarium" label="Abecedarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130778" start="9702" end="9717" title="Air batu campur" label="Air batu campur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742839" start="9785" end="9806" title="American-born Chinese" label="American-born Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q39940" start="9864" end="9918" title="Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope" label="Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q979630" start="10042" end="10069" title="Industry Foundation Classes" label="Industry Foundation Classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303719" start="10072" end="10095" title="Australian-born Chinese" label="Australian-born Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650065" start="10162" end="10183" title="ABCC (disambiguation)" label="ABCC (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2167" wikidata="Q4722160" url="?curid=2167" title="Alford plea">
<text>In United States law, an Alford plea, also called a Kennedy plea in West Virginia, an Alford guilty plea, and the Alford doctrine, is a guilty plea in criminal court, whereby a defendant in a criminal case does not admit to the criminal act and asserts innocence, but accepts imposition of a sentence. This plea is allowed even if the evidence to be presented by the prosecution would be likely to persuade a judge or jury to find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. This can be caused by circumstantial evidence and testimony favoring the prosecution, and difficulty finding evidence and witnesses that would aid the defense.

Alford pleas are legally permissible in nearly all U.S. federal and state courts, except in the state courts of Indiana, Michigan, and New Jersey, or in the United States military courts.

== Origin ==

The &quot;Alford&quot; guilty plea is named after the United States Supreme Court case of &quot;North Carolina v. Alford&quot; (1970). Henry Alford had been indicted on a charge of first-degree murder in 1963. Evidence in the case included testimony from witnesses that Alford himself had said, after the victim&#x27;s death, that he had killed the individual. Court testimony showed that Alford and the victim had argued at the victim&#x27;s house. Alford left the house, and afterward, the victim received a fatal gunshot wound when he opened the door responding to a knock.

Alford was faced with the possibility of capital punishment if convicted in a jury trial. The death penalty was the default sentence in North Carolina at the time if two criteria were satisfied: the defendant had to have pleaded not guilty, and the jury did not instead recommend a life sentence. Had Alford pleaded guilty to first-degree murder, he would have had the possibility of a life sentence and would have avoided the death penalty, but he did not want to admit guilt. Nonetheless, Alford pleaded guilty to second-degree murder and said he was doing so to avoid a death sentence, were he to be convicted of first-degree murder after attempting to contest that charge. Alford was sentenced to 30 years in prison after the trial judge accepted the plea bargain and ruled that the defendant had been adequately advised by his lawyer.

Alford appealed and requested a new trial, arguing he was forced into a guilty plea because he was afraid of receiving a death sentence. The Supreme Court of North Carolina ruled that the defendant had voluntarily entered the guilty plea with knowledge of what that meant. Following this ruling, Alford petitioned for a writ of &quot;habeas corpus&quot; in the United States District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina, which upheld the initial ruling, and subsequently to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which ruled that Alford&#x27;s plea was not voluntary because it was made under fear of the death penalty. &quot;I just pleaded guilty because they said if I didn&#x27;t, they would gas me for it,&quot; wrote Alford in one of his appeals.
The case was then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, where Justice Byron White wrote the majority decision. The Court held that for the plea to be accepted, the defendant must have been advised by a competent lawyer who could inform him that his best option was to enter a guilty plea. The Court ruled that the defendant can enter such a plea &quot;when he concludes that his interests require a guilty plea and the record strongly indicates guilt.&quot; The Court allowed the guilty plea with a simultaneous protestation of innocence only because there was enough evidence to show that the prosecution had a strong case for conviction and that the defendant was entering such a plea to avoid the possible sentence. The Court noted that even if the defendant could have shown that he would not have entered a guilty plea &quot;but for&quot; the rationale of receiving a lesser sentence, the plea itself would not have been ruled invalid. As evidence existed that could have supported Alford&#x27;s conviction, the Supreme Court held that his guilty plea was allowable, while the defendant himself still maintained that he was not guilty.

Alford died in prison in 1975.

== Definition ==
The &quot;Dictionary of Politics: Selected American and Foreign Political and Legal Terms&quot; defines the term &quot;Alford plea&quot; as: &quot;A plea under which a defendant may choose to plead guilty, not because of an admission to the crime, but because the prosecutor has sufficient evidence to place a charge and to obtain conviction in court. The plea is commonly used in local and state courts in the United States.&quot; According to &quot;University of Richmond Law Review&quot;, &quot;When offering an Alford plea, a defendant asserts his innocence but admits that sufficient evidence exists to convict him of the offense.&quot; &quot;A Guide to Military Criminal Law&quot; notes that under the Alford plea, &quot;the defendant concedes that the prosecution has enough evidence to convict, but the defendant still refuses to admit guilt.&quot; The book &quot;Plea Bargaining&#x27;s Triumph: A History of Plea Bargaining in America&quot; published by Stanford University Press defines the plea as one in &quot;which the defendant adheres to his/her claim of innocence even while allowing that the government has enough evidence to prove his/her guilt beyond a reasonable doubt&quot;. According to the book &quot;Gender, Crime, and Punishment&quot; published by Yale University Press, &quot;Under the Alford doctrine, a defendant does not admit guilt but admits that the state has sufficient evidence to find him or her guilty, should the case go to trial.&quot; &quot;Webster&#x27;s New World Law Dictionary&quot; defines Alford plea as: &quot;A guilty plea entered as part of a plea bargain by a criminal defendant who denies committing the crime or who does not actually admit his guilt. In federal courts, such plea may be accepted as long as there is evidence that the defendant is actually guilty.&quot;

The Alford guilty plea is &quot;a plea of guilty containing a protestation of innocence&quot;. The defendant pleads guilty, but does not have to specifically admit to the guilt itself. The defendant maintains a claim of innocence, but agrees to the entry of a conviction in the charged crime. Upon receiving an Alford guilty plea from a defendant, the court may immediately pronounce the defendant guilty and impose sentence as if the defendant had otherwise been convicted of the crime. Sources disagree, as may differing states&#x27; laws, as to what category of plea the &quot;Alford&quot; plea falls under: Some sources state that the Alford guilty plea is a form of &quot;nolo contendere&quot;, where the defendant in the case states &quot;no contest&quot; to the factual matter of the case as given in the charges outlined by the prosecution. Others hold that an &quot;Alford&quot; plea is simply one form of a guilty plea, and, as with other guilty pleas, the judge must see there is some factual basis for the plea.

Defendants can take advantage of the ability to use the Alford guilty plea by admitting there is enough evidence to convict them of a more serious crime, while at the same time pleading guilty to a lesser charge. Defendants usually enter an Alford guilty plea if they want to avoid a possibly worse sentence were they to lose the case against them at trial. It affords defendants the ability to accept a plea bargain while maintaining innocence.

== Court and government use ==

This form of guilty plea has been frequently used in local and state courts in the United States, though it constitutes a small percentage of all plea bargains in the US. This form of plea is not allowed in courts of the United States military. In 2000, the United States Department of Justice noted: &quot;In an Alford plea the defendant agrees to plead guilty because he or she realizes that there is little chance to win acquittal because of the strong evidence of guilt. About 17% of State inmates and 5% of Federal inmates submitted either an Alford plea or a no contest plea, regardless of the type of attorney. This difference reflects the relative readiness of State courts, compared to Federal courts, to accept an alternative plea.&quot;

In the 1995 case &quot;State of Idaho v. Howry&quot; before the Idaho Court of Appeals, the Court commented on the impact of the Alford guilty plea on later sentencing. The Court ruled: &quot;Although an Alford plea allows a defendant to plead guilty amid assertions of innocence, it does not require a court to accept those assertions. The sentencing court may, of necessity, consider a broad range of information, including the evidence of the crime, the defendant&#x27;s criminal history and the demeanor of the defendant, including the presence or absence of remorse.&quot; In the 1999 South Carolina Supreme Court case &quot;State v. Gaines&quot;, that court held that Alford guilty pleas would be considered valid even in the absence of a specific on-the-record ruling that the pleas were voluntary, provided that the sentencing judge acted appropriately in accordance with the rules for acceptance of a plea made voluntarily by the defendant. The Court held that a ruling that the plea was entered into voluntarily is implied by the act of sentencing.
In a 2006 case before the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, &quot;Ballard v. Burton&quot;, Judge Carl E. Stewart writing for the court held that an Alford guilty plea is a &quot;variation of an ordinary guilty plea&quot;. In October 2008, the United States Department of Justice defined an Alford plea as follows: &quot;the defendant maintains his or her innocence with respect to the charge to which he or she offers to plead guilty&quot;.

In March 2009, the Minnesota House of Representatives characterized the Alford plea as &quot;a form of a guilty plea in which the defendant asserts innocence but acknowledges on the record that the prosecutor could present enough evidence to prove guilt.&quot; The Minnesota Judicial Branch similarly states: &quot;Alford Plea: A plea of guilty that may be accepted by a court even where the defendant does not admit guilt. In an Alford plea, defendant has to admit that he has reviewed the state&#x27;s evidence, a reasonable jury could find him guilty, and he wants to take advantage of a plea offer that has been made. Court has discretion as to whether to accept this type of plea.&quot;

The U.S. Attorneys&#x27; Manual states that in the federal system, Alford pleas &quot;should be avoided except in the most unusual circumstances, even if no plea agreement is involved and the plea would cover all pending charges.&quot; U.S. Attorneys are required to obtain the approval of an Assistant Attorney General with supervisory responsibility over the subject matter before accepting such a plea.

=== Use in post-conviction proceedings ===
The Alford plea has received public attention for its use in resolving high-profile post-conviction proceedings for individuals who claim they were wrongfully convicted for crimes they did not commit. In 2011, the West Memphis Three—three men who had been convicted as teenagers of the 1993 murders of three children and sentenced to life in prison or, for one defendant, the death penalty—entered Alford pleas decades following their initial convictions. New evidence had come to light that might exonerate them, so the Arkansas Supreme Court ordered an evidentiary hearing to consider whether a new trial would be required. Instead of holding the hearing, the defendants and state prosecutors agreed that the court would vacate the prior convictions to permit the defendants to enter Alford pleas, be re-sentenced to &quot;time served,&quot; and obtain immediate release from prison. As part of the plea deal, the men agreed not to sue the state seeking civil damages for their convictions and imprisonment.

Similarly, novelist Michael Peterson, who had been convicted in 2003 of murdering his wife, entered an Alford plea in 2017 to resolve the case against him. Peterson&#x27;s case had been the subject of the 2004 documentary series &quot;The Staircase&quot; and other media scrutiny, and Peterson continued to challenge his conviction based on alleged law enforcement misconduct and judicial errors. He was eventually granted a new trial, but then agreed to enter an Alford plea to the lesser offense of voluntary manslaughter instead. The judge then imposed a sentence that, after being reduced to account for time already served, resulted in Peterson serving no additional time in prison. A 2022 scripted drama miniseries, also called &quot;The Staircase&quot;, portrayed the events of the case, including the legal battle and Alford plea.

== Commentary ==
In his book &quot;American Criminal Justice&quot; (1972), Jonathan D. Casper comments: &quot;The &quot;Alford&quot; decision recognizes the plea-bargaining system, acknowledging that a man may maintain his innocence but still plead guilty in order to minimize his potential loss.&quot; Casper comments on the impact of the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision to require evidence of guilt in such a plea: &quot;By requiring that there be some evidence of guilt in such a situation, the decision attempts to protect the &#x27;really&#x27; innocent from the temptations to which plea-bargaining and defense attorneys may subject them.&quot;

U.S. Air Force attorney Steven E. Walburn argues in a 1998 article in &quot;The Air Force Law Review&quot; that this form of guilty plea should be adopted for usage by the United States military. &quot;In fairness to an accused, if, after consultation with his defense counsel, he knowingly and intelligently determines that his best interest is served by an Alford-type guilty plea, he should be free to choose this path. The system should not force him to lie under oath, nor to go to trial with no promise of the ultimate outcome concerning guilt or punishment. We must trust the accused to make such an important decision for himself. The military provides an accused facing court-martial with a qualified defense attorney. Together, they are in the best position to properly weigh what the impact his decision, and the resulting conviction, will have upon himself and his family.&quot; He emphasizes that when allowing these pleas, &quot;trial counsel should establish as strong a factual basis as possible&quot;, in order to minimize the possible negative outcomes to &quot;the public&#x27;s perception of the administration of justice within the military&quot;.

Stephanos Bibas writes in a 2003 analysis for &quot;Cornell Law Review&quot; that Judge Frank H. Easterbrook and a majority of scholars &quot;praise these pleas as efficient, constitutional means of resolving cases&quot;. Bibas notes that prominent plea bargain critic Albert Alschuler supports the use of this form of plea: &quot;He views them as a lesser evil, a way to empower defendants within a flawed system. As long as we have plea bargaining, he maintains, innocent defendants should be free to use these pleas to enter advantageous plea bargains without lying. And guilty defendants who are in denial should be empowered to use these pleas instead of being forced to stand trial.&quot; Bibas instead asserts that this form of plea is &quot;unwise and should be abolished&quot;: &quot;These procedures may be constitutional and efficient, but they undermine key values served by admissions of guilt in open court. They undermine the procedural values of accuracy and public confidence in accuracy and fairness, by convicting innocent defendants and creating the perception that innocent defendants are being pressured into pleading guilty. More basically, they allow guilty defendants to avoid accepting responsibility for their wrongs.&quot;

Legal scholar Jim Drennan, an expert on the court system at the Institute of Government at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, told the &quot;Winston-Salem Journal&quot; in a 2007 interview that the ability to use this form of guilty plea as an option in courts had a far-reaching effect throughout the United States: &quot;We have lots of laws, but human interaction creates unique circumstances and the law has to adapt.&quot; He added that the Supreme Court &quot;had to make a decision about what to do. One of the things the court has to do is figure out how to answer new questions, and that is what happened in this case.&quot;

Common criticisms of Alford pleas include harm to victims who are denied justice, harm to society from lack of respect for the criminal justice system, the incentive for coercion, violating the right against self-incrimination, hindering rehabilitation by avoiding treatment, and the arbitrary nature in which they are utilized, allowing a person to say one thing when they mean another.

== See also ==
* Alternative pleading
* Deferred adjudication
* Insanity defense
* List of people who entered an Alford plea
* List of U.S. states by Alford plea usage
* &quot;Malum in se&quot;
* &quot;Malum prohibitum&quot;
* &quot;Nolo contendere&quot;
* Peremptory plea
* Michael Peterson
* West Memphis Three
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* Alford Doctrine – State of Connecticut, Judicial Branch
* USAM 9-16.000 Pleas—Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 11, United States Department of Justice
* Issue: Effect of Alford Plea of Guilty, &quot;Issues In NY Criminal Law&quot;, Volume 4, Issue 11.
* Transcript Of Plea Form, North Carolina, with question about term
;Court cases
* &quot;North Carolina v. Alford&quot;, Supreme Court of the United States
* &quot;US v. Szucko&quot;, Definition of term by United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
* &quot;US v. Bierd&quot;, Definition of term by United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="3" end="20" title="Law of the United States" label="United States law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722160" start="25" end="36" title="Alford plea" label="Alford plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722160" start="52" end="64" title="Alford plea" label="Kennedy plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722160" start="86" end="104" title="Alford plea" label="Alford guilty plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722160" start="114" end="129" title="Alford plea" label="Alford doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q705178" start="136" end="142" title="Guilt (law)" label="guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916459" start="143" end="147" title="plea" label="plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q117488" start="151" end="165" title="Criminal justice" label="criminal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="177" end="186" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="192" end="205" title="Criminal procedure" label="criminal case"/>
<link wikidata="Q359385" start="253" end="262" title="innocence" label="innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="335" end="343" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905670" start="461" end="477" title="reasonable doubt" label="reasonable doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q634260" start="501" end="524" title="circumstantial evidence" label="circumstantial evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600987" start="680" end="720" title="List of U.S. states by Alford plea usage" label="nearly all U.S. federal and state courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="752" end="759" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="761" end="769" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="775" end="785" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178703" start="797" end="826" title="United States military courts" label="United States military courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="897" end="924" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054692" start="939" end="963" title="North Carolina v. Alford" label="North Carolina v. Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="1000" end="1008" title="indictment" label="indicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="1024" end="1043" title="first-degree murder" label="first-degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="1462" end="1480" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="1499" end="1509" title="jury trial" label="jury trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="1557" end="1571" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="1703" end="1716" title="life sentence" label="life sentence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1937" end="1957" title="Murder (United States law)#Degrees" label="second-degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054626" start="2403" end="2434" title="Supreme Court of North Carolina" label="Supreme Court of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="2596" end="2609" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889816" start="2623" end="2693" title="United States District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina" label="United States District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q250463" start="2752" end="2805" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2989" end="3002" title="Gas_chamber#United_States" label="gas me for it"/>
<link wikidata="Q958904" start="3114" end="3125" title="Byron White" label="Byron White"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005921" start="4686" end="4719" title="University of Richmond Law Review" label="University of Richmond Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479937" start="5198" end="5223" title="Stanford University Press" label="Stanford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="5508" end="5529" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763090" start="6473" end="6481" title="sentence (law)" label="sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="6734" end="6749" title="nolo contendere" label="nolo contendere"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="7486" end="7498" title="plea bargain" label="plea bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="7782" end="7804" title="United States military" label="United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="7819" end="7854" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987339" start="8374" end="8396" title="Idaho Court of Appeals" label="Idaho Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566647" start="8900" end="8928" title="South Carolina Supreme Court" label="South Carolina Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="9395" end="9447" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040071" start="9486" end="9501" title="Carl E. Stewart" label="Carl E. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q782050" start="9850" end="9884" title="Minnesota House of Representatives" label="Minnesota House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889569" start="10528" end="10555" title="U.S. Attorneys&amp;#x27; Manual" label="U.S. Attorneys&amp;#x27; Manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="10760" end="10773" title="U.S. Attorney" label="U.S. Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889542" start="10817" end="10843" title="United States Assistant Attorney General" label="Assistant Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124012" start="11122" end="11142" title="Miscarriage of justice" label="wrongfully convicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q775538" start="11188" end="11206" title="West Memphis Three" label="West Memphis Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791883" start="11495" end="11517" title="Arkansas Supreme Court" label="Arkansas Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805430" start="11799" end="11810" title="time served" label="time served"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927978" start="12005" end="12021" title="Michael Peterson trial" label="Michael Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414394" start="12220" end="12233" title="The Staircase (French miniseries)" label="The Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295558" start="12486" end="12508" title="voluntary manslaughter" label="voluntary manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q107176616" start="12719" end="12744" title="The Staircase (American miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;The Staircase&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="13475" end="13489" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="13933" end="13947" title="lie under oath" label="lie under oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="14154" end="14167" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608476" start="14645" end="14660" title="Stephanos Bibas" label="Stephanos Bibas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171540" start="14697" end="14715" title="Cornell Law Review" label="Cornell Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487000" start="14733" end="14753" title="Frank H. Easterbrook" label="Frank H. Easterbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q107609138" start="14914" end="14930" title="Albert Alschuler" label="Albert Alschuler"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="15992" end="16035" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q962388" start="16052" end="16073" title="Winston-Salem Journal" label="Winston-Salem Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736542" start="16952" end="16972" title="Alternative pleading" label="Alternative pleading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251505" start="16975" end="16996" title="Deferred adjudication" label="Deferred adjudication"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="16999" end="17015" title="Insanity defense" label="Insanity defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633177" start="17018" end="17059" title="List of people who entered an Alford plea" label="List of people who entered an Alford plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600987" start="17062" end="17102" title="List of U.S. states by Alford plea usage" label="List of U.S. states by Alford plea usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q843634" start="17111" end="17122" title="Malum in se" label="Malum in se"/>
<link wikidata="Q843625" start="17137" end="17153" title="Malum prohibitum" label="Malum prohibitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="17168" end="17183" title="Nolo contendere" label="Nolo contendere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167842" start="17192" end="17207" title="Peremptory plea" label="Peremptory plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927978" start="17210" end="17226" title="Michael Peterson trial" label="Michael Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q775538" start="17229" end="17247" title="West Memphis Three" label="West Memphis Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="17332" end="17352" title="Connecticut" label="State of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="17431" end="17466" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="17595" end="17609" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="17689" end="17723" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="17774" end="17826" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q250492" start="17876" end="17928" title="United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2170" wikidata="Q509435" url="?curid=2170" title="ABCD">
<text>ABCD may refer to:

== Entertainment ==

=== Film ===
* &quot;ABCD&quot; (film), a 2005 Indian Tamil-language romance
* &quot;&quot;, a 2013 Indian Hindi-language dance-drama
** &quot;ABCD 2&quot;, the 2015 sequel

=== Music ===

* ABCD (song), a 2024 South Korean song by Nayeon of Twice

==Science and technology==
===Medicine===
* ABCD, a variation of ABC (medicine), a medical mnemonic
* ABCD guideline, used in diagnosis of melanoma
* ABCD rating, a staging system for prostate cancer
* ABCD syndrome, a genetic disorder

===Other uses in science and technology===
* ABCD Schema, a data exchange and access model in biology
* ABCD matrix analysis, or ray transfer matrix analysis
* &quot;ABCD&quot;-parameters, in a two-port network
* ABCd, an American TV streaming service
* ABCD (add, browse, change, delete) a variation of create, read, update and delete in computer programming

==Other uses==
* ABCD line, embargoes placed against the Japanese Empire by the Americans, British, Chinese and Dutch
* ABCD Region, an industrial district outside of São Paulo, Brazil
* ABCD ships (&quot;Atlanta&quot;, &quot;Boston&quot;, &quot;Chicago&quot; and &quot;Dolphin&quot;) of Delaware River Iron Ship Building and Engine Works
* Action for Boston Community Development, an American organization
* American-born confused desi, informal term for South Asian Americans
* Asset-based community development, a methodology for the sustainable development of communities
* Association of Better Computer Dealers, now CompTIA
* &quot;ABCD&quot; companies that dominate world agricultural commodity trading: Archer-Daniels-Midland, Bunge, Cargill, Louis Dreyfus 

==See also==
* ABC (disambiguation)
* ABCD1, a protein
* ABCD2 score, a score for determining the risk of stroke after a transient ischemic attack
* English alphabet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q509435" start="0" end="4" title="ABCD" label="ABCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650086" start="56" end="79" title="ABCD (film)" label="&amp;quot;ABCD&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509388" start="184" end="190" title="ABCD 2" label="ABCD 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q126626347" start="232" end="243" title="ABCD (song)" label="ABCD (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668011" start="355" end="369" title="ABC (medicine)" label="ABC (medicine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="392" end="406" title="ABCD guideline" label="ABCD guideline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650088" start="440" end="451" title="ABCD rating" label="ABCD rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508565" start="492" end="505" title="ABCD syndrome" label="ABCD syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650087" start="572" end="583" title="ABCD Schema" label="ABCD Schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760601" start="631" end="651" title="ABCD matrix analysis" label="ABCD matrix analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q243745" start="687" end="714" title="ABCD-parameters" label="&amp;quot;ABCD&amp;quot;-parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="740" end="744" title="ABCd" label="ABCd"/>
<link wikidata="Q60500" start="831" end="862" title="create, read, update and delete" label="create, read, update and delete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368015" start="905" end="914" title="ABCD line" label="ABCD line"/>
<link wikidata="Q287199" start="1008" end="1019" title="ABCD Region" label="ABCD Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494423" start="1075" end="1085" title="ABCD ships" label="ABCD ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677197" start="1229" end="1268" title="Action for Boston Community Development" label="Action for Boston Community Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974896" start="1297" end="1324" title="American-born confused desi" label="American-born confused desi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808776" start="1368" end="1401" title="Asset-based community development" label="Asset-based community development"/>
<link wikidata="Q597534" start="1466" end="1504" title="Association of Better Computer Dealers" label="Association of Better Computer Dealers"/>
<link wikidata="Q632694" start="1599" end="1621" title="ADM (company)" label="Archer-Daniels-Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009458" start="1623" end="1628" title="Bunge Global" label="Bunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036056" start="1630" end="1637" title="Cargill" label="Cargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q833111" start="1639" end="1652" title="Louis Dreyfus Company" label="Louis Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q286874" start="1670" end="1690" title="ABC (disambiguation)" label="ABC (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912808" start="1693" end="1698" title="ABCD1" label="ABCD1"/>
<link wikidata="Q286990" start="1712" end="1723" title="ABCD² score" label="ABCD2 score"/>
<link wikidata="Q754673" start="1804" end="1820" title="English alphabet" label="English alphabet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2171" wikidata="Q2716356" url="?curid=2171" title="Anti-realism">
<text>In analytic philosophy, anti-realism is the position that the truth of a statement rests on its demonstrability through internal logic mechanisms, such as the context principle or intuitionistic logic, in direct opposition to the realist notion that the truth of a statement rests on its correspondence to an external, independent reality. In anti-realism, this external reality is hypothetical and is not assumed. 

There are many varieties of anti-realism, such as metaphysical, mathematical, semantic, scientific, moral and epistemic. The term was first articulated by British philosopher Michael Dummett in an argument against a form of realism Dummett saw as &#x27;colorless reductionism&#x27;.

Anti-realism in its most general sense can be understood as being in contrast to a &quot;generic realism&quot;, which holds that distinctive objects of a subject-matter exist and have properties independent of one&#x27;s beliefs and conceptual schemes. The ways in which anti-realism rejects these type of claims can vary dramatically. Because this encompasses statements containing abstract ideal objects (i.e. mathematical objects), anti-realism may apply to a wide range of philosophical topics, from material objects to the theoretical entities of science, mathematical statements, mental states, events and processes, the past and the future.

== Varieties ==
=== Metaphysical anti-realism ===

One kind of metaphysical anti-realism maintains a skepticism about the physical world, arguing either: 1) that nothing exists outside the mind, or 2) that we would have no access to a mind-independent reality, even if it exists. The latter case often takes the form of a denial of the idea that we can have &#x27;unconceptualised&#x27; experiences (see Myth of the Given). Conversely, most realists (specifically, indirect realists) hold that perceptions or sense data are caused by mind-independent objects. But this introduces the possibility of another kind of skepticism: since our understanding of causality is that the same effect can be produced by multiple causes, there is a lack of determinacy about what one is really perceiving, as in the brain in a vat scenario. The main alternative to this sort of metaphysical anti-realism is metaphysical realism.

On a more abstract level, model-theoretic anti-realist arguments hold that a given set of symbols in a theory can be mapped onto any number of sets of real-world objects—each set being a &quot;model&quot; of the theory—provided the relationship between the objects is the same (compare with symbol grounding.)

In ancient Greek philosophy, nominalist (anti-realist) doctrines about universals were proposed by the Stoics, especially Chrysippus. In early modern philosophy, conceptualist anti-realist doctrines about universals were proposed by thinkers like René Descartes, John Locke, Baruch Spinoza, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, George Berkeley, and David Hume. In late modern philosophy, anti-realist doctrines about knowledge were proposed by the German idealist Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. Hegel was a proponent of what is now called inferentialism: he believed that the ground for the axioms and the foundation for the validity of the inferences are the right consequences and that the axioms do not explain the consequence. Kant and Hegel held conceptualist views about universals. In contemporary philosophy, anti-realism was revived in the form of empirio-criticism, logical positivism, semantic anti-realism and scientific instrumentalism (see below).

===Mathematical anti-realism===
In the philosophy of mathematics, realism is the claim that mathematical entities such as &#x27;number&#x27; have an observer-independent existence. Empiricism, which associates numbers with concrete physical objects, and Platonism, in which numbers are abstract, non-physical entities, are the preeminent forms of mathematical realism.

The &quot;epistemic argument&quot; against Platonism has been made by Paul Benacerraf and Hartry Field. Platonism posits that mathematical objects are &quot;abstract&quot; entities. By general agreement, abstract entities cannot interact causally with physical entities (&quot;the truth-values of our mathematical assertions depend on facts involving platonic entities that reside in a realm outside of space-time&quot;). Whilst our knowledge of physical objects is based on our ability to perceive them, and therefore to causally interact with them, there is no parallel account of how mathematicians come to have knowledge of abstract objects.

Field developed his views into fictionalism. Benacerraf also developed the philosophy of mathematical structuralism, according to which there are no mathematical objects. Nonetheless, some versions of structuralism are compatible with some versions of realism.

====Counterarguments====
Anti-realist arguments hinge on the idea that a satisfactory, naturalistic account of thought processes can be given for mathematical reasoning. One line of defense is to maintain that this is false, so that mathematical reasoning uses some special intuition that involves contact with the Platonic realm, as in the argument given by Sir Roger Penrose.

Another line of defense is to maintain that abstract objects are relevant to mathematical reasoning in a way that is non causal, and not analogous to perception. This argument is developed by Jerrold Katz in his 2000 book &quot;Realistic Rationalism&quot;. In this book, he put forward a position called realistic rationalism, which combines metaphysical realism and rationalism.

A more radical defense is to deny the separation of physical world and the platonic world, i.e. the mathematical universe hypothesis (a variety of mathematicism). In that case, a mathematician&#x27;s knowledge of mathematics is one mathematical object making contact with another.

=== Semantic anti-realism ===

The term &quot;anti-realism&quot; was introduced by Michael Dummett in his 1963 paper &quot;Realism&quot; in order to re-examine a number of classical philosophical disputes, involving such doctrines as nominalism, Platonic realism, idealism and phenomenalism. The novelty of Dummett&#x27;s approach consisted in portraying these disputes as analogous to the dispute between intuitionism and Platonism in the philosophy of mathematics.

According to intuitionists (anti-realists with respect to mathematical objects), the truth of a mathematical statement consists in our ability to prove it. According to Platonic realists, the truth of a statement is proven in its correspondence to objective reality. Thus, intuitionists are ready to accept a statement of the form &quot;P or Q&quot; as true only if we can prove P or if we can prove Q. In particular, we cannot in general claim that &quot;P or not P&quot; is true (the law of excluded middle), since in some cases we may not be able to prove the statement &quot;P&quot; nor prove the statement &quot;not P&quot;. Similarly, intuitionists object to the existence property for classical logic, where one can prove formula_1, without being able to produce any term formula_2 of which formula_3 holds.

Dummett argues that this notion of truth lies at the bottom of various classical forms of anti-realism, and uses it to re-interpret phenomenalism, claiming that it need not take the form of reductionism.

Dummett&#x27;s writings on anti-realism draw heavily on the later writings of Ludwig Wittgenstein, concerning meaning and rule following, and can be seen as an attempt to integrate central ideas from the &quot;Philosophical Investigations&quot; into the constructive tradition of analytic philosophy deriving from Gottlob Frege.

===Scientific anti-realism===

In philosophy of science, anti-realism applies chiefly to claims about the non-reality of &quot;unobservable&quot; entities such as electrons or genes, which are not detectable with human senses.

One prominent variety of scientific anti-realism is instrumentalism, which takes a purely agnostic view towards the existence of unobservable entities, in which the unobservable entity X serves as an instrument to aid in the success of theory Y and does not require proof for the existence or non-existence of X.

=== Moral anti-realism ===
In the philosophy of ethics, moral anti-realism (or moral irrealism) is a meta-ethical doctrine that there are no objective moral values or normative facts. It is usually defined in opposition to moral realism, which holds that there are objective moral values, such that a moral claim may be either true or false. Specifically the moral anti-realist is committed to denying at least one of the following three statements: 

# &quot;The Semantic Thesis:&quot; Moral statements have meaning, they express propositions, or are the kind of things that can be true or false.
# &quot;The Alethic Thesis:&quot; Some moral propositions are true.
# &quot;The Metaphysical Thesis&quot;: The metaphysical status of moral facts is robust and ordinary, not importantly different from other facts about the world.

Different version of moral anti-realism deny different statements: specifically, non-cognitivism denies the first claim, arguing that moral statements have no meaning or truth content, error theory denies the second claim, arguing that all moral statements are false, and ethical subjectivism denies the third claim, arguing that the truth of moral statements is mind dependent.

Examples of anti-realist moral theories might be:

*Ethical subjectivism
*Non-cognitivism
*Emotivism
*Prescriptivism
*Quasi-realism
*Projectivism
*Moral fictionalism
*Moral nihilism
*Moral skepticism

There is a debate as to whether moral relativism is actually an anti-realist position. While many versions deny the metaphysical thesis, some do not, as one could imagine a system of morality which requires you to obey the written laws in your country. Such a system would be a version of moral relativism, as different individuals would be required to follow different laws, but the moral facts are physical facts about the world, not mental facts, so they are metaphysically ordinary. Thus, different versions of moral relativism might be considered anti-realist or realist.

===Epistemic anti-realism===

Just as moral anti-realism asserts the nonexistence of normative facts, epistemic anti-realism asserts the nonexistence of facts in the domain of epistemology. Thus, the two are now sometimes grouped together as &quot;metanormative anti-realism&quot;. Prominent defenders of epistemic anti-realism include Hartry Field, Simon Blackburn, Matthew Chrisman, and Allan Gibbard, among others.

==See also==

* Arend Heyting
* Constructivist epistemology
* Crispin Wright
* Critical realism (philosophy of perception)
* Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer
* Metaepistemology
* Michael Dummett
* Münchhausen trilemma
* Neil Tennant (philosopher)
* Philosophical realism
* Quasi-realism
== References ==
==Bibliography==
** . reprinted, pp. 1–24.
** . reprinted, pp. 145–165.
** . reprinted, pp. 202–214.
* Lee Braver (2007). &quot;A Thing of This World: a History of Continental Anti-Realism,&quot; Northwestern University Press: 2007.
* Ian Hacking (1999). &quot;The Social Construction of What?&quot;. Harvard University Press: 2001.
* Samir Okasha (2002). &quot;Philosophy of Science: A Very Short Introduction&quot;. Oxford University Press.

==External links==
* Semantic challenges to realism in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="3" end="22" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716356" start="24" end="36" title="Anti-realism" label="anti-realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684591" start="73" end="82" title="Statement (logic)" label="statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783174" start="159" end="176" title="context principle" label="context principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q176786" start="180" end="200" title="intuitionistic logic" label="intuitionistic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q735590" start="230" end="237" title="Philosophical realism" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="382" end="394" title="hypothesis" label="hypothetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="580" end="591" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q342646" start="592" end="607" title="Michael Dummett" label="Michael Dummett"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="614" end="622" title="argument" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q735590" start="641" end="648" title="Philosophical realism" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205125" start="1084" end="1106" title="abstract object" label="abstract ideal objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q223557" start="1205" end="1221" title="Physical body" label="material objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q35120" start="1241" end="1249" title="entity" label="entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="1253" end="1260" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q246672" start="1262" end="1285" title="mathematical object" label="mathematical statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q677734" start="1287" end="1322" title="The problem of other minds" label="mental states, events and processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192630" start="1328" end="1332" title="past" label="past"/>
<link wikidata="Q344" start="1341" end="1347" title="future" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="1451" end="1461" title="skepticism" label="skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q712462" start="1754" end="1771" title="Myth of the Given" label="Myth of the Given"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860201" start="1815" end="1832" title="Indirect realism" label="indirect realists"/>
<link wikidata="Q237202" start="1859" end="1869" title="sense data" label="sense data"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="2004" end="2013" title="causality" label="causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017758" start="2085" end="2104" title="Indeterminacy (philosophy)" label="lack of determinacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q852947" start="2152" end="2166" title="brain in a vat" label="brain in a vat"/>
<link wikidata="Q735590" start="2243" end="2263" title="metaphysical realism" label="metaphysical realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="2292" end="2307" title="model theory" label="model-theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="2356" end="2362" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="2369" end="2375" title="theory" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q246989" start="2557" end="2573" title="symbol grounding" label="symbol grounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="2580" end="2604" title="ancient Greek philosophy" label="ancient Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2606" end="2641" title="Problem of universals#Nominalism" label="nominalist (anti-realist) doctrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092032" start="2648" end="2658" title="universals (metaphysics)" label="universals"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="2680" end="2686" title="Stoics" label="Stoics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211411" start="2699" end="2709" title="Chrysippus" label="Chrysippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966481" start="2714" end="2737" title="early modern philosophy" label="early modern philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q848969" start="2739" end="2752" title="Conceptualism" label="conceptualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="2824" end="2838" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="2840" end="2850" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="2852" end="2866" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="2868" end="2893" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="2895" end="2910" title="George Berkeley" label="George Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="2916" end="2926" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="2931" end="2953" title="late modern philosophy" label="late modern philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="3015" end="3030" title="German idealist" label="German idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="3031" end="3060" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662353" start="3106" end="3120" title="Semantic inferentialism" label="inferentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q943303" start="3359" end="3382" title="contemporary philosophy" label="contemporary philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93996" start="3424" end="3441" title="empirio-criticism" label="empirio-criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193627" start="3443" end="3461" title="logical positivism" label="logical positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q342646" start="3463" end="3484" title="Semantic anti-realism (epistemology)" label="semantic anti-realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856063" start="3500" end="3515" title="instrumentalism" label="instrumentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180536" start="3569" end="3594" title="philosophy of mathematics" label="philosophy of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180536" start="3711" end="3721" title="Mathematical empiricism" label="Empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392001" start="3784" end="3793" title="Mathematical Platonism" label="Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="3910" end="3919" title="epistemic" label="epistemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396649" start="3970" end="3985" title="Paul Benacerraf" label="Paul Benacerraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587666" start="3990" end="4002" title="Hartry Field" label="Hartry Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205125" start="4057" end="4065" title="abstract object" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="4138" end="4144" title="causal" label="causal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="4390" end="4398" title="perception" label="perceive"/>
<link wikidata="Q180536" start="4578" end="4590" title="Mathematical fictionalism" label="fictionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625074" start="4636" end="4662" title="mathematical structuralism" label="mathematical structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000" start="4896" end="4908" title="Naturalism (philosophy)" label="naturalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189222" start="5083" end="5092" title="Intuition (knowledge)" label="intuition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801572" start="5124" end="5138" title="Platonic realm" label="Platonic realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q193803" start="5168" end="5185" title="Sir Roger Penrose" label="Sir Roger Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687784" start="5380" end="5392" title="Jerrold Katz" label="Jerrold Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="5555" end="5566" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951321" start="5669" end="5701" title="mathematical universe hypothesis" label="mathematical universe hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222093" start="5716" end="5729" title="mathematicism" label="mathematicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q342646" start="5897" end="5909" title="Semantic anti-realism (epistemology)" label="anti-realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q342646" start="5934" end="5949" title="Michael Dummett" label="Michael Dummett"/>
<link wikidata="Q202253" start="6085" end="6095" title="nominalism" label="nominalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="6097" end="6113" title="Platonic realism" label="Platonic realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="6115" end="6123" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141430" start="6128" end="6141" title="phenomenalism" label="phenomenalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10879018" start="6257" end="6269" title="intuitionism (philosophy of mathematics)" label="intuitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="6274" end="6283" title="Platonism" label="Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180536" start="6291" end="6316" title="philosophy of mathematics" label="philosophy of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="6404" end="6409" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="6567" end="6576" title="Objectivity (philosophy)" label="objective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282264" start="6677" end="6721" title="Disjunction and existence properties" label="only if we can prove P or if we can prove Q."/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="6805" end="6827" title="law of excluded middle" label="law of excluded middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="6850" end="6947" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems" label="we may not be able to prove the statement &amp;quot;P&amp;quot; nor prove the statement &amp;quot;not P&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282264" start="6988" end="7006" title="existence property" label="existence property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141430" start="7267" end="7280" title="phenomenalism" label="phenomenalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="7325" end="7337" title="reductionism" label="reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="7418" end="7437" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q772496" start="7550" end="7578" title="Philosophical Investigations" label="Philosophical Investigations"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="7620" end="7639" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="7654" end="7667" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Gottlob Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="7704" end="7725" title="philosophy of science" label="philosophy of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="7833" end="7841" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="7846" end="7850" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q856063" start="7950" end="7965" title="instrumentalism" label="instrumentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="8246" end="8266" title="Ethics" label="philosophy of ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q56003" start="8313" end="8325" title="Meta-ethics" label="meta-ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="8363" end="8375" title="Morality" label="moral values"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100314" start="8435" end="8448" title="moral realism" label="moral realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156560" start="9122" end="9137" title="non-cognitivism" label="non-cognitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q68012161" start="9226" end="9238" title="Error Theory" label="error theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q568188" start="9313" end="9333" title="ethical subjectivism" label="ethical subjectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q568188" start="9473" end="9493" title="Ethical subjectivism" label="Ethical subjectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156560" start="9495" end="9510" title="Non-cognitivism" label="Non-cognitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058270" start="9512" end="9521" title="Emotivism" label="Emotivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980795" start="9523" end="9537" title="Universal prescriptivism" label="Prescriptivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269470" start="9539" end="9552" title="Quasi-realism" label="Quasi-realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249478" start="9554" end="9566" title="Projectivism" label="Projectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321529" start="9568" end="9586" title="Moral fictionalism" label="Moral fictionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q68012161" start="9588" end="9602" title="Moral nihilism" label="Moral nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673227" start="9604" end="9620" title="Moral skepticism" label="Moral skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778848" start="9654" end="9670" title="moral relativism" label="moral relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="10376" end="10388" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587666" start="10536" end="10548" title="Hartry Field" label="Hartry Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q287357" start="10550" end="10565" title="Simon Blackburn" label="Simon Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730627" start="10589" end="10602" title="Allan Gibbard" label="Allan Gibbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q641771" start="10635" end="10648" title="Arend Heyting" label="Arend Heyting"/>
<link wikidata="Q179270" start="10651" end="10678" title="Constructivist epistemology" label="Constructivist epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q445989" start="10681" end="10695" title="Crispin Wright" label="Crispin Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483466" start="10698" end="10741" title="Critical realism (philosophy of perception)" label="Critical realism (philosophy of perception)"/>
<link wikidata="Q155887" start="10744" end="10772" title="Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer" label="Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822250" start="10775" end="10791" title="Metaepistemology" label="Metaepistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q342646" start="10794" end="10809" title="Michael Dummett" label="Michael Dummett"/>
<link wikidata="Q949691" start="10812" end="10832" title="Münchhausen trilemma" label="Münchhausen trilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989396" start="10835" end="10861" title="Neil Tennant (philosopher)" label="Neil Tennant (philosopher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q735590" start="10864" end="10885" title="Philosophical realism" label="Philosophical realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269470" start="10888" end="10901" title="Quasi-realism" label="Quasi-realism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2174" wikidata="Q9617" url="?curid=2174" title="Arsenal F.C.">
<text>The Arsenal Football Club, commonly known as simply Arsenal, is a professional football club based in Islington, North London, England. They compete in the Premier League, the top tier of English football. In domestic football, Arsenal have won 13 league titles (including one unbeaten title), a record 14 FA Cups, two League Cups, 17 FA Community Shields, and a Football League Centenary Trophy. In European football, they have one European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup and one Inter-Cities Fairs Cup. In terms of trophies won, it is the third-most successful club in English football.

Arsenal was the first club from southern England to join the Football League in 1893, and it reached the First Division in 1904. Relegated only once, in 1913, it continues the longest streak in the top division, and has won the second-most top-flight matches in English football history. In the 1930s, Arsenal won five League Championships and two FA Cups, and another FA Cup and two Championships after the war. In 1970–71, it won its first League and FA Cup double. Between 1989 and 2005, they won five league titles and five FA Cups, including two more doubles. They completed the 20th century with the highest average league position. Between 1998 and 2017, Arsenal qualified for the UEFA Champions League for an English football record nineteen consecutive seasons.

In 1886, munitions workers at the Royal Arsenal in Woolwich founded the club as Dial Square. In 1913, the club crossed the city to Arsenal Stadium in Highbury, becoming close neighbours of Tottenham Hotspur, and creating the North London derby. Herbert Chapman won the club its first silverware, and his legacy enabled a trophy-laden period in the 1930s. He helped introduce the WM formation, floodlights, and shirt numbers; he also added the white sleeves and brighter red to the club&#x27;s jersey. Arsène Wenger is the club&#x27;s longest-serving manager and has won the most trophies. He won a record seven FA Cups, and his third and final title-winning team set an English record for the longest top-flight unbeaten league run at 49 games between 2003 and 2004, receiving the nickname The Invincibles.

In 2006, the club moved to the nearby Emirates Stadium. With an annual revenue of £367.1m in the 2021–22 season, Arsenal was estimated to be worth US$2.26 billion by &quot;Forbes&quot;, making it the world&#x27;s tenth-most valuable football club, while it is one of the most followed on social media. The motto of the club is &quot;Victoria Concordia Crescit&quot;, Latin for &quot;Victory Through Harmony&quot;.

==History==

===1886–1912: Dial Square to Royal Arsenal===

In October 1886, Scotsman David Danskin and fifteen fellow munitions workers in Woolwich formed Dial Square Football Club, named after a workshop at the heart of the Royal Arsenal complex. Each member contributed sixpence, and Danskin also added three shillings to help form the club. Dial Square played their first match on 11 December 1886 against the Eastern Wanderers and won 6–0. The club had been renamed Royal Arsenal by January 1887, and its first home was Plumstead Common, though they spent most of their time playing at the Manor Ground. Their first trophies were the Kent Senior Cup and London Charity Cup in 1889–90 and the London Senior Cup in 1890–91; these were the only county association trophies Arsenal won during their time in South East London. In 1891, Royal Arsenal became the first London club to turn professional.

Royal Arsenal was renamed for the second time upon becoming a limited liability company in 1893. They registered their new name, Woolwich Arsenal, with the Football League when the club ascended later that year. Woolwich Arsenal was the first southern member of the Football League, starting out in the Second Division and reaching the First Division in 1904. Falling attendances, due to financial difficulties among the munitions workers and the arrival of more accessible football clubs elsewhere in the city, led the club close to bankruptcy by 1910. Businessmen Henry Norris and William Hall became involved in the club, and sought to move them elsewhere.

===1912–1925: Bank of England club===
In 1913, soon after relegation back to the Second Division, the club moved across the river to the new Arsenal Stadium in Highbury. In 1919, the Football League controversially voted to promote The Arsenal, instead of relegated local rivals Tottenham Hotspur, into the newly enlarged First Division, despite only finishing fifth in the Second Division&#x27;s last pre-war season of 1914–15. Later that year, The Arsenal started dropping &quot;The&quot; in official documents, gradually shifting its name for the final time towards Arsenal, as it is generally known today.
With a new home and First Division football, attendances were more than double those at the Manor Ground, and Arsenal&#x27;s budget grew rapidly. With record-breaking spending and gate receipts, Arsenal quickly became known as the Bank of England club.

=== 1925–1934: Herbert Chapman&#x27;s legendary Gunners ===
Arsenal&#x27;s location and record-breaking salary offer lured star Huddersfield Town manager Herbert Chapman in 1925. Over the next five years, Chapman built a revolutionary new Arsenal. Firstly, he appointed an enduring new trainer, Tom Whittaker who would one day rise to become a fabled Arsenal manager himself. With the help of player Charlie Buchan, implemented the nascent WM formation which would serve as a stable bedrock to his outfit. He also captured generational young talents such as Cliff Bastin and Eddie Hapgood, whilst also lavishing Highbury&#x27;s high income on stars such as David Jack and Alex James.

Transformed, Chapman&#x27;s Arsenal claimed their first national trophy, the FA Cup in 1930, and League Championships followed in 1930–31 and 1932–33. Chapman also presided over off-pitch changes: white sleeves and shirt numbers were added to the kit; a Tube station was named after the club; and the first of two opulent Art Deco stands was completed, with some of the first floodlights in English football. Suddenly, in the middle of the 1933–34 season, Chapman died of pneumonia.

=== 1934–1947: Shaw, Allison and the Second World War ===
Chapman&#x27;s death meant work was left to his colleagues Joe Shaw and George Allison, with both proving to be shrewd and consummate custodians of Chapman&#x27;s excellent Arsenal team, seeing out a hat-trick of league wins with the 1933–34, 1934–35, and 1937–38 titles, and then furthermore winning the 1936 FA Cup.

World War II meant the Football League was suspended for seven years. While Arsenal were paraded by the nation as a symbol of solidarity with war efforts, the war took a huge toll on the team as the club had had more players killed than any top flight club. Furthermore, debt from reconstructing an ambitious North Bank Stand redevelopment greatly bled Arsenal&#x27;s resources.

=== 1947–1962: Tom Whittaker&#x27;s meteoric Gunners ===
Despite this period of turbulence and churn, Arsenal returned to win the league in the second post-war season of 1947–48. This was Tom Whittaker&#x27;s first season as manager, and meant the club equalled the champions of England record. Whittaker, despite his disarming humble and modest disposition, was oft-referred to as the &quot;brains&quot; behind charismatic Chapman&#x27;s legendary Arsenal side. He gathered a successful and highly skilled Arsenal side in spite of greatly limited resources, with a fiery and expansive style that drove great fanfare at the time.

They won a third FA Cup in 1950, and then won a record-breaking seventh championship in 1952–53 making Arsenal the most successful team in English history at the time.

===1962–1984: Billy Wright, Bertie Mee and Terry Neill&#x27;s cohorts===

Arsenal were not to win the League or the FA Cup for another 18 years. The &#x27;53 Champions squad had aged, and the club failed to attract strong enough replacements. Although Arsenal were competitive during these years, their fortunes had waned; the club spent most of the 1950s and 1960s in mid-table mediocrity. Even former England captain Billy Wright could not bring the club any success as manager, in a stint between 1962 and 1966.

Arsenal tentatively appointed club physiotherapist Bertie Mee as acting manager in 1966. With new assistant Don Howe and new players such as Bob McNab and George Graham, Mee led Arsenal to their first League Cup finals, in 1967–68 and 1968–69. Next season saw a breakthrough, with Arsenal&#x27;s first competitive European trophy, the 1969–70 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup. The season after, Arsenal achieved an even greater triumph with their first League and FA Cup double, and a new champions of England record. This marked a premature high point of the decade; the Double-winning side was soon broken up and the rest of the decade was characterised by a series of near misses, with Arsenal finishing as FA Cup runners up in 1972, and First Division runners-up in 1972–73.

Former player Terry Neill succeeded Mee in 1976. At the age of 34, he became the youngest Arsenal manager to date. With new signings like Malcolm Macdonald and Pat Jennings, and a crop of talent in the side like Liam Brady and Frank Stapleton, the club reached a trio of FA Cup finals (1978 FA Cup, 1979 FA Cup and 1980 FA Cup), and lost the 1980 European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup Final on penalties. The club&#x27;s only trophy during this time was the 1979 FA Cup, achieved with a last-minute 3–2 victory over Manchester United, in a final is widely regarded as a classic.

===1984–1996: George Graham&#x27;s Arsenal===

One of Mee&#x27;s double winners, George Graham, returned as manager in 1986, with Arsenal winning their first League Cup in 1987, Graham&#x27;s first season in charge. New signings Nigel Winterburn, Lee Dixon and Steve Bould had joined the club by 1988 to complete the &quot;famous Back Four&quot;, led by homegrown player Tony Adams. Graham&#x27;s credo of prioritising defensive excellence seemingly clashed with the club&#x27;s traditionally expansive motifs and many had skepticism whether it would work with the young squad at the club in that time period; however, his methods quickly gained a cult following after initial successes.

The side immediately won the 1988 Football League Centenary Trophy, and followed it with the 1988–89 Football League title, snatched with a last-minute goal in the final game of the season against fellow title challengers Liverpool. Graham&#x27;s Arsenal won another title in 1990–91, losing only one match, won the FA Cup and League Cup double in 1993, and the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup in 1994. Graham&#x27;s reputation was tarnished when he was found to have taken kickbacks from agent Rune Hauge for signing certain players, and he was dismissed in 1995. His replacement, Bruce Rioch, lasted for only one season, leaving the club after a dispute with the board of directors.

===1996–2018: Arsene Wenger years===

The club metamorphosed during the tenure of French manager Arsène Wenger, who was appointed in 1996. Attacking football, an overhaul of dietary and fitness practices, and elite scouting defined his reign. Accumulating key players from Wenger&#x27;s homeland, such as Patrick Vieira and Thierry Henry, Arsenal won a second League and Cup double in 1997–98 and a third in 2001–02. In addition, the club reached the final of the 1999–2000 UEFA Cup, were victorious in the 2003 and 2005 FA Cup finals, and won the Premier League in 2003–04 without losing a single match, an achievement which earned the side the nickname &quot;The Invincibles&quot;. This feat came within a run of 49 league matches unbeaten from 7 May 2003 to 24 October 2004, a national record.

Arsenal finished in either first or second place in the league in eight of Wenger&#x27;s first nine seasons at the club, although they never won the title in two consecutive seasons.
The club had never progressed beyond the quarter-finals of the Champions League until 2005–06; in that season, they became the first club from London to reach the final in the competition&#x27;s fifty-year history, but were beaten 2–1 by Barcelona. In July 2006, they moved into the Emirates Stadium, after 93 years at Highbury.
Arsenal reached the finals of the 2007 and 2011 League Cups, losing 2–1 to Chelsea and Birmingham City respectively. The club had not gained a trophy since the 2005 FA Cup until, spearheaded by club record acquisition Mesut Özil, Arsenal beat Hull City in the 2014 FA Cup Final, coming back from a 2–0 deficit to win the match 3–2. A year later, Arsenal completed another victorious FA Cup campaign, and became the most successful club in the tournament&#x27;s history by winning their 13th FA Cup in 2016–17. However, in that same season Arsenal finished fifth in the league, the first time they had finished outside the top four since before Wenger arrived in 1996. In his 21st and final season, Arsenal under Arsene Wenger finished sixth and won the FA Community Shield. Wenger departed Arsenal following the end of the season on 13 May 2018.

=== 2018–2020: post-Wenger revolution ===
After conducting an overhaul in the club&#x27;s operating model to coincide with Wenger&#x27;s departure, Spaniard Unai Emery was named as the club&#x27;s new head coach on 23 May 2018. He became the club&#x27;s first ever &#x27;head coach&#x27; and second manager from outside the United Kingdom. In Emery&#x27;s first season, Arsenal finished fifth in the Premier League and as runner-up in the Europa League. On 29 November 2019, Emery was dismissed as manager and former player and assistant first team coach Freddie Ljungberg was appointed as interim head coach.

=== 2020–: Mikel Arteta era ===
On 20 December 2019, Arsenal appointed former club captain Mikel Arteta as the new head coach. Arsenal finished the 2019–20 season in eighth, their lowest finish since 1994–95, but beat Chelsea 2–1 to earn a record-extending 14th FA Cup win. After the season, Arteta&#x27;s title was changed from head coach to manager. On 18 April 2021, Arsenal were announced as a founding club of the breakaway European competition The Super League; they withdrew from the competition two days later amid near-universal condemnation. Arsenal finished the 2020–21 season in eighth place once again, not qualifying for a European competition for the first time in 26 years. The season after (2021–22), Arteta had assembled the youngest outfit in the Premier League with an average starting age of 24 years and 308 days – more than a whole year younger than the next team. They finished in fifth in the Premier League that year, and qualified for next season&#x27;s UEFA Europa League.

By the 2022–23 season, Arsenal returned to the Champions League by coming second to Manchester City, setting a record for most time spent on top of the table without actually winning the league, ending on 84 points. In the 2023–24 season, Arsenal beat Manchester City to claim their 17th FA Community Shield, they finished second in the Premier League to Manchester City with an improved 89 points from their previous campaign.

==Crest==

Unveiled in 1888, Royal Arsenal&#x27;s first crest featured three cannons viewed from above, pointing northwards, similar to the coat of arms of the Metropolitan Borough of Woolwich (nowadays transferred to the coat of arms of the Royal Borough of Greenwich). These can sometimes be mistaken for chimneys, but the presence of a carved lion&#x27;s head and a cascabel on each are clear indicators that they are cannons. This was dropped after the move to Highbury in 1913, only to be reinstated in 1922, when the club adopted a crest featuring a single cannon, pointing eastwards, with the club&#x27;s nickname, &quot;The Gunners&quot;, inscribed alongside it; this crest only lasted until 1925, when the cannon was reversed to point westward and its barrel slimmed down.

In 1949, the club unveiled a modernised crest featuring the same style of cannon below the club&#x27;s name, set in blackletter typography, and above the coat of arms of the Metropolitan Borough of Islington and a scroll inscribed with the club&#x27;s newly adopted Latin motto, &quot;Victoria Concordia Crescit&quot; (VCC) – &quot;victory comes from harmony&quot; – coined by the club&#x27;s programme editor Harry Homer. For the first time, the crest was rendered in colour, which varied slightly over the crest&#x27;s lifespan, finally becoming red, gold and green. Because of the numerous revisions of the crest, Arsenal were unable to copyright it. Although the club had managed to register the crest as a trademark, and had fought (and eventually won) a long legal battle with a local street trader who sold &quot;unofficial&quot; Arsenal merchandise, Arsenal eventually sought a more comprehensive legal protection. Therefore, in 2002 they introduced a new crest featuring more modern curved lines and a simplified style, which was copyrightable.
The cannon once again faces east, and the club&#x27;s name is written in a sans-serif typeface above the cannon. Green was replaced by dark blue. The new crest was criticised by some supporters; the Arsenal Independent Supporters&#x27; Association claimed that the club had ignored much of Arsenal&#x27;s history and tradition with such a radical modern design, and that fans had not been properly consulted on the issue.
Until the 1960s, a badge was worn on the playing shirt only for high-profile matches such as FA Cup finals, usually in the form of a monogram of the club&#x27;s initials in red on a white background.

The monogram theme was developed into an Art Deco-style badge on which the letters A and C framed a football rather than the letter F, the whole set within a hexagonal border. This early example of a corporate logo, introduced as part of Herbert Chapman&#x27;s rebranding of the club in the 1930s, was used not only on Cup Final shirts but as a design feature throughout Highbury Stadium, including above the main entrance and inlaid in the floors.
From 1967, a white cannon was regularly worn on the shirts, until replaced by the club crest, sometimes with the addition of the nickname &quot;The Gunners&quot;, in the 1990s.

In the 2011–12 season, Arsenal celebrated their 125th anniversary. The celebrations included a modified version of the current crest worn on their jerseys for the season. The crest was all-white, surrounded by 15 oak leaves to the right and 15 laurel leaves to the left. The oak leaves represent the 15 founding members of the club who met at the Royal Oak pub. The 15 laurel leaves represent the design detail on the six pence pieces paid by the founding fathers to establish the club. The laurel leaves also represent strength. To complete the crest, 1886 and 2011 are shown on either sides of the motto &quot;Forward&quot; at the bottom of the crest.

Starting in the 2021–22 season, Adidas reintroduced the cannon-only crest on that season&#x27;s away kit. It was the first time it had been seen on an Arsenal shirt since 1991. It would remain in use on the away kit in 2022–23 and in 2023–24 would be added to the third kit as well, before being used on all three kits in 2024–25 - marking the first time the crest would not be seen on an Arsenal kit since its introduction in 2002.

==Colours==



For much of Arsenal&#x27;s history, their home colours have been bright red shirts with white sleeves and white shorts, though this has not always been the case. The choice of red is in recognition of a charitable donation from Nottingham Forest, soon after Arsenal&#x27;s foundation in 1886. Two of Dial Square&#x27;s founding members, Fred Beardsley and Morris Bates, were former Forest players who had moved to Woolwich for work. As they put together the first team in the area, no kit could be found, so Beardsley and Bates wrote home for help and received a set of kit and a ball. The shirt was redcurrant, a dark shade of red, and was worn with white shorts and socks with blue and white hoops.

In 1933, Herbert Chapman, wanting his players to be more distinctly dressed, updated the kit, adding white sleeves and changing the shade to a brighter pillar box red. Two possibilities have been suggested for the origin of the white sleeves. One story reports that Chapman noticed a supporter in the stands wearing a red sleeveless sweater over a white shirt; another was that he was inspired by a similar outfit worn by the cartoonist Tom Webster, with whom Chapman played golf. Regardless of which story is true, the red-and-white shirts have come to define Arsenal, and the team have worn that combination ever since that time, aside from two seasons. The first was 1966–67, when Arsenal wore all-red shirts; this proved unpopular, and the white sleeves returned the following season. The second was 2005–06, the last season that Arsenal played at Highbury, when the team wore commemorative redcurrant shirts similar to those worn in 1913, their first season in the stadium; the side reverted to their normal colours at the start of the next season. In the 2008–09 season, Arsenal replaced the traditional all-white sleeves with red sleeves that bore a broad white stripe.

Arsenal&#x27;s home colours have been the inspiration for at least three other clubs. In 1909, Sparta Prague adopted a dark red kit like the one Arsenal wore at the time; in 1938, Hibernian adopted the design of the Arsenal shirt sleeves in their own green-and-white strip. In 1941, Luis Robledo, an England-schooled founder of Santa Fe and a fan of Arsenal, selected the main colours for his newly created team. In 1920, Sporting Clube de Braga&#x27;s manager returned from a game at Highbury and changed his team&#x27;s green kit to a duplicate of Arsenal&#x27;s red-with-white-sleeves-and-shorts, giving rise to the team&#x27;s nickname of &quot;Os Arsenalistas&quot;. These teams still wear those designs to this day.

For many years Arsenal&#x27;s away colours were white or navy blue. However, in 1968 the FA banned navy shirts (they looked too similar to referees&#x27; black kit), so in the 1969–70 season Arsenal introduced an away kit of yellow shirts with blue shorts. This kit was worn in the 1971 FA Cup Final when Arsenal beat Liverpool to secure the double for the first time in their history. The yellow and blue strip became almost as famous as their iconic red-and-white home kit. Arsenal reached the FA Cup final again the following year wearing the red-and-white home strip and were beaten by Leeds United. Arsenal then competed in three consecutive FA Cup finals between 1978 and 1980 wearing their &quot;lucky&quot; yellow and blue strip, which remained the club&#x27;s away strip until the release of a green and navy away kit in 1982–83. The following season, Arsenal returned to the yellow and blue scheme, albeit with a darker shade of blue than before.

When Nike took over from Adidas as Arsenal&#x27;s kit provider in 1994, Arsenal&#x27;s away colours were again changed to two-tone blue shirts and shorts. Since the advent of the lucrative replica kit market, the away kits have been changed regularly, with Arsenal usually releasing both away and third choice kits. During this period the designs have been either all blue designs, or variations on the traditional yellow and blue, such as the metallic gold and navy strip used in the 2001–02 season, the yellow and dark grey used from 2005 to 2007, and the yellow and maroon of 2010 to 2013.
Until 2014, the away kit was changed every season, and the outgoing away kit became the third-choice kit if a new home kit was being introduced in the same year.

After Puma began manufacturing Arsenal&#x27;s kits in 2014, new home, away and third kits were released every season. In the 2017–18 season, Puma released a new colour scheme for the away and third kits. The away kit was a light blue, which faded to a darker blue near the bottom, while the third kit was black with red highlight. Puma returned to the original colour scheme for the 2018–19 season. From the 2019–20 season Arsenal&#x27;s kits are manufactured by Adidas.

===Kit suppliers and shirt sponsors===

==Stadiums==

Before joining the Football League, Arsenal played briefly on Plumstead Common, then at the Manor Ground in Plumstead, then spent three years between 1890 and 1893 at the nearby Invicta Ground. Upon joining the Football League in 1893, the club returned to the Manor Ground and installed stands and terracing, upgrading it from just a field. Arsenal continued to play their home games there for the next twenty years (with two exceptions in the 1894–95 season), until the move to north London in 1913.

Widely referred to as Highbury, Arsenal Stadium was the club&#x27;s home from September 1913 until May 2006. The original stadium was designed by the renowned football architect Archibald Leitch, and had a design common to many football grounds in the UK at the time, with a single covered stand and three open-air banks of terracing. The entire stadium was given a massive overhaul in the 1930s: new Art Deco West and East stands were constructed, opening in 1932 and 1936 respectively, and a roof was added to the North Bank terrace, which was bombed during the Second World War and not restored until 1954.

Highbury could hold more than 60,000 spectators at its peak, and had a capacity of 57,000 until the early 1990s. The Taylor Report and Premier League regulations obliged Arsenal to convert Highbury to an all-seater stadium in time for the 1993–94 season, thus reducing the capacity to 38,419 seated spectators. This capacity had to be reduced further during Champions League matches to accommodate additional advertising boards, so much so that for two seasons, from 1998 to 2000, Arsenal played Champions League home matches at Wembley, which could house more than 70,000 spectators.
Expansion of Highbury was restricted because the East Stand had been designated as a Grade II listed building and the other three stands were close to residential properties. These limitations prevented the club from maximising matchday revenue during the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century, putting them in danger of being left behind in the football boom of that time. After considering various options, in 2000 Arsenal proposed building a new 60,361-capacity stadium at Ashburton Grove, since named the Emirates Stadium, about 500 metres south-west of Highbury. The project was initially delayed by red tape and rising costs, and construction was completed in July 2006, in time for the start of the 2006–07 season. The stadium was named after its sponsors, the airline company Emirates, with whom the club signed the largest sponsorship deal in English football history, worth around £100 million. Some fans referred to the ground as Ashburton Grove, or the Grove, as they did not agree with corporate sponsorship of stadium names. The stadium will be officially known as Emirates Stadium until at least 2028, and the airline will be the club&#x27;s shirt sponsor until at least 2024. From the start of the 2010–11 season on, the stands of the stadium have been officially known as North Bank, East Stand, West Stand and Clock end. The capacity of the Emirates now stands at 60,704.

Arsenal&#x27;s players train at the Shenley Training Centre in Hertfordshire, a purpose-built facility which opened in 1999.
Before that the club used facilities on a nearby site owned by the University College of London Students&#x27; Union. Until 1961 they had trained at Highbury.
Arsenal&#x27;s Academy under-18 teams play their home matches at Shenley, while the reserves play their games at Meadow Park, which is also the home of Boreham Wood. Both the Academy under-18 team and the reserves occasionally play their big games at the Emirates in front of a crowd reduced to only the lower west stand.

==Supporters and rivalries==
Arsenal&#x27;s fanbase are referred to as &quot;Gooners&quot; – the name derived from the club&#x27;s nickname &quot;The Gunners&quot;. Virtually all home matches sell out; in 2007–08 Arsenal had the second-highest average League attendance for an English club (60,070, which was 99.5% of available capacity), and, as of 2015, the third-highest all-time average attendance. Arsenal have the seventh highest average attendance of European football clubs only behind Borussia Dortmund, Barcelona, Manchester United, Real Madrid, Bayern Munich and Schalke 04. The club&#x27;s location, adjoining wealthy areas such as Canonbury and Barnsbury, mixed areas such as Islington, Holloway, Highbury, and the adjacent London Borough of Camden, and largely working-class areas such as Finsbury Park and Stoke Newington, has meant that Arsenal&#x27;s supporters have come from a variety of social classes. Much of the Afro-Caribbean support comes from the neighbouring London Borough of Hackney and a large portion of the South Asian Arsenal supporters commute to the stadium from Wembley Park, North West of the capital. There was also traditionally a large Irish community that followed Arsenal, with the surrounding Islington and particularly the nearby Archway area having a large community of residents with Irish heritage. But Irish migration to North London is recently much lower than in the 1960s or 1970s.

Like all major English football clubs, Arsenal have a number of domestic supporters&#x27; clubs, including the Arsenal Football Supporters&#x27; Club, which works closely with the club, and the Arsenal Independent Supporters&#x27; Association, which maintains a more independent line. The Arsenal Supporters&#x27; Trust promotes greater participation in ownership of the club by fans. The club&#x27;s supporters also publish fanzines such as &quot;The Gooner&quot;, &quot;Gunflash&quot; and the satirical &quot;Up The Arse!&quot;

There have always been Arsenal supporters outside London, and since the advent of satellite television, a supporter&#x27;s attachment to a football club has become less dependent on geography. Consequently, Arsenal have a significant number of fans from beyond London and all over the world; in 2007, 24 UK, 37 Irish and 49 other overseas supporters&#x27; clubs were affiliated with the club. A 2011 report by SPORT+MARKT estimated Arsenal&#x27;s global fanbase at 113 million. The club&#x27;s social media activity was the fifth highest in world football during the 2014–15 season.

===Chants===
The team&#x27;s anthem is &quot;The Angel (North London Forever)&quot; by Louis Dunford. The song is typically played at Arsenal home games before a match.

In addition to the usual English football chants, Arsenal&#x27;s supporters sing &quot;One-Nil to the Arsenal&quot; (to the tune of &quot;Go West&quot;) and also regularly sing &quot;Who&#x27;s that team they call the Arsenal&quot;, &quot;Good Old Arsenal&quot; (to the tune of &quot;Rule, Britannia!&quot;) and &quot;We&#x27;re the North Bank/Clock End Highbury&quot;. The fans also chant &quot;Boring, Boring Arsenal&quot; in self-deprecating reference to Arsenal&#x27;s reputation during the 1970s and 1980s as an overly defensive, cautious team.

===Rivalries===
Arsenal&#x27;s longest-running and deepest rivalry is with their nearest major neighbour, Tottenham Hotspur; matches between the two are referred to as the North London derby. There also exists a rivalry between Arsenal and Chelsea. In addition, Arsenal and Manchester United developed a strong on-pitch rivalry in the late 1980s, which intensified in the early 2000s when both clubs were competing for the Premier League title.

==Mascot==
The club mascot is Gunnersaurus Rex, a smiling, seven-foot-tall green dinosaur, who first appeared at a home match against Manchester City in August 1994 (or 1993). He is based on a drawing by then-11-year-old Peter Lovell, whose design and another similar idea won a Junior Gunners contest; his official backstory is that he hatched from an egg found during renovations at Highbury.

The same performer, Jerry Quy, has been inside the suit from the start; in early October 2020, as part of cost-cutting brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, the club made him redundant from that and his other part-time job in supporter liaison, together with 55 full-time employees, although they later said Gunnersaurus could return after spectators were allowed back in stadiums. An online fundraiser was begun for Quy, and Mesut Özil offered to pay his salary himself as long as he remains with Arsenal. In November 2020, in advance of COVID-19 regulations being relaxed to allow supporters to attend home games from 3 December, Arsenal announced that Gunnersaurus would return, to be played by a roster of people that could include Quy if he wished.

==Ownership and finances==

The largest shareholder on the Arsenal board is American sports tycoon Stan Kroenke. Kroenke first launched a bid for the club in April 2007, and faced competition for shares from Red and White Securities, which acquired its first shares from David Dein in August 2007. Red &amp; White Securities was co-owned by Russian billionaire Alisher Usmanov and London-based Iranian financier Farhad Moshiri, though Usmanov bought Moshiri&#x27;s stake in 2016. Kroenke came close to the 30% takeover threshold in November 2009, when he increased his holding to 18,594 shares (29.9%). In April 2011, Kroenke achieved a full takeover by purchasing the shareholdings of Nina Bracewell-Smith and Danny Fiszman, taking his shareholding to 62.89%. In May 2017, Kroenke owned 41,721 shares (67.05%) and Red &amp; White Securities owned 18,695 shares (30.04%). In January 2018, Kroenke expanded his ownership by buying twenty-two more shares, taking his total ownership to 67.09%. In August 2018, Kroenke bought out Usmanov for £550m. Now owning more than 90% of the shares, he had the required stake to complete the buyout of the remaining shares and become the sole owner. There has been criticism of Arsenal&#x27;s poor performance since Kroenke took over, which has been attributed to his ownership. Ivan Gazidis was the club&#x27;s Chief executive from 2009 to 2018.

Arsenal&#x27;s parent company, Arsenal Holdings plc, operates as an unlisted public limited company, whose ownership is considerably different from that of other football clubs. Only 62,219 shares in Arsenal have been issued, and they are not traded on a public exchange such as the FTSE or AIM; instead, they are traded relatively infrequently on the ICAP Securities and Derivatives Exchange, a specialist market. On 29 May 2017, a single share in Arsenal had a mid price of £18,000, which sets the club&#x27;s market capitalisation value at approximately £1,119.9m. Most football clubs are not listed on an exchange, which makes direct comparisons of their values difficult. Consultants Brand Finance valued the club&#x27;s brand and intangible assets at $703m in 2015, and consider Arsenal an AAA global brand. Business magazine &quot;Forbes&quot; valued Arsenal as a whole at $2.238 billion (£1.69 billion) in 2018, ranked third in English football. Research by the Henley Business School ranked Arsenal second in English football, modelling the club&#x27;s value at £1.118 billion in 2015.

Arsenal&#x27;s financial results for the 2019–20 season showed an after tax loss of £47.8m, due in part to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Deloitte Football Money League is a publication that homogenises and compares clubs&#x27; annual revenue. Deloitte put Arsenal&#x27;s footballing revenue in 2019 at £392.7m (€445.6m), ranking Arsenal eleventh among world football clubs. Arsenal and Deloitte both listed the match day revenue generated in 2019 by the Emirates Stadium as €109.2m (£96.2m).

==In popular culture==
Partly due to their proximity to the Alexandra Palace transmitter, Arsenal have appeared in a number of media &quot;firsts&quot;. On 22 January 1927, their match at Highbury against Sheffield United was the first English League match to be broadcast live on radio. A decade later, on 16 September 1937, an exhibition match between Arsenal&#x27;s first team and the reserves was the first football match in the world to be televised live. Arsenal also featured in the first edition of the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Match of the Day&quot;, which screened highlights of their match against Liverpool at Anfield on 22 August 1964. Sky&#x27;s coverage of Arsenal&#x27;s January 2010 match against Manchester United was the first live public broadcast of a sports event on 3D television.

As one of the most successful teams in the country, Arsenal have often featured when football is depicted in the arts in Britain. They formed the backdrop to one of the earliest football-related novels, &quot;The Arsenal Stadium Mystery&quot; (1939), which was made into a film in the same year. The story centres on a friendly match between Arsenal and an amateur side, one of whose players is poisoned while playing. Many Arsenal players appeared as themselves in the film and manager George Allison was given a speaking part. The book &quot;Fever Pitch&quot; by Nick Hornby was an autobiographical account of Hornby&#x27;s life and relationship with football, and with Arsenal in particular. Published in 1992, it formed part of the revival and rehabilitation of football in British society during the 1990s. The book was twice adapted for the cinema – the 1997 British film focuses on Arsenal&#x27;s 1988–89 title win, and a 2005 American version features a fan of baseball&#x27;s Boston Red Sox.

Arsenal have often been stereotyped as a defensive and &quot;boring&quot; side, especially during the 1970s and 1980s. In the 1997 film &quot;The Full Monty&quot; the principal characters move forward in a line and raise their hands, deliberately mimicking the Arsenal defence&#x27;s offside trap, in an attempt to co-ordinate their striptease routine.
Fifteen years later, an almost identical scene was included in the 2012 Disney science-fiction film &quot;John Carter&quot; (director and co-writer Andrew Stanton, a notable overseas supporter of the club), along with other visual cues and oblique dialogue hints and references to the club throughout the film.
Another film reference to the club&#x27;s defence comes in the film &quot;Plunkett &amp; Macleane&quot;, in which two characters are named Dixon and Winterburn after Arsenal&#x27;s long-serving full backs – the right-sided Lee Dixon and the left-sided Nigel Winterburn.

In August 2022, Amazon Prime Video released an eight-episode docuseries called &quot;All or Nothing: Arsenal&quot;. It documented the club by spending time with the coaching staff and players behind the scenes both on and off the field throughout their 2021–22 season, in which they were the youngest team in the Premier League with an average starting age of 24 years and 308 days – more than a whole year younger than the next team.

==In the community==
In 1985, Arsenal founded a community scheme, &quot;Arsenal in the Community&quot;, which offered sporting, social inclusion, educational and charitable projects. The club support a number of charitable causes directly and in 1992 established The Arsenal Charitable Trust, which by 2006 had raised more than £2 million for local causes. An ex-professional and celebrity football team associated with the club also raised money by playing charity matches. The club launched the Arsenal for Everyone initiative in 2008 as an annual celebration of the diversity of the Arsenal family. In the 2009–10 season Arsenal announced that they had raised a record breaking £818,897 for the Great Ormond Street Hospital Children&#x27;s Charity. The original target was £500,000. In 2022, Arsenal and Adidas partnered up to launch the &quot;No More Red&quot; campaign to support the long-standing work being done by Arsenal in the Community to help keep young people safe from knife crime and youth violence. To promote the event, the club launched an exclusive all white kit that was not commercially available and only awarded to individuals who are making a positive difference in the community.

Save the Children has been Arsenal global charity partner since 2011 and have worked together in numerous projects to improve safety and well-being for vulnerable children in London and abroad. On 3 September 2016 The Arsenal Foundation has donated £1m to build football pitches for children in London, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan and Somalia thanks to The Arsenal Foundation Legends Match against Milan Glorie at the Emirates Stadium. On 3 June 2018, Arsenal played Real Madrid in the Corazon Classic Match 2018 at the Bernabeu, where the proceeds went to Realtoo Real Madrid Foundation projects that are aimed at the most vulnerable children. In addition there will be a return meeting on 8 September 2018 at the Emirates stadium where proceeds will go towards the Arsenal foundation.

During 2007 in Pleiku, Vietnam, Arsenal partnered with the JMG Academy and the Hoang Anh Gia Lai Corporation to found a youth academy for the V.League 1 side Hoàng Anh Lai Lai, which saw a selection of Vietnam-based players train with Arsenal; the club ended their partnership with the club in 2017. Additionally, the club formally partnered with a variety of clubs overseas including Virginia based Richmond Strikers and Cairo based Wadi Degla.

==Players==

===First-team squad===










====Out on loan====




===Academy===

: Players with at least one first-team appearance for Arsenal.




====Out on loan====


==Management and staff==
===Current staff===

===Arsenal board===
==Statistics and records==
Arsenal&#x27;s tally of 13 League Championships is the third highest in English football, after Manchester United (20) and Liverpool (19),
and they were the first club to reach a seventh and an eighth League Championship. As of June 2020, they are one of seven teams, the others being Manchester United, Blackburn Rovers, Chelsea, Manchester City, Leicester City and Liverpool, to have won the Premier League since its formation in 1992.

They hold the highest number of FA Cup trophies, with 14. The club is one of only six clubs to have won the FA Cup twice in succession, in 2002 and 2003, and 2014 and 2015.
Arsenal have achieved three League and FA Cup &quot;Doubles&quot; (in 1971, 1998 and 2002), a feat only previously achieved by Manchester United (in 1994, 1996 and 1999).
They were the first side in English football to complete the FA Cup and League Cup double, in 1993.
Arsenal were also the first London club to reach the final of the UEFA Champions League, in 2006, losing the final 2–1 to Barcelona.

Arsenal have one of the best top-flight records in history, having finished below fourteenth only seven times. They have won the second most top flight league matches in English football, and have also accumulated the second most points, whether calculated by two points per win or by the contemporary points value. They have been in the top flight for the most consecutive seasons (98 as of 2023–24). Arsenal also have the highest average league finishing position for the 20th century, with an average league placement of 8.5.

Arsenal hold the record for the longest run of unbeaten League matches (49 between May 2003 and October 2004). This included all 38 matches of their title-winning 2003–04 season, when Arsenal became only the second club to finish a top-flight campaign unbeaten, after Preston North End (who played only 22 matches) in 1888–89. They also hold the record for the longest top flight win streak. Arsenal set a Champions League record during the 2005–06 season by going ten matches without conceding a goal, beating the previous best of seven set by AC Milan. They went a record total stretch of 995 minutes without letting an opponent score; the streak ended in the final, when Samuel Eto&#x27;o scored a 76th-minute equaliser for Barcelona.

David O&#x27;Leary holds the record for Arsenal appearances, having played 722 first-team matches between 1975 and 1993. Fellow centre half and former captain Tony Adams comes second, having played 669 times. The record for a goalkeeper is held by David Seaman, with 564 appearances. Thierry Henry is the club&#x27;s top goalscorer with 228 goals in all competitions between 1999 and 2012; he surpassed Ian Wright&#x27;s total of 185 in October 2005. Wright&#x27;s record had stood since September 1997, when he overtook the longstanding total of 178 goals set by winger Cliff Bastin in 1939. Henry also holds the club record for goals scored in the League, with 175, a record that had been held by Bastin until February 2006. Declan Rice holds the Arsenal record signing price after a deal with West Ham United was completed in July 2023, for an initial £100 million. This easily surpassed the former record of £72 million for Nicolas Pepe.

Arsenal&#x27;s record home attendance is 73,707, for a UEFA Champions League match against Lens on 25 November 1998 at Wembley, where the club formerly played home European matches because of the limits on Highbury&#x27;s capacity. The record attendance for an Arsenal match at Highbury is 73,295, for a 0–0 draw against Sunderland on 9 March 1935, while that at Emirates Stadium is 60,161, for a 2–2 draw with Manchester United on 3 November 2007.

==Honours==
Arsenal&#x27;s first ever silverware was won as the Royal Arsenal in 1890. The Kent Junior Cup, won by Royal Arsenal&#x27;s reserves, was the club&#x27;s first trophy, while the first team&#x27;s first trophy came three weeks later when they won the Kent Senior Cup. Their first national senior honour came in 1930, when they won the FA Cup. The club enjoyed further success in the 1930s, winning another FA Cup and five Football League First Division titles. Arsenal won their first league and cup double in the 1970–71 season and twice repeated the feat, in 1997–98 and 2001–02, as well as winning a cup double of the FA Cup and League Cup in 1992–93. The 2003–04 season was the only 38-match league season unbeaten in English football history. A special gold version of the Premier League trophy was commissioned and presented to the club the following season.
* 
* shared record

===Other===
When the FA Cup was the only national football association competition available to Arsenal, the other football association competitions were County Cups, and they made up many of the matches the club played during a season. Arsenal&#x27;s first first-team trophy was a County Cup, the inaugural Kent Senior Cup. Arsenal became ineligible for the London Cups when the club turned professional in 1891, and rarely participated in County Cups after this. Due to the club&#x27;s original location within the borders of both the London and Kent Football Associations, Arsenal competed in and won trophies organised by each.

During Arsenal&#x27;s history, the club has participated in and won a variety of pre-season and friendly honours. These include Arsenal&#x27;s own pre-season competition the Emirates Cup, begun in 2007. During the wars, previous competitions were widely suspended and the club had to participate in wartime competitions. During WWII, Arsenal won several of these.

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 

===Independent websites===
* Arsenal F.C. at BBC Sport
* Arsenal F.C. at Sky Sports
* Arsenal F.C. at Premier League
* Arsenal F.C. at Union of European Football Associations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="0" end="25" title="Arsenal F.C." label="The Arsenal Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="52" end="59" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="79" end="87" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q205817" start="102" end="111" title="London Borough of Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="156" end="170" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="188" end="204" title="English football league system" label="English football"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="248" end="261" title="List of English football champions#Total titles won" label="league titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012902" start="277" end="285" title="The Invincibles (English football)" label="unbeaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="306" end="312" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="319" end="329" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="335" end="354" title="FA Community Shield" label="FA Community Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854832" start="363" end="395" title="Football League Centenary Trophy" label="Football League Centenary Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685107" start="400" end="417" title="UEFA competitions" label="European football"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="433" end="463" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q245375" start="472" end="494" title="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup" label="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437610" start="532" end="578" title="List of football clubs in England by competitive honours won" label="third-most successful club in English football"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="642" end="657" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="686" end="700" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="710" end="719" title="Relegated" label="Relegated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="950" end="956" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q42291429" start="997" end="1004" title="1970–71 Arsenal F.C. season" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1023" end="1047" title="Double (association football)#England" label="League and FA Cup double"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1269" end="1290" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170996" start="1387" end="1400" title="Royal Arsenal" label="Royal Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="1484" end="1499" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Arsenal Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q124394" start="1503" end="1511" title="Highbury" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="1542" end="1559" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333687" start="1578" end="1596" title="North London derby" label="North London derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q313784" start="1598" end="1613" title="Herbert Chapman" label="Herbert Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q871403" start="1732" end="1744" title="WM formation" label="WM formation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1746" end="1757" title="Floodlight#Association football" label="floodlights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1763" end="1776" title="Squad number (association football)#First use of numbers" label="shirt numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47576" start="1854" end="1867" title="Arsène Wenger" label="Arsène Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433351" start="1949" end="1957" title="List of FA Cup winning managers" label="a record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479537" start="2023" end="2037" title="Football records and statistics in England" label="English record"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012902" start="2143" end="2158" title="The Invincibles (English football)" label="The Invincibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q163995" start="2199" end="2215" title="Emirates Stadium" label="Emirates Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="2333" end="2339" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062163" start="2374" end="2407" title="Forbes&amp;#x27; list of the most valuable football clubs" label="tenth-most valuable football club"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="2449" end="2461" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q328487" start="2662" end="2675" title="David Danskin" label="David Danskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006232" start="2716" end="2724" title="Woolwich" label="Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170996" start="2802" end="2815" title="Royal Arsenal" label="Royal Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205473" start="3101" end="3117" title="Plumstead Common" label="Plumstead Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659713" start="3171" end="3183" title="Manor Ground (Plumstead)" label="Manor Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814668" start="3215" end="3230" title="Kent Senior Cup" label="Kent Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836572" start="3235" end="3253" title="London Charity Cup" label="London Charity Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436037" start="3257" end="3264" title="1889–90 in English football" label="1889–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836585" start="3273" end="3290" title="London Senior Cup" label="London Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233742" start="3294" end="3301" title="1890–91 in English football" label="1890–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177674" start="3323" end="3341" title="County football association" label="county association"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="3634" end="3649" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="3781" end="3796" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="3814" end="3828" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q332778" start="4044" end="4056" title="Henry Norris (businessman)" label="Henry Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="4280" end="4295" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Arsenal Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="4418" end="4435" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q677654" start="4446" end="4460" title="1919–20 Football League" label="newly enlarged"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340791" start="4559" end="4566" title="1914–15 Football League Second Division" label="1914–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913307" start="4916" end="4924" title="World football transfer record" label="spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822361" start="4980" end="5000" title="Bank of England club" label="Bank of England club"/>
<link wikidata="Q19473" start="5131" end="5148" title="Huddersfield Town A.F.C." label="Huddersfield Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q313784" start="5157" end="5172" title="Herbert Chapman" label="Herbert Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q544155" start="5298" end="5311" title="Tom Whittaker (footballer)" label="Tom Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q469899" start="5403" end="5417" title="Charlie Buchan" label="Charlie Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q871403" start="5443" end="5455" title="WM formation" label="WM formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q439227" start="5561" end="5573" title="Cliff Bastin" label="Cliff Bastin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282813" start="5578" end="5591" title="Eddie Hapgood" label="Eddie Hapgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q377883" start="5660" end="5670" title="David Jack" label="David Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304069" start="5675" end="5685" title="Alex James (footballer)" label="Alex James"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484485" start="5765" end="5779" title="1930 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup in 1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339886" start="5818" end="5825" title="1930–31 Football League" label="1930–31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483173" start="5830" end="5837" title="1932–33 Football League" label="1932–33"/>
<link wikidata="Q262548" start="5940" end="5954" title="Arsenal tube station" label="a Tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="6010" end="6018" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838679" start="6128" end="6135" title="1933–34 in English football" label="1933–34"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="6160" end="6169" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380443" start="6289" end="6297" title="Joe Shaw (footballer born 1883)" label="Joe Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q722565" start="6302" end="6316" title="George Allison" label="George Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501110" start="6464" end="6471" title="1933–34 Football League" label="1933–34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334664" start="6473" end="6480" title="1934–35 Football League" label="1934–35"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506771" start="6486" end="6493" title="1937–38 Football League" label="1937–38"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443860" start="6535" end="6546" title="1935–36 FA Cup" label="1936 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6549" end="6561" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6748" end="6780" title="List of footballers killed during World War II#Great Britain" label="club had had more players killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q685969" start="7099" end="7106" title="1947–48 Football League" label="1947–48"/>
<link wikidata="Q544155" start="7117" end="7130" title="Tom Whittaker (footballer)" label="Tom Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7195" end="7222" title="List of English football champions#List of champions" label="champions of England record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438592" start="7577" end="7591" title="1949–50 FA Cup" label="FA Cup in 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839557" start="7648" end="7655" title="1952–53 Football League" label="1952–53"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="8132" end="8139" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q223234" start="8148" end="8160" title="Billy Wright (footballer born 1924)" label="Billy Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="8280" end="8295" title="physiotherapist" label="physiotherapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q544272" start="8296" end="8306" title="Bertie Mee" label="Bertie Mee"/>
<link wikidata="Q726250" start="8353" end="8361" title="Don Howe" label="Don Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662758" start="8386" end="8395" title="Bob McNab" label="Bob McNab"/>
<link wikidata="Q313763" start="8400" end="8413" title="George Graham (footballer, born 1944)" label="George Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="8446" end="8456" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833038" start="8468" end="8475" title="1967–68 Football League Cup" label="1967–68"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573367" start="8480" end="8487" title="1968–69 Football League Cup" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049089" start="8580" end="8610" title="1969–70 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup" label="1969–70 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436199" start="8612" end="8628" title="1970–71 in English football" label="The season after"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444792" start="8688" end="8694" title="1970–71 Football League" label="League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316424" start="8699" end="8705" title="1970–71 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="8706" end="8712" title="Double (association football)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8724" end="8751" title="List of English football champions#List of champions" label="champions of England record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316358" start="8966" end="8970" title="1971–72 FA Cup" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246066" start="9005" end="9012" title="1972–73 Football League" label="1972–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380624" start="9029" end="9040" title="Terry Neill" label="Terry Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144432" start="9153" end="9170" title="Malcolm Macdonald" label="Malcolm Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q311711" start="9175" end="9187" title="Pat Jennings" label="Pat Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q356466" start="9227" end="9237" title="Liam Brady" label="Liam Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q118942" start="9242" end="9257" title="Frank Stapleton" label="Frank Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736716" start="9301" end="9312" title="1977–78 FA Cup" label="1978 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438556" start="9314" end="9325" title="1978–79 FA Cup" label="1979 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736718" start="9330" end="9341" title="1979–80 FA Cup" label="1980 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q197638" start="9357" end="9398" title="1980 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup Final" label="1980 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="9402" end="9411" title="penalty shootout (association football)" label="penalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484510" start="9466" end="9477" title="1979 FA Cup Final" label="1979 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="9524" end="9541" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q313763" start="9669" end="9682" title="George Graham (footballer, born 1944)" label="George Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635063" start="9760" end="9764" title="1986–87 Football League Cup" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q373415" start="9817" end="9833" title="Nigel Winterburn" label="Nigel Winterburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q353358" start="9835" end="9844" title="Lee Dixon" label="Lee Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q738244" start="9849" end="9860" title="Steve Bould" label="Steve Bould"/>
<link wikidata="Q299391" start="9959" end="9969" title="Tony Adams" label="Tony Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854832" start="10311" end="10343" title="Football League Centenary Trophy" label="Football League Centenary Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444815" start="10370" end="10393" title="1988–89 Football League" label="1988–89 Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843952" start="10441" end="10465" title="Liverpool 0–2 Arsenal (26 May 1989)" label="final game of the season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="10499" end="10508" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253708" start="10553" end="10560" title="1990–91 Football League" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386614" start="10593" end="10599" title="1992–93 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225401" start="10604" end="10614" title="1992–93 Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="10639" end="10669" title="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q738751" start="10673" end="10677" title="1993–94 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q14743875" start="10750" end="10759" title="Kickback (bribery)" label="kickbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q724261" start="10771" end="10781" title="Rune Hauge" label="Rune Hauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q373052" start="10858" end="10869" title="Bruce Rioch" label="Bruce Rioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47576" start="11059" end="11072" title="Arsène Wenger" label="Arsène Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11249" end="11257" title="France" label="homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q46347" start="11267" end="11281" title="Patrick Vieira" label="Patrick Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q45901" start="11286" end="11299" title="Thierry Henry" label="Thierry Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623940" start="11347" end="11354" title="1997–98 Arsenal F.C. season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599405" start="11370" end="11377" title="2001–02 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q751822" start="11426" end="11444" title="1999–2000 UEFA Cup" label="1999–2000 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386642" start="11469" end="11473" title="2002–03 FA Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386656" start="11478" end="11482" title="2004–05 FA Cup" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q817262" start="11528" end="11535" title="2003–04 FA Premier League" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085692" start="11623" end="11638" title="The Invincibles (football)" label="The Invincibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479537" start="11742" end="11757" title="Football records and statistics in England" label="national record"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="12006" end="12022" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q219705" start="12029" end="12036" title="2005–06 UEFA Champions League" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q478526" start="12102" end="12111" title="2006 UEFA Champions League Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="12181" end="12190" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q163995" start="12226" end="12242" title="Emirates Stadium" label="Emirates Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078360" start="12306" end="12310" title="2007 Football League Cup Final" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976335" start="12315" end="12319" title="2011 Football League Cup Final" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="12347" end="12354" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="12359" end="12374" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q83488" start="12490" end="12500" title="Mesut Özil" label="Mesut Özil"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="12515" end="12524" title="Hull City A.F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16323089" start="12532" end="12549" title="2014 FA Cup Final" label="2014 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817594" start="12644" end="12670" title="2015 FA Cup Final" label="victorious FA Cup campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q24266695" start="12773" end="12780" title="2016–17 FA Cup" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q30105751" start="12998" end="13012" title="2017–18 Arsenal F.C. season" label="finished sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q30110459" start="13017" end="13044" title="2017 FA Community Shield" label="won the FA Community Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q295610" start="13276" end="13286" title="Unai Emery" label="Unai Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052816" start="13475" end="13487" title="2018–19 Premier League" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q30126418" start="13558" end="13571" title="2018–19 UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10560" start="13674" end="13691" title="Freddie Ljungberg" label="Freddie Ljungberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q185572" start="13821" end="13833" title="Mikel Arteta" label="Mikel Arteta"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121407" start="13878" end="13892" title="2019–20 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q225273" start="13930" end="13937" title="1994–95 FA Premier League" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044305" start="13943" end="13959" title="2020 FA Cup Final" label="beat Chelsea 2–1"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044305" start="13987" end="13998" title="2020 FA Cup Final" label="14th FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q106548888" start="14180" end="14196" title="European Super League" label="The Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q97065081" start="14303" end="14317" title="2020–21 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q106688025" start="14438" end="14445" title="2021–22 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085551" start="14711" end="14729" title="2022–23 UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q112132199" start="14739" end="14753" title="2022–23 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="14816" end="14831" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945383" start="14955" end="14969" title="2023–24 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q119011868" start="15020" end="15039" title="2023 FA Community Shield" label="FA Community Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907550" start="15217" end="15222" title="crest (sports)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="15238" end="15244" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="15301" end="15313" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925844" start="15321" end="15353" title="Metropolitan Borough of Woolwich" label="Metropolitan Borough of Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993358" start="15383" end="15429" title="coat of arms of the Royal Borough of Greenwich" label="coat of arms of the Royal Borough of Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048074" start="15530" end="15538" title="cascabel (artillery)" label="cascabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="16060" end="16071" title="blackletter" label="blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405925" start="16118" end="16151" title="Metropolitan Borough of Islington" label="Metropolitan Borough of Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="16216" end="16221" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="16584" end="16593" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796394" start="16674" end="16721" title="Arsenal Football Club v Reed" label="fought (and eventually won) a long legal battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="17073" end="17083" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q168346" start="17553" end="17561" title="monogram" label="monogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="17662" end="17670" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="17992" end="18008" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Highbury Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="18461" end="18464" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q734844" start="18492" end="18498" title="Laurel wreath" label="laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106688025" start="18919" end="18926" title="2021–22 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q112132199" start="19122" end="19129" title="2022–23 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945383" start="19137" end="19144" title="2023–24 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912533" start="19225" end="19232" title="2024–25 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2024–25"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="19580" end="19597" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452230" start="19689" end="19703" title="Fred Beardsley" label="Fred Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q585157" start="19708" end="19720" title="Morris Bates" label="Morris Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q58663" start="20206" end="20216" title="pillar box" label="pillar box"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440214" start="20491" end="20502" title="Tom Webster (cartoonist)" label="Tom Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193481" start="21327" end="21340" title="AC Sparta Prague" label="Sparta Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q192597" start="21412" end="21421" title="Hibernian F.C." label="Hibernian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424072" start="21560" end="21568" title="Independiente Santa Fe" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q75684" start="21654" end="21677" title="S.C. Braga" label="Sporting Clube de Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484505" start="22451" end="22463" title="1972 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="22545" end="22557" title="Leeds United A.F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="22918" end="22922" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="22938" end="22944" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q157064" start="23675" end="23679" title="Puma SE" label="Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="24132" end="24138" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205473" start="24257" end="24273" title="Plumstead Common" label="Plumstead Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659713" start="24287" end="24299" title="Manor Ground, Plumstead" label="Manor Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q946533" start="24303" end="24312" title="Plumstead" label="Plumstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671802" start="24373" end="24387" title="Invicta Ground" label="Invicta Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577534" start="24494" end="24503" title="terrace (stadium)" label="terracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="24730" end="24745" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Arsenal Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q344137" start="24876" end="24892" title="Archibald Leitch" label="Archibald Leitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="25099" end="25107" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348518" start="25426" end="25439" title="Taylor Report" label="Taylor Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="25667" end="25683" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="25838" end="25845" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="25979" end="25994" title="Grade II listed" label="Grade II listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q163995" start="26408" end="26424" title="Emirates Stadium" label="Emirates Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q180432" start="26683" end="26691" title="Emirates (airline)" label="Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478144" start="26751" end="26767" title="Football in England" label="English football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532047" start="27326" end="27349" title="Shenley Training Centre" label="Shenley Training Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894630" start="27482" end="27531" title="University College London Union" label="University College of London Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384231" start="27589" end="27605" title="Arsenal F.C. Academy" label="Academy under-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384231" start="27658" end="27666" title="Arsenal F.C. Reserves" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303777" start="27687" end="27698" title="Meadow Park (Borehamwood)" label="Meadow Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4094837" start="27726" end="27738" title="Borehamwood F.C." label="Boreham Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384231" start="27749" end="27765" title="Arsenal F.C. Academy" label="Academy under-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384231" start="27779" end="27787" title="Arsenal F.C. Reserves" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="28391" end="28408" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Borussia Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="28410" end="28419" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="28421" end="28438" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="28440" end="28451" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="28453" end="28466" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q32494" start="28471" end="28481" title="FC Schalke 04" label="Schalke 04"/>
<link wikidata="Q123365" start="28541" end="28550" title="Canonbury" label="Canonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q122776" start="28555" end="28564" title="Barnsbury" label="Barnsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="28586" end="28595" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q124308" start="28597" end="28605" title="Holloway, London" label="Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q124394" start="28607" end="28615" title="Highbury" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q202088" start="28634" end="28658" title="London Borough of Camden" label="London Borough of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q122566" start="28700" end="28713" title="Finsbury Park (district)" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483346" start="28718" end="28733" title="Stoke Newington" label="Stoke Newington"/>
<link wikidata="Q205679" start="28883" end="28908" title="London Borough of Hackney" label="London Borough of Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q146294" start="28995" end="29007" title="Wembley Park" label="Wembley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="29133" end="29142" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q123369" start="29171" end="29178" title="Archway, London" label="Archway"/>
<link wikidata="Q492523" start="29346" end="29368" title="English Football Clubs" label="English football clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796412" start="29620" end="29650" title="Arsenal Supporters&amp;#x27; Trust" label="Arsenal Supporters&amp;#x27; Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q181298" start="29756" end="29763" title="fanzine" label="fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q116881962" start="30491" end="30523" title="The Angel (North London Forever)" label="The Angel (North London Forever)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114456590" start="30533" end="30546" title="Louis Dunford" label="Louis Dunford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489759" start="30649" end="30663" title="football chant" label="football chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q701588" start="30754" end="30761" title="Go West (song)" label="Go West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582872" start="30855" end="30871" title="Good Old Arsenal" label="Good Old Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q215729" start="30900" end="30915" title="Rule, Britannia" label="Rule, Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="31273" end="31290" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333687" start="31339" end="31357" title="North London derby" label="North London derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="31407" end="31414" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q87743855" start="32149" end="32166" title="COVID-19 pandemic in England" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462531" start="32177" end="32195" title="Layoff" label="made him redundant"/>
<link wikidata="Q83488" start="32437" end="32447" title="Mesut Özil" label="Mesut Özil"/>
<link wikidata="Q945207" start="32865" end="32877" title="Stan Kroenke" label="Stan Kroenke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723975" start="33037" end="33047" title="David Dein" label="David Dein"/>
<link wikidata="Q503147" start="33127" end="33142" title="Alisher Usmanov" label="Alisher Usmanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q861168" start="33178" end="33192" title="Farhad Moshiri (businessman)" label="Farhad Moshiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367019" start="33452" end="33472" title="Nina Bracewell-Smith" label="Nina Bracewell-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q859628" start="33477" end="33490" title="Danny Fiszman" label="Danny Fiszman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804701" start="34081" end="34093" title="Ivan Gazidis" label="Ivan Gazidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="34227" end="34249" title="public limited company" label="public limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355823" start="34433" end="34437" title="FTSE Group" label="FTSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q438511" start="34441" end="34444" title="Alternative Investment Market" label="AIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653165" start="34502" end="34506" title="ICAP (company)" label="ICAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841075" start="34613" end="34622" title="mid price" label="mid price"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="34662" end="34683" title="market capitalisation" label="market capitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="34988" end="34994" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062163" start="35001" end="35007" title="Forbes&amp;#x27; list of the most valuable football clubs" label="valued"/>
<link wikidata="Q125328" start="35120" end="35142" title="Henley Business School" label="Henley Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60439913" start="35287" end="35294" title="2019–20 Premier League" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="35371" end="35388" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q388971" start="35394" end="35424" title="Deloitte Football Money League" label="Deloitte Football Money League"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="35643" end="35651" title="Deloitte" label="Deloitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179170" start="35810" end="35838" title="Alexandra Palace television station" label="Alexandra Palace transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="35955" end="35971" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="36261" end="36264" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908130" start="36278" end="36294" title="Match of the Day" label="Match of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="36364" end="36371" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="36391" end="36394" title="Sky UK" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="36456" end="36473" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q229438" start="36531" end="36544" title="3D television" label="3D television"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382001" start="36756" end="36783" title="The Arsenal Stadium Mystery (novel)" label="The Arsenal Stadium Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502271" start="36808" end="36824" title="The Arsenal Stadium Mystery" label="made into a film"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="36866" end="36880" title="friendly match" label="friendly match"/>
<link wikidata="Q722565" start="37034" end="37048" title="George Allison" label="George Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q574875" start="37091" end="37102" title="Fever Pitch" label="Fever Pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q313007" start="37112" end="37123" title="Nick Hornby" label="Nick Hornby"/>
<link wikidata="Q774416" start="37407" end="37424" title="Fever Pitch (1997 film)" label="1997 British film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304902" start="37476" end="37497" title="Fever Pitch (2005 film)" label="2005 American version"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="37532" end="37546" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="37590" end="37599" title="defender (association football)" label="defensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q775970" start="37691" end="37705" title="The Full Monty" label="The Full Monty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531" start="37833" end="37845" title="offside trap" label="offside trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q152213" start="37882" end="37892" title="striptease" label="striptease"/>
<link wikidata="Q235347" start="38008" end="38019" title="John Carter (film)" label="John Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q328723" start="38050" end="38064" title="Andrew Stanton" label="Andrew Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q137130" start="38287" end="38310" title="Plunkett &amp;amp; Macleane" label="Plunkett &amp;amp; Macleane"/>
<link wikidata="Q353358" start="38436" end="38445" title="Lee Dixon" label="Lee Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q373415" start="38465" end="38481" title="Nigel Winterburn" label="Nigel Winterburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="38500" end="38518" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="38545" end="38555" title="documentary film" label="docuseries"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38569" end="38592" title="All or Nothing: Arsenal" label="All or Nothing: Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106688025" start="38737" end="38751" title="2021–22 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q218600" start="38968" end="38984" title="corporate social responsibility" label="community scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="39048" end="39064" title="social inclusion" label="social inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349705" start="39618" end="39670" title="Great Ormond Street Hospital Children&amp;#x27;s Charity" label="Great Ormond Street Hospital Children&amp;#x27;s Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q215934" start="40126" end="40143" title="Save the Children" label="Save the Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599" start="40925" end="40931" title="Pleiku" label="Pleiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108503" start="40969" end="40980" title="JMG Academy" label="JMG Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874356" start="40989" end="41018" title="Hoang Anh Gia Lai Group" label="Hoang Anh Gia Lai Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10771878" start="41030" end="41043" title="Hoang Anh Gia Lai Academy" label="youth academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209080" start="41052" end="41062" title="V.League 1" label="V.League 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201894" start="41068" end="41085" title="Hoang Anh Gia Lai FC" label="Hoàng Anh Lai Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331006" start="41310" end="41327" title="Richmond Strikers" label="Richmond Strikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966238" start="41344" end="41354" title="Wadi Degla SC" label="Wadi Degla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41679" end="41692" title="List of English football champions#Total titles won" label="third highest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41792" end="41800" title="List of English football champions#Football League First Division (1892–1992)" label="to reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="41928" end="41944" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="41946" end="41953" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="41955" end="41970" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="41972" end="41986" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42288" end="42295" title="Double (association football)#England" label="Doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="42629" end="42638" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949686" start="43334" end="43341" title="2003–04 in English football" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612" start="43439" end="43456" title="Preston North End F.C." label="Preston North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556341" start="43489" end="43496" title="1888–89 in English football" label="1888–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="43716" end="43724" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q478526" start="43829" end="43838" title="2006 UEFA Champions League Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255625" start="43845" end="43862" title="Samuel Eto&amp;#x27;o" label="Samuel Eto&amp;#x27;o"/>
<link wikidata="Q132026" start="43910" end="43928" title="David O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="David O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="44038" end="44049" title="centre half" label="centre half"/>
<link wikidata="Q299391" start="44069" end="44079" title="Tony Adams (footballer)" label="Tony Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="44136" end="44146" title="Goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q214498" start="44158" end="44170" title="David Seaman" label="David Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q45901" start="44194" end="44207" title="Thierry Henry" label="Thierry Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q312595" start="44313" end="44323" title="Ian Wright" label="Ian Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q439227" start="44481" end="44493" title="Cliff Bastin" label="Cliff Bastin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30007142" start="44637" end="44648" title="Declan Rice" label="Declan Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="44706" end="44721" title="West Ham United" label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q20641306" start="44838" end="44850" title="Nicolas Pepe" label="Nicolas Pepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="44908" end="44929" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q191843" start="44944" end="44948" title="RC Lens" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="44972" end="44979" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="45174" end="45184" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q381165" start="45341" end="45351" title="Silverware (Sport)" label="silverware"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45394" end="45409" title="Kent County Football Association#County Cup Competitions" label="Kent Junior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814668" start="45565" end="45580" title="Kent Senior Cup" label="Kent Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="45649" end="45655" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="45736" end="45766" title="Football League First Division" label="Football League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45814" end="45820" title="Double (association football)#England" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436199" start="45828" end="45842" title="1970–71 in English football" label="1970–71 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534966" start="45875" end="45882" title="1997–98 in English football" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271507" start="45887" end="45894" title="2001–02 in English football" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="45946" end="45956" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997332" start="45960" end="45967" title="1992–93 in English football" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465935" start="45973" end="45980" title="2003–04 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085692" start="46024" end="46032" title="The Invincibles (football)" label="unbeaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478443" start="46249" end="46269" title="football association" label="football association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177674" start="46353" end="46364" title="County football association" label="County Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814668" start="46507" end="46522" title="Kent Senior Cup" label="Kent Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836576" start="46558" end="46569" title="London Football Association" label="London Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391675" start="46747" end="46751" title="Kent County Football Association" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q577696" start="47006" end="47018" title="Emirates Cup" label="Emirates Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809338" start="47153" end="47164" title="Association football during World War II" label="During WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q552359" start="47375" end="47384" title="BBC Sport" label="BBC Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="47403" end="47413" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="47432" end="47446" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="47465" end="47504" title="UEFA" label="Union of European Football Associations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2175" wikidata="Q40578" url="?curid=2175" title="American cuisine">
<text>American cuisine consists of the cooking style and traditional dishes prepared in the United States. It has been significantly influenced by Europeans, Indigenous Americans, Africans, Latin Americans, Asians, Pacific Islanders, and many other cultures and traditions. Principal influences on American cuisine are European, Native American, soul food, regional heritages including Cajun, Louisiana Creole, Pennsylvania Dutch, Mormon foodways, Texan, Tex-Mex, New Mexican, and Tlingit, and the cuisines of immigrant groups such as Chinese American, German American, Italian American, Greek American, Jewish American, and Mexican American. The large size of America and its long history of immigration have created an especially diverse cuisine that varies by region. 

American cooking dates back to the traditions of the Native Americans, whose diet included a mix of farmed and hunted food, and varied widely across the continent. The Colonial period created a mix of new world and Old World cookery, and brought with it new crops and livestock. During the early 19th century, cooking was based mostly on what the agrarian population could grow, hunt, or raise on their land. With an increasing influx of immigrants, and a move to city life, American food further diversified in the later part of the 19th century. The 20th century saw a revolution in cooking as new technologies, the World Wars, a scientific understanding of food, and continued immigration combined to create a wide range of new foods. This has allowed for the current rich diversity in food dishes throughout the country. This was driven in part by the many chefs and television personalities who contributed to the rise of the culinary arts in the US.

Highlights of American cuisine include milkshakes, barbecue, and a wide range of fried foods. Many quintessential American dishes are unique takes on food originally from other culinary traditions, including pizza, hot dogs, and Tex-Mex. Regional highlights include a range of fish dishes in the coastal states, gumbo, and cheesesteak. American cuisine has specific foods that are eaten on holidays, such as a turkey at Thanksgiving dinner or Christmas dinner. Modern American cuisine includes a focus on fast food, as well as take-out food, which is often ethnic. There is also a vibrant culinary scene in the country surrounding televised celebrity chefs.

==History==
===Native Americans origins: American cuisine before 1600===
Native Americans utilized a number of cooking methods in early American cuisine that have been blended with the methods of early Europeans to form the basis of what is now American cuisine. Nearly all regions and subregions of the present-day cuisine have roots in the foodways of Native Americans, who lived in tribes numbering in the thousands. Prior to 1600, native peoples lived off the land in very diverse bioregions and had done so for thousands of years, often living a nomadic life where their diet changed with the season.

Many practiced a form of agriculture revolving around the Three Sisters, the rotation of beans, maize, and squash as staples of their diet. In the East, this was documented as early as the 1620s in &quot;Of Plimoth Plantation,&quot; evidenced by the pages William Bradford wrote regarding Squanto, who showed them the traditional regional method of burying a fish or eel in a mound with seeds for maize to improve the soil; this itself is also part of the widely practiced phenomenon of companion planting.

Wild game was equally a staple of nearly every tribe: generally, deer, elk, and bison were staples, as were rabbits and hare. The Cherokee of the Southern Appalachians used blowguns made of an indigenous type of bamboo to hunt squirrels.

Northern tribes like the Ojibwe of what is now the state of Michigan and the peoples of the Wabanaki of what is now the state of Maine would stalk and hunt moose, whereas their Southern counterparts, like the Choctaw or Catawba, hunted snapping turtles and other testudines, possums, and young alligators in the subtropical swamps of Louisiana and South Carolina.

Many tribes would preserve their meat in the form of pemmican, needed on long journeys or to survive harsh winters.

====Fish and crustaceans====

As with the hunted game, the biome in which one lived often dictated what was available to catch. For example, the Apache and Navajo peoples of the Southwest, whose territories each would have included swathes of New Mexico and Arizona, generally do not eat fish because in both cultures it is taboo, as well as often inconvenient. The Navajo believe that fish have a part in the story of creation, the Apache were in general afraid of water since they associated it with thunder, and the arid desert climate made fish a rarity.

However, in the culture of the Lenape, the tribe that originally lived in New Jersey, on the Delaware River, and the area that now comprises New York City, fish and shellfish were a staple in their diet and it was such a revered part of the culture that there is a documented and still-practiced harvest dance called the Fish Dance. Originally it would have been done to celebrate bringing in fish from places like the Delaware or Raritan River or the estuary around Manhattan Island and the completion of smoking them as a source of food for the winter ahead.

Eastern tribes would have eaten cod, particularly groups that spoke the Algonquian languages of New England as far south as present day Connecticut, winter flounder and other flatfish, species of herring like the alewife, shad, Atlantic herring, and Atlantic menhaden, They also would have consumed the Atlantic sturgeon and drum.

In the West, Pacific several species of sturgeon, like the white sturgeon and green sturgeon, olachen and several autochthonal fish of the &quot;Oncorhynchus&quot; family including the rainbow trout, cutthroat trout, coho salmon, kokanee salmon, and chinook salmon. The last makes an appearance in the accounts of Lewis and Clark as being fished for in the Columbia River Basin, and this species is named for a family of tribes of the Pacific Northwest, indicating its important role in that food culture.

Pacific gray whales and humpbacks were hunted by American Indians off the Northwest coast, especially by the Makah, and used for their meat and oil. Catfish was also popular among native people throughout the land, over many types of terrain.

Crustaceans included shrimp, lobster, crayfish, and dungeness crabs in the Northwest and shrimp, lobster and blue crabs in the East. Other shellfish include abalone and geoduck on the West Coast, while on the East Coast the surf clam, quahog, and the soft-shell clam. Oysters were eaten on both shores, as were mussels and periwinkles.

====Cooking methods====
Early American natives used a number of cooking methods that have been blended with early European cooking methods to form the basis of American cuisine. Grilling meats was common. Spit roasting over a pit fire was common as well. Vegetables, especially root vegetables, were often cooked directly in the ashes of the fire.

As early Native Americans lacked pottery that could be used directly over a fire, they developed a technique many anthropologists call &quot;stone boiling&quot;. They heated rocks in a fire, then added the rocks to a pot filled with water until it came to a boil to cook the meat or vegetables. In what is now the Southwestern United States, they also created adobe ovens, dubbed &quot;hornos&quot; by the Spanish, to bake products such as cornmeal bread. Other parts of America dug pit ovens, which were also used to steam foods by adding heated rocks or embers. One technique performed extensively by New England tribes was adding seaweed or corn husks on top of the layers of stones to steam fish and shellfish as well as vegetables. A later addition was potatoes, a garden plant that came to New England by the 18th century, added while still in skin with corn in husk, later to be referred to as a clambake by colonists.

===Colonial period===


The European settlement of the Americas introduced a number of ingredients, spices, herbs, and cooking styles to the continent.

When European colonists came to Virginia, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and any of the other English colonies on the eastern seaboard of North America, their initial attempts at survival included planting crops familiar to them from back home in England. In the same way, they farmed animals for clothing and meat. Through hardships and the eventual establishment of trade with England, the West Indies and other regions, the colonists were able to derive a cuisine similar to what they had previously consumed in Britain and Ireland, while also introducing local animals and plants to their diet. American colonists followed along the line of British cookery up until the Revolution, when a desire to distinguish themselves from Britain led Americans to create &quot;American&quot; styles of cookery.

In 1796, the first American cookbook was published, and others followed. There was a general disdain for French cuisine/French cookery, even with French Huguenot settlers in South Carolina and French-Canadian emigrants in America. One of the cookbooks that proliferated in the colonies was &quot;The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy&quot; (1747) by Hannah Glasse, who referred to &quot;the blind folly of this age that would rather be imposed on by a French booby, than give encouragement to a good English cook!&quot; Of the French recipes given in the text, she speaks out flagrantly against the dishes as she &quot;... think[s] it an odd jumble of trash.&quot;

With the introduction of slavery, Africans were brought into the colonies. With them, came foods and ingredients such as bananas, peanuts, sweet potato, yams, and coffee, and cooking styles reminiscent of West African cuisines are still found in many dishes, especially in Southern cuisine.

The expulsion of the Acadians from Acadia led many of them to Louisiana, where they left a French influence in the diet of those settled in Louisiana, and among the Acadian Francophones who settled eastern Maine and parts of what is now northern Vermont at the same time they colonized New Brunswick.

Some of the Jews who fled from the Inquisition with other Sephardic Jews in the 15th century had previously settled in Recife, Brazil and the West Indies, where their cuisine was influenced by new local ingredients like molasses, rum, sugar, vanilla, chocolate, peppers, corn, tomatoes, kidney beans, string beans and turkey. In 1654, twenty three Sephardic Jews arrived in New Amsterdam bringing this cuisine with them to the early colonial United States. Early American Jewish cuisine was heavily influenced by this branch of Sephardic cuisine. Many of the recipes were bound up in observance of traditional holidays and remained true to their origins. These included dishes such as stew and fish fried in olive oil, beef and bean stews, almond puddings, and egg custards. The first kosher cookbook in America was the &quot;Jewish Cookery Book&quot; by Esther Levy, published in 1871 in Philadelphia and includes many of the traditional recipes.

====Common ingredients====

The American colonial diet varied depending on the settled region in which someone lived. Local cuisine patterns had been established by the mid-18th century. The New England colonies were extremely similar in their dietary habits to those that many of them had brought from England. As many of the New Englanders were originally from England, game hunting was useful when they immigrated to the New World. Many of the northern colonists depended upon their ability to hunt, or upon others from whom they could purchase game. Hunting was the preferred method of protein acquisition, as opposed to animal husbandry, which required much more work to defend the kept animals against raids.

A striking difference for the colonists in New England compared to other regions was seasonality. While in the southern colonies, they could farm almost year-round, in the northern colonies, the growing seasons were very restricted. In addition, northern colonists&#x27; close proximity to the ocean gave them a bounty of fresh fish to add to their diet.

Wheat, the grain used to bake bread back in England, was almost impossible to grow, and imports of wheat were far from cost productive. Substitutes in cases such as this included cornmeal. The Johnnycake was a poor substitute to some for wheaten bread, but acceptance by both the northern and southern colonies seems evident.

====Livestock and game====
Commonly hunted game included deer, bear, buffalo, and wild turkey. The larger muscles of the animals were roasted and served with currant sauce, while the other smaller portions went into soups, stews, sausages, pies, and pastries. In addition to the game, colonists&#x27; protein intake was supplemented by mutton.

The Spanish in Florida originally introduced sheep to the New World, but this development never quite reached the North, and there they were introduced by the Dutch and English. The keeping of sheep was a result of the English non-practice of animal husbandry. The animals provided wool when young and mutton upon maturity after wool production was no longer desirable. The forage-based diet for sheep that prevailed in the Colonies produced a characteristically strong, gamy flavor and a tougher consistency, which required aging and slow cooking to tenderize.

====Fats and oils====

Fats and oils made from animals served to cook many colonial foods. Many homes had a sack made of deerskin filled with bear oil for cooking, while solidified bear fat resembled shortening.

Rendered pork fat made the most popular cooking medium, especially from the cooking of bacon. Pork fat was used more often in the southern colonies than the northern colonies as the Spanish introduced pigs earlier to the South. The colonists enjoyed butter in cooking as well, but it was rare prior to the American Revolution, as cattle were not yet plentiful.

====Alcoholic drinks====
Prior to the Revolution, New Englanders consumed large quantities of rum and beer, as maritime trade provided them relatively easy access to the goods needed to produce these items. Rum was the distilled spirit of choice, as the main ingredient, molasses, was readily available from trade with the West Indies.

Further into the interior, however, one would often find colonists consuming whiskey, as they did not have similar access to sugar cane. They did have ready access to corn and rye, which they used to produce their whiskey.

Until the Revolution, many considered whiskey to be a coarse alcohol unfit for human consumption, as many believed that it caused the poor to become raucous and unkempt drunkards. In addition to these alcohol-based products produced in America, imports were seen on merchant shelves, including wine and brandy.

====Southern variations====
In comparison to the northern colonies, the southern colonies were quite diverse in their agricultural diet. The uplands of Piedmont and the coastal lowlands made up the two main parts of the southern colonies.

The diet of the uplands often included wild game, cabbage, string beans, corn, squashes and white potatoes. People had biscuits as part of their breakfast, along with healthy portions of pork. The lowlands of Louisiana included a varied diet heavily influenced by the French, Spanish, Acadians, Germans, Native Americans, Africans and Caribbeans. Rice played a large part of the diet in Louisiana. In addition, unlike the uplands, the lowlands subsistence of protein came mostly from coastal seafood. Much of the diet involved the use of peppers, as it still does to this day.

===Post-colonial cuisine===
During the 18th and 19th centuries, Americans developed many new foods. Some, such as Rocky Mountain oysters, stayed regional; some spread throughout the nation but with little international appeal, such as peanut butter (a core ingredient of the peanut butter and jelly sandwich); and some spread throughout the world, such as popcorn, cola, fried chicken, cornbread, unleavened muffins such as the poppyseed muffin, and brownies.

==== 19th-century American farmhouse ====
During the 1800s, American farms were mostly self-sufficient, but certain staples like salt, coffee, sugar, and baking soda would be purchased at the town general store. If the family did not grow wheat, then flour would also be purchased. Another luxury was canned salmon, which was sometimes eaten for Sunday dinner. Items purchased at the general store would be paid for with eggs, butter or some other food from the farm. Women were responsible for much of the processing of food like straining fresh milk, churning butter, making molasses from sorghum, grinding corn into cornmeal or cleaning whole chickens. Fresh picked apples were pressed into cider, which could be fermented to make apple cider vinegar. Fruits and vegetables were preserved by various means like canning, drying or pickling.

One contemporary writer from Michigan described October as cider season, when apple butter would be made. Her writings mention johnnycakes, and, as winter fare, buckwheat cakes.

Typical farmhouse fare included fried chicken, simmered green beans, boiled corn, chicken and dumplings, fried ham, boiled beans and beets, stewed tomatoes, potatoes, and coleslaw made of shredded cabbage. &quot;Pon haus&quot;, similar to the scrapple of the Pennsylvania Dutch, was a typical breakfast dish among the Germans who had settled Indiana in the 19th century.

Pork scraps and corn meal were cooked into a thick porridge and molded in loaf pans. Once solidified, the mixture would be cut and fried. During the fall months, pork might be replaced with fried apples or potatoes. It was served with buttered biscuits, jam, jelly, milk gravy or sorghum syrup. Fruit butter might be made from apples, plums or peaches to accompany the meal.

===20th century===
The 20th century revolutionized American cooking, with the advent of many new technologies, and a continued influx of immigrants with unique food traditions.

==== Pre-World War I ====
At the universities, nutritionists and home economists taught a new scientific approach to food. In the early 1900s muckraking journalists raised public concern about the wholesomeness of industrialized food products that contained various preservatives and adulterants of unknown safety. From 1902 to 1912 Harvey Washington Wiley, a chemist at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, supervised &quot;hygienic table trials&quot; to test the safety of food additives and preservatives. His work contributed to the enactment of the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. He became the first commissioner of the FDA and later led the laboratories of &quot;Good Housekeeping&quot; Magazine.

During World War I the Progressives&#x27; moral advice about food conservation was emphasized in large-scale state and federal programs designed to educate housewives. Large-scale foreign aid during and after the war brought American standards to Europe.

From 1912 to the end of the 1930s researchers discovered and popularized the role of various vitamins and minerals in human health. Starting with iodized salt in 1924, commercially distributed food began to be fortified with vitamins and minerals. In 1932, milk began to be fortified with viosterol, a purified vitamin D2 product. Synthetic thiamin (vitamin B1) first became available after 1936 and bakers began voluntarily enriching bread with high-vitamin yeast or synthetic vitamins in the late 1930s.

The cookware of the period was made of cast iron and these were thoroughly seasoned with pork fat. Fried salt pork with gravy was an indulgent fat-laden dish often served with a side of boiled potatoes. In the Appalachian region a dish called &quot;killed lettuce&quot; was made with pokeweed, dandelion and assorted wild greens that were drizzled with hot bacon grease until wilted or &quot;killed&quot;.

Pie could be served up to three times a day and many varieties were prepared depending on the season. During the spring months, pies would be made of rhubarb and strawberry; in summer peach, cherry, blackberry, blueberry, elderberry and grape; and in fall apple.

The staples of the urban diet were bread, dairy and canned goods. Dinner might be tomato bisque from a can topped with cream or a salad made of canned string beans and mayonnaise. Many preferred to purchase food at delicatessens, rather than attempt to prepare meals in the cramped kitchenettes.

German delicatessens in cities like New York and Milwaukee sold imported cold cuts, potato salads, &quot;schmierkase&quot;, &quot;wienerwurst&quot;, North Sea herring, assorted pickles (pickled cucumber) and other prepared foods. Jewish immigrants from Germany soon followed suit, replacing pork dishes with corned beef (salt-cured beef) and pastrami. Ice cream soda was served at soda fountains, along with various other early &quot;soda water&quot; recipes like the Garden Sass Sundae (rhubarb) or the Oh-Oh-Cindy Sundae (strawberry ice cream topped with chocolate syrup, chopped nuts, whipped cream and candied cherries).

During that same time frame, grain-feeding of cattle during low pasture months made milk increasingly available year-round. The invention of milking machines lowered production costs. Pasteurization, homogenization, evaporation, condensation, and refrigeration along with glass milk bottles, wax-paper cartons, and then plastic bottles made milk increasingly available and safe for urban consumers. Milk became a staple food item and an increasingly important ingredient in American cuisine. Examples include the root beer float and the milkshake.

Pork was a staple of the rural diet through the Southern and Midwestern United States. Lard was used for baking, frying and even as a seasoning.

Major railroads featured upscale cuisine in their dining cars. Restaurant chains emerged with standardized decor and menus, including the Fred Harvey restaurants along the route of the Santa Fe Railroad in the Southwest.

==== World War II and later ====
The Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Science established the first set of &quot;Recommended Dietary Allowances&quot; in 1941. In 1943, the US War Foods Administration issued the War Food Order No. 1, which made enriched bread the temporary law of the land.

In 1945, George Stigler published an article on &quot;The cost of subsistence&quot; which described the so-called Stigler diet, his solution to the problem of providing a diet that met the RDA at a minimum cost.

The logistical requirements of the US military during WW2 and the Korean War spurred the development and growth of the processed foods industry in the US. These wars encouraged the production of shelf-stable ingredients processed on a vast industrial scale. Examples include powdered milk, powdered eggs, potato flakes, and frozen concentrated orange juice.

After the war, low-cost, highly processed foods became one of the foundational elements of an era of mass prosperity. Many companies in the American food industry developed new products requiring minimal preparation, such as frozen entrees. One such example is the TV dinner in which a multi-course meal was assembled in aluminum packaging in a food factory and flash frozen, then reheated at home in a thermal oven to be served while watching TV. Convenience foods of the era were designed to simplify home preparation.

One example is macaroni and cheese created using a powdered artificial cheese product that is reconstituted at home with fresh milk. Newspapers and magazines ran recipe columns, aided by research from corporate kitchens, which were major food manufacturers like General Mills, Campbell&#x27;s, and Kraft Foods. For example, General Mills &quot;Betty Crocker&#x27;s Cookbook&quot;, first published in 1950, was a popular book in American homes.

Highly processed foods of the mid-20th century included novelty elements like multi-colored Jell-O using various chemical food colorings, prepared breakfast cereals marketed to children with large amounts of sugar and artificial colors (e.g. Froot Loops). Fruit-flavored punches made with artificial fruit flavorings (e.g. Tang, Hi-C). Mid-20th-century foods also added novelty packaging elements like spray cheese in an aerosol can, pimento-stuffed olives, and drink pouches.

The development of the microwave oven resulted in the creation of industrial food products and packaging intended to take advantage of the opportunities and overcome the unique challenges of that technology. Microwave popcorn is an example of such a product.

Throughout the second half of the 20th century, the US commercial food system has become increasingly dependent on subsidized maize (corn) production to provide feed for livestock and ingredients for human foods such as high-fructose corn syrup. It is estimated that the typical American gets 70 percent of their carbon intake from maize (corn) sources.

The last half of the 20th century saw the development of controversial technological innovations intended to lower the cost of or increase the safety of commercial food, including food irradiation, genetically modified organisms, livestock treated with antibiotics/hormones, and concentrated animal feeding operations. Activists have raised concerns about the wholesomeness, safety, or humaneness of these innovations and recommend alternatives such as organic produce, veganism/vegetarianism, and locavore diets.

Fast-food restaurants with standardized product and franchised service models began to appear and spread with the development of the highway system. White Castle (1916) was one of the first examples. Franchising was introduced in 1921 by A&amp;W Root Beer. The McDonald brothers created their &quot;Speedee Service System&quot; in 1948. Other examples include Burger King, Wendy&#x27;s, Pizza Hut, Domino&#x27;s Pizza, Subway, Arby&#x27;s, KFC, Popeyes and Taco Bell.

=== Ethnic influences ===

One signature characteristic of American cooking is the fusion of multiple ethnic or regional approaches into completely new cooking styles. For example, spaghetti is Italian, while hot dogs are German; a popular meal, especially among young children, is spaghetti containing slices of hot dogs. Since the 1960s, Asian cooking has played a particularly large role in American fusion cuisine.

Some dishes that are typically considered American have their origins in other countries. American cooks and chefs have substantially altered these dishes over the years, to the degree that the dishes now enjoyed around the world are considered to be American. Hot dogs and hamburgers are both based on traditional German dishes, but in their modern popular form they can be reasonably considered American dishes.

Pizza is based on the traditional Italian dish, brought by Italian immigrants to the United States, but varies highly in style based on the region of development since its arrival. For example, Chicago style has focus on a thicker, taller crust, whereas a &quot;New York Slice&quot; is known to have a much thinner crust which can be folded. These different types of pizza can be advertised throughout the country and are generally recognizable and well-known, with some restaurants going so far as to import New York tap water from a thousand or more miles away to recreate the signature style in other regions.

Some dishes that Americans think of as being of &quot;foreign&quot; in origin and/or associated with a particular immigrant group were in fact invented in America and customized to American tastes. For example, General Tso&#x27;s chicken was invented by Chinese or Taiwanese chefs working in New York in the early 1970s. The dish is unknown in China, except for a distant resemblance to a much spicier dish from Hong Kong said to have influenced the American version. The fortune cookie was likewise invented in California in the early 1900s and is known in Asia only as an American style food.

A wave of celebrity chefs began with Julia Child and Graham Kerr in the 1970s, with many more following after the rise of cable channels like Food Network. Probably the best-known television chef was Child, who taught French cuisine in her weekly show, &quot;The French Chef&quot;.

=== New American ===

During the 1980s, upscale restaurants introduced a mixing of cuisines that contain Americanized styles of cooking with foreign elements commonly referred to as New American cuisine, a type of fusion cuisine combining flavors from the melting pot of traditional American cooking techniques with those from other cultures, sometimes adding molecular gastronomy components.

=== 21st century ===
By the beginning of the 21st century, regional variations in consumption of meat began to reduce, as more meat was consumed overall. Saying they eat too much protein, the &quot;2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans&quot; asked men and teenage boys to increase their consumption of underconsumed foods such as vegetables. Vegan and vegetarian meals have increased in popularity, with more restaurants catering to vegans and vegetarians.

==Regional cuisines==

In the present day, the modern cuisine of the United States is very regional in nature. Excluding Alaska and Hawaii, the terrain spans from east to west and more than from north to south.

===Northeast===
====New England====
New England cuisine traces its roots to English cuisine and the Native American cuisine of the Abenaki, Narragansett, Niantic, Wabanaki, Wampanoag, and other native peoples. It also includes influences from French, Italian, and Portuguese cuisine, among others. It is characterized by the extensive use of potatoes, beans, dairy products and seafood. Corn, historically the main crop grown by Native American tribes in New England, continues to be grown in all New England states. It is traditionally used in hasty pudding, cornbread and corn chowder. Three prominent foodstuffs native to New England are maple syrup, cranberries and blueberries. Maine is the only state with a commercial wild blueberry industry, with 105 million pounds harvested in 2021.

Initial European colonists came from East Anglia in England. East Anglian cookery included dishes like suet puddings, soda breads, and a few shellfish delicacies, and would have been quite simple in contrast to the dishes prepared in contemporary London. Most of this cuisine was one-pot cookery, which developed into such dishes as succotash, chowder, baked beans, and others.

The most popular starches in New England cuisine include potatoes and cornmeal, and a few native breads like Anadama bread, johnnycakes, bulkie rolls, Parker House rolls, popovers, ployes, and New England brown bread. Because of the influence of New Englander health reformers, the most well known of whom is Sylvester Graham, this region is fairly conservative with its spices, but typical spices include nutmeg, ginger, cinnamon, cloves, and allspice, especially in desserts, and for savory foods, thyme, black pepper, sea salt, and sage. Typical condiments include maple syrup, grown from the native sugar maple, molasses, and cranberry sauce.

The fruits of the region include the &quot;Vitis labrusca&quot; grapes used in grape juice made by companies such as Welch&#x27;s, along with jelly, Kosher wine by companies like Mogen David and Manischewitz along with other wineries that make higher quality wines. Though not anywhere near as productive a region as the top three apple-producing regions, apples have been a staple of New England foodways since at least the 1640s, and it is here that a very high amount of heirloom varieties are found, many of them gaining renewed interest as part of locavore movements and the re-emergence of cider as a beverage of choice. Apples from New England would include varieties imported from their earliest in Europe and a few natives, like Baldwin, Lady, Mother, Pomme Grise, Porter, Roxbury Russet, Rhode Island Greening, Sops of Wine, Hightop Sweet, Peck&#x27;s Pleasant, Titus Pippin, Westfield-Seek-No-Further, and Duchess of Oldenburg. Beach plums a small native species with fruits the size of a pinball, are sought after in summer to make into a jam. Cranberries are another fruit indigenous to the region, often collected in autumn in huge flooded bogs. Thereafter they are juiced so they can be drunk fresh for breakfast, or dried and incorporated into salads and quickbreads.

Winter squashes like pumpkin and butternut squashes have been a staple for generations owing to their ability to keep for long periods over icy New England winters and being an excellent source of beta carotene; in summer, they are replaced with pattypan and zucchini, the latter brought to the region by immigrants from Southern Italy a century ago. Blueberries are a very common summertime treat owing to them being an important crop, and find their way into muffins, pies and pancakes.

Historically New England and the other original 13 colonies were major producers of hard cider and the only reason why this changed were that immigrants from Western and Central Europe preferred beer, especially lagers, to apple based alcohol. In more recent years cider has made a roaring comeback nationwide, with New England being the first to break out of the box and with many pomologists scouring the woods for abandoned apple trees and heirloom varieties to add to the cider press. Angry Orchard is a local commercial brand that began in New Hampshire but has since skyrocketed in sales, with other large marques following suit around the land.

Typical favorite desserts are quite diverse, and encompass hasty pudding, blueberry pie, whoopie pies, Boston cream pie, pumpkin pie, Joe Frogger cookies, hand-crafted ice cream, Hermit cookies, and the chocolate chip cookie, invented in Massachusetts in the 1930s.

New England is noted for having a heavy emphasis on seafood, a legacy inherited from coastal tribes like the Wampanoag and Narragansett, who equally used the rich fishing banks offshore for sustenance. Favorite fish include cod, salmon, winter flounder, haddock, striped bass, pollock, hake, bluefish, and, in southern New England, tautog. All of these are prepared numerous ways, such as frying cod for fish fingers, grilling bluefish over hot coals for summertime, smoking salmon or serving a whole poached one chilled for feasts with a dill sauce, or, on cold winter nights, serving haddock baked in casserole dish with a creamy sauce and crumbled breadcrumbs as a top so it forms a crust. Clam cakes, a savory fritter based on chopped clams, are a specialty of Rhode Island. Also, a hard shell clam is unique to Rhode Island called the Quahoag which is used in clear chowders. Farther inland, brook trout, largemouth bass, and herring are sought after, especially in the rivers and icy finger lakes in upper New England where New Englanders will fly fish for them in summertime.

Meat is present though not as prominent, and typically is either stewed in dishes like Yankee pot roast and New England boiled dinner or braised, as in a picnic ham; these dishes suit the weather better as summers are humid and hot but winters are raw and cold, getting below 0 °C for most of the winter and only just above it by March. The roasting of whole turkeys began here as a centerpiece for large American banquets, and like all other East Coast tribes, the Native American tribes of New England prized wild turkeys as a source of sustenance and later Anglophone settlers were enamored of cooking them using methods they knew from Europe: often that meant trussing the bird and spinning it on a string or spit roasting. Today turkey meat is a key ingredient in soups, and also a favorite in several sandwiches like the Pilgrim. For lunch, hot roast beef is sometimes chopped finely into small pieces and put on a roll with salami and American or provolone cheese to make a steak bomb. Bacon is often maple cured, and often bacon or salt pork drippings are an ingredient in corn chowder, a cousin of clam chowder. Veal consumption was prevalent in the North Atlantic States prior to World War II.

A variety of &quot;linguiça&quot; is favored as a breakfast food, introduced by Portuguese fishermen and Brazilian immigrants. Dairy farming and its resultant products figure strongly on the ingredient list, and homemade ice cream is a summertime staple of the region: it was a small seasonal roadside stand in Vermont that eventually became the internationally famous Ben and Jerry&#x27;s ice cream. Vermont is known for producing farmhouse style cheeses, especially a type of cheddar. The recipe goes all the way back to colonial times when English settlers brought the recipe with them from England and found the rocky landscape eminently suitable to making the cheese. Today Vermont has more artisanal cheese makers per capita than any other state, and diversity is such that interest in goat&#x27;s milk cheeses has become prominent.

Crustaceans and mollusks are also an essential ingredient in the regional cookery. Maine and Massachusetts, in more recent years, have taken to harvesting peekytoe crab and Jonah crab and making crab bisques, based on cream with 35% milkfat, and crabcakes out of them: often these were overlooked as bycatch of lobster pots by fishermen of the region, but in the past 30 years their popularity has firmly established them as a staple. They even appear on the menu as far south as to be out of the region in New York, where they are sold to four star restaurants in the form of cocktail claws. Whelks are eaten in salad, and lobster, which is indigenous to the coastal waters of the region and are a feature of many dishes, baked, boiled, roasted, and steamed, or simply eaten as a sandwich, chilled with mayonnaise and chopped celery in Maine and Massachusetts, or slathered with melted butter on Long Island and in Connecticut. Shellfish of all sorts are part of the diet, and shellfish of the coastal regions include little neck clams, sea scallops, blue mussels, oysters, soft shell clams, and razor shell clams. Much of this shellfish contributes to New England tradition, the clambake. The clambake as known today is a colonial interpretation of an American Indian tradition.

In summer, oysters and clams are dipped in batter and fried, often served in a basket with french fries, or commonly on a wheaten bun as a clam roll. Oysters are otherwise eaten chilled on a bed of crushed ice on the half shell with mignonette sauce, and are often branded on where they were harvested. Large quahogs are stuffed with breadcrumbs and seasoning and baked in their shells, and smaller ones often find their way into clam chowder. Other preparations include clams casino, clams on the half shell served stuffed with herbs like oregano and streaky bacon.

Southern New England, particularly along the coast, shares many specialties with the Mid-Atlantic, including especially dishes from Jewish and Italian-American cuisine. There is a so-called pizza belt which stretches from New Haven, Connecticut southward through New York, New Jersey, and into Maryland. Coastal Connecticut is known for distinctive kinds of pizza, locally called apizza (pronounced locally as &quot;abeetz&quot;), which differ in their thin and slightly blackened texture and in their toppings (such as clams) from those of the regions of the pizza belt further south.

====Delaware Valley and Mid-Atlantic====
The mid-Atlantic states comprise the states of New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Pennsylvania, and Northern Maryland. The oldest major settlement in this area of the country is found in the most populous city in the nation, New York, founded in 1625 by the Dutch. Today, it is a major cultural capital of the United States.

The influences on cuisine in this region are extremely eclectic, as it has been, and continues to be, a gateway for international culture as well as a gateway for new immigrants. Going back to colonial times, each new group has left their mark on homegrown cuisine and in turn the cities in this region disperse trends to the wider United States. In addition, cities like New York and Philadelphia have had the past influence of Dutch, Italian, German, Irish, British, and Jewish cuisines, and that continues to this day. Baltimore has become the crossroads between North and South, a distinction it has held since the end of the Civil War.

A global power city, New York is well known for its diverse and cosmopolitan dining scene. Its restaurants compete fiercely for good reviews in the Food and Dining section of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, online guides, and Zagat&#x27;s, the last of which is widely considered the premier American dining guide, published yearly and headquartered in New York.
Many of the more complicated dishes with rich ingredients like Lobster Newberg, waldorf salad, vichyssoise, eggs benedict, and the New York strip steak were born out of a need to entertain and impress the well-to-do in expensive bygone restaurants like Delmonico&#x27;s and still standing establishments like the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. Modern commercial American cream cheese was developed in 1872.

Since the first reference to an alcoholic mixed drink called a cocktail comes from New York State in 1803, it is not a surprise that there have been many cocktails invented in New York and the surrounding environs. Even today New York bars are noted for being highly influential in making national trends. Cosmopolitans, Long Island iced teas, Manhattans, Rob Roys, Tom Collins, Aviations, and Greyhounds were all invented in New York bars, and the gin martini was popularized in New York in speakeasies during the 1920s, as evidenced by its appearance in the works of New Yorker and American writer F. Scott Fitzgerald. Like its neighbor Philadelphia, many rare and unusual liquors and liqueurs often find their way into a mixologist&#x27;s cupboard or restaurant wine list.

New York State is the third most productive area in the country for wine grapes, just behind California and Washington. It has AVA&#x27;s near the Finger Lakes, the Catskills, and Long Island, and in the Hudson Valley has the second-most productive area in the country for growing apples, making it a center for hard cider production, just like New England. Pennsylvania has been growing rye since Germans began to emigrate to the area at the end of the 17th century and required a grain they knew from Germany. Therefore, overall it is not unusual to find New York grown Gewürtztraminer and Riesling, Pennsylvania rye whiskey, or marques of locally produced ciders like Original Sin on the same menu.
Since their formative years, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore have welcomed immigrants of every kind to their shores, and all three have been an important gateway through which new citizens to the general United States arrive. Traditionally natives have eaten cheek to jowl with newcomers for centuries as the newcomers would open new restaurants and small businesses and all the different groups would interact.

Even in colonial days this region was a very diverse mosaic of peoples, as settlers from Switzerland, Wales, England, Ulster, Wallonia, Holland, Gelderland, the British Channel Islands, and Sweden sought their fortune in this region. This is very evident in many signature dishes and local foods, all of which have evolved to become American dishes in their own right.

The original Dutch settlers of New York brought recipes they knew and understood from the Netherlands and their mark on local cuisine is still apparent today: in many quarters of New York their version of apple pie with a streusel top is still baked. In the colony of New Amsterdam, their predilection for waffles in time evolved into the American national recipe and forms part of a New York brunch. They also made coleslaw, originally a Dutch salad, but today accented with the later 18th-century introduction of mayonnaise.

The doughnut began its life originally as a New York pastry that arrived in the 18th century as the Dutch &quot;olykoek&quot;, with later additions from other nations of Europe like the Italian zeppole, the Jewish/Polish &quot;pączki&quot;, and the German &quot;Berliner&quot; arriving in the 19th century to complete the variety found in modern doughnuts today.
Crab cakes were once a kind of English &quot;croquette&quot;, but over time as spices have been added they and the Maryland crab feast became two of Baltimore&#x27;s signature dishes. Fishing for blue crab is a favorite summer pastime in the waters off Maryland, New Jersey, and Delaware where they may grace the table at summer picnics.

Other mainstays of the region have been present since the early years of American history, like oysters from Cape May, the Chesapeake Bay, and Long Island, and lobster and tuna from the coastal waters found in New York and New Jersey. Philadelphia Pepper Pot, a tripe stew, was originally a British dish but today is a classic of home cooking in Pennsylvania alongside bookbinder soup, a type of turtle soup.

In the winter, New York pushcarts sell roasted chestnuts, a delicacy dating back to English Christmas traditions, and it was in New York and Pennsylvania that the earliest Christmas cookies were introduced: Germans introduced crunchy molasses-based gingerbread and sugar cookies in Pennsylvania, and the Dutch introduced cinnamon-based cookies, all of which have become part of the traditional Christmas meal.

Scrapple was originally a type of savory pudding that early Pennsylvania Germans made to preserve the offal of a pig slaughter. The Philadelphia soft pretzel was originally brought to Eastern Pennsylvania in the early 18th century, and later, 19th-century immigrants sold them to the masses from pushcarts to make them the city&#x27;s best-known bread product, having evolved into its own unique recipe.
After the 1820s, new groups began to arrive and the character of the region began to change. There had been some Irish from Ulster prior to 1820, however largely they had been Protestants with somewhat different culture and (often) a different language than the explosion of emigrants that came to Castle Garden and Locust Point in Baltimore in their masses starting in the 1840s.

The Irish arrived in America in a rather woeful state, as Ireland at the time was often plagued by some of the worst poverty in Europe and often heavy disenfranchisement among the masses. Many of them arrived barely alive having ridden coffin ships to the New World, very sick with typhus and gaunt from prolonged starvation.

In addition, they were the first to face challenges other groups did not have: they were the first large wave of Catholics. They faced prejudice for their faith and the cities of Philadelphia, New York, and Baltimore were not always set up for their needs.

For example, Catholic bishops in the U.S. mandated until the 1960s that all Catholics were forbidden from eating red meat on Fridays and during Lent, and attending Mass sometimes conflicted with work as produce and meat markets would be open on high holy days; this was difficult for Irishmen supporting families since many worked as laborers.

Unsurprisingly, many Irishmen also found their fortunes working as longshoremen, which would have given their families access to fish and shellfish whenever a fisherman made berth, which was frequent on the busy docks of Baltimore and New York.

Though there had been some activity in Baltimore in founding a see earlier by the Carrolls, the Irish were the first major wave of Catholic worship in this region, and that meant bishops and cardinals sending away to Europe for wine. Wine, with water, is consecrated as part of the Catholic Mass.

Taverns had existed prior to their emigration to America in the region, though the Irish brought their particular brand of pub culture and founded some of the first saloons and bars that served Dublin style stout and red ale; they brought with them the knowledge of single-malt style whiskey and sold it.

The Irish were the first immigrant group to arrive in this region in massive millions, and these immigrants also founded some of the earliest saloons and bars in this region, of which McSorley&#x27;s is a still operating example.
It was also in this region that the Irish introduced something that today is a very important festival in American culture that involves a large amount of food, drink, and merry making: Halloween. In England and Wales, where prior immigrants had come from, the feast of All Hallows Eve had died out in the Reformation, dismissed as superstition and excess having nothing to do with the Bible and often replaced with the festival of Guy Fawkes Night. Other immigrant groups like the Germans preferred to celebrate October 31 as Reformation Day, and after the American Revolution all of the above were less and less eager to celebrate the legacy of an English festival given they had fought against Great Britain for their independence.

The Catholicism of the Irish demanded attendance at church on November 1 and charity and deeds, not just faith, as a cornerstone of dogma, and many of their older traditions survived the Reformation and traveled with them. Naturally, they went door-to-door to collect victuals for masked parties as well as gave them out, like nuts to roast on the fire, whiskey, beer, or cider, and barmbracks; they also bobbed for apples and made dumb cakes. Later in the century they were joined by Scots going guising, children going door-to-door to ask for sweets and treats in costume.

From the Mid-Atlantic this trend spread to be nationwide and evolved into American children trick-or-treating on October 31 wearing costumes and their older counterparts having wild costume parties with various foods and drinks such as caramel apples, candy apples, dirt cakes, punch, cocktails, cider (both alcoholic and non,) pumpkin pie, candy corn, chocolate turtles, peanut brittle, taffy, tipsy cake, and copious buckets full of candy; children carving jack-o-lanterns and eating squash derived foods derive from Halloween&#x27;s heritage as a harvest festival and from Irish and Scottish traditions of carving turnips and eating root vegetables at this time of year.

Bobbing for apples has survived to the present day as a Halloween party classic game, as has a variation on the parlor game of trying to grab an apple hanging from the ceiling blindfolded: it has evolved into trying to catch a donut in one&#x27;s teeth.

Immigrants from Southern Europe, namely Sicily, Campania, Lazio, and Calabria, appeared between 1880 and 1960 in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Eastern Maryland hoping to escape the extreme poverty and corruption endemic to Italy.

Typically none of them spoke English, but rather dialects of Italian and had a culture that was more closely tied to the village they were born in than the high culture only accessible to those who could afford it at this time; many could not read or write in any language.

They were employed in manual labor or factory work but it is because of them that dishes like spaghetti with meatballs, New York–style pizza, calzones, and baked ziti exist, and Americans of today are very familiar with semolina based pasta noodles.

Their native cuisine had less of an emphasis on meat, as evidenced by dishes they introduced like pasta e fagioli and minestrone, but the dishes they created in America often piled it on as a sign of wealth and newfound prosperity since for the first time even cheap cuts of it were affordable. The American recipe for lasagna is proof of this, as mostly it is derived from the Neapolitan version of the dish with large amounts of meat and cheese.
New York–style hot dogs came about with German-speaking emigrants from Austria and Germany, particularly with the frankfurter sausage and the smaller wiener sausage; Jews would also contribute here by introducing the kosher version of these sausages, made of beef rather than pork. Today, the New York–style hot dog with sauerkraut, mustard, and the optional cucumber pickle relish is such a part of the local fabric, that it is one of the favorite comestibles of New York and both the pork and the beef versions are beloved. Hot dogs are a typical street food sold year round in all but the most inclement weather from thousands of pushcarts.

As with all other stadiums in Major League Baseball they are an essential for New York Yankees and the New York Mets games though it is the local style of preparation that predominates without exception.

Hot dogs are also the focus of a televised eating contest on the Fourth of July in Coney Island, at Nathan&#x27;s Famous, one of the earliest hot dog stands opened in the United States in 1916 by Nathan Handwerker. Handwerker was a Jewish man who emigrated from what is now Ukraine in 1912 and whose influence is felt today around the world.

Coney Island is most famous for being a traditional boardwalk amusement park and the site of the world&#x27;s first rollercoaster, a precursor of modern theme parks. Hot dogs are a staple of amusement parks 100 years later.

A summertime treat, Italian ice, began its life as a sweeter adaptation of the Sicilian granita that was strictly lemon-flavored and brought to New York and Philadelphia. Its Hispanic counterpart, &quot;piragua&quot;, is a common shaved-ice treat brought to New York by Puerto Ricans in the 1930s. Unlike the original dish which included flavors like tamarind, mango, coconut, &quot;piragua&quot; is evolving to include flavors like grape and cherry, fruits which are impossible to grow in the tropical Puerto Rican climate and get exported back to the island from New York.

Taylor Ham, a meat delicacy of New Jersey, first appeared around the time of the Civil War and today is often served for breakfast with eggs and cheese on a kaiser roll, a variant of a roll brought to the area by Austrians in the second half of the 19th century, now commonly used for sandwiches at lunchtime, often topped with poppyseeds. This breakfast meat is generally known as pork roll in southern New Jersey and Philadelphia, and Taylor Ham in northern New Jersey.
Other dishes came about during the early 20th century and have much to do with delicatessen fare, set up largely by Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe who came to America incredibly poor, often illiterate in any other language but Yiddish, and often banished from mainstream society in their place of origin for centuries. Most often they were completely unable to partake in the outdoor food markets that the general population utilized as most of the food for sale was not kosher.

The influence of European Jewry before their destruction in the Holocaust on modern mid-Atlantic cooking remains strong and reinforced by their many descendants in the region. These currently form the largest concentration of Jews outside Tel Aviv and are very integrated into the local mainstream of New York in particular.

American-style pickles, now a common addition to hamburgers and sandwiches, were brought by Polish Jews, and Austro-Hungarian Jews brought a recipe for almond horns that now is a common regional cookie, diverting from the original recipe in dipping the ends in dark chocolate.

New York–style cheesecake has copious amounts of cream and eggs because animal rennet is not kosher and so could not be sold to a large number of the deli&#x27;s clientele.

New York inherited its bagels and bialys from Jews, as well as Challah bread. Pastrami first entered the country via Romanian Jews, and is a feature of many sandwiches, often eaten on marble rye, a bread that was born in the mid-Atlantic.

Whitefish salad, lox, and matzoh ball soup are now standard fare made to order at local diners and delicatessens, but started their life as foods that made up a strict dietary code. Rugelach cookies and hamentashen are sweet staples still sold to the general public, but came to New York over a century ago with Ashkenazi Jews along with Jewish rye.
Many of their dishes passed into the mainstream enough that they became standard fare in diners by the end of the 20th century, a type of restaurant that is now the most common in the region, and the subject matter of the artist Edward Hopper.

In the past this sort of establishment was the haven of the short-order cook grilling or frying simple foods for the working man. Today typical service includes staples from this large region like beef on weck, Manhattan clam chowder, the club sandwich, Buffalo wings, Philadelphia cheesesteak, the black and white cookie, shoofly pie, snapper soup, Smith Island cake, blackout cake, grape pie, milkshakes, and the egg cream, a vanilla or chocolate fountain drink with a frothy top and fizzy taste.

As in Hopper&#x27;s painting from 1942, many of these businesses are open 24 hours a day.

===Midwest===

This region today comprises the states near the Great Lakes and also the Great Plains; much of it is prairie with very flat terrain. Winters are bitterly cold, windy, and wet.
Midwestern cuisine today is a very eclectic and odd mix and match of foodways, covering everything from Kansas City–style barbecue to the Chicago-style hot dog, though many of its classics are very simple, hearty fare.

This region was mostly untouched by European and American settlers until after the American Revolutionary War, and excepting Missouri and the heavily forested states near the Great Lakes, was mainly populated by nomadic tribes like the Sioux, Osage, Arapaho, and Cheyenne. As with most other American Indian tribes, these tribes consumed the Three Sisters of beans, maize, and squash, but also for thousands of years followed the herds of bison, hunting them on foot and later on horseback, typically using bow and arrow. There are buffalo jumps dating back nearly 10,000 years and several photographs and written accounts of trappers and homesteaders attesting to their dependence on the buffalo and to a lesser degree elk.

After nearly wiping out elk and bison, this region has taken to raising bison alongside cattle for their meat and at an enormous profit, making them into burgers and steaks.

Often that means harsh blizzards especially near the Great Lakes where Arctic winds blow off of Canada, where ice on rivers and lakes freezes thick enough for ice hockey, and for ice fishing for pike, walleye and panfish to be ubiquitous. In Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan, they often become part of the local fish fry.
The primary meats here are beef and poultry, since the Midwest has been raising turkeys, chickens, and geese for over 150 years. Chickens have been common for so long that the Midwest has several native breeds that are prized for both backyard farming and for farmer&#x27;s markets, such as the Buckeye and Wyandotte. One, Billina, appears as a character in the second book of the Oz series by L. Frank Baum.

Favorite fruits of the region include some native plants inherited from Native American tribes like the pawpaw, and American persimmons are also highly favored.

As in the American South, pawpaws are the region&#x27;s largest native fruit, about the size of a mango, often found growing wild come September; they are made into preserves and cakes and command quite a price at farmer&#x27;s markets in Chicago.

The American persimmon is often smaller than its Japanese cousin, about the size of a small plum, but in the Midwest and parts of the East it is the main ingredient in the steamed persimmon pudding, topped with &quot;crème anglaise&quot;.

Other crops inherited from the Native Americans include wild rice, which grows on the banks of lakes and is a local favorite for fancy meals and today often used in stuffing for Thanksgiving.

Typical fruits of the region are cold-weather crops. Once it was thought that its winters were too harsh for apples, but a breeder in Minnesota produced the Wealthy apple and it became the third-most productive region for apple growing in the country, with local varieties comprising Wolf River, Enterprise, Melrose, Paula Red, Rome Beauty, Honeycrisp, and the Red Delicious.

Cherries are important to Michigan and Wisconsin grows many cranberries, a legacy of early-19th-century emigration of New England farmers. Crabapple jelly is a favorite condiment of the region.

The influence of German, Scandinavian, and Slavic peoples on the northern portion of the region is very strong; many emigrated to Wisconsin, Minnesota, Michigan, Ohio, and Illinois in the 19th century to take advantage of jobs in the meatpacking business as well as being homesteaders and tradesmen.

Bratwurst is a very common sausage eaten at tailgate parties for the Green Bay Packers, Chicago Bears, or Detroit Lions, often served boiled in lager beer with sauerkraut, different from many of the recipes currently found in Germany.

Polish sausage, in particular a locally invented type of kielbasa, is essential for sporting events in Chicago: Chicago today has approximately 200,000 Polish speakers and has had a similar population for over 100 years.

When Poles came to Chicago and surrounding cities from Europe, they brought with them long ropes of kielbasa, cabbage rolls, and pierogi. Poles that left Poland after the fall of the Berlin Wall and descendants of earlier immigrants still make them, and they remain common in local diners and delis.

Today alongside the pierogi, the sausage is served on a long roll with mustard like a hot dog or as a Maxwell Street Polish, a sandwich with caramelized onions. In Cleveland, the same sausage is served in the form of the Polish boy, a sandwich made of french fries, spicy barbecue sauce, and coleslaw.

Unlike cities in the East where the hot dog alone is traditional, fans of the Cleveland Guardians, Detroit Tigers, Chicago Cubs, Chicago White Sox, and Milwaukee Brewers favor two or three different kinds of sausage sold in the pushcarts outside the stadium.

The hot dogs themselves tend to follow the Chicago style, with mustard and pickled vegetables.

In Cincinnati, where the Cincinnati Reds play, there is a competitor in Cincinnati chili. Invented by Macedonian immigrants, it includes spaghetti as its base, chili with a Mediterranean-inspired spice mix, and cheddar cheese; the chili itself is often a topping for local hot dogs at games.

In the Midwest and especially Minnesota, the tradition of the church potluck is a gathering where local foods reign, and has been since the era of the frontier; pioneers often needed to pool resources to have a celebration in the 19th century and that simply never changed.

Nowhere is this more clear than with the hotdish, a type of casserole believed to have derived from a Norwegian recipe, it is usually topped with potatoes or tater tots. Next to the hotdish at potlucks usually glorified rice is found, a kind of rice pudding mixed with crushed pineapple and maraschino cherries. Next to that is the booyah, a thick soup made of meat, vegetables, and seasonings that is meant to simmer on the stove for up to two days.

Lefse, traditionally a Scandinavian flatbread, has been handed down to descendants for over a hundred years and is common on the table. Behind that is venison, a popular meat around the Great Lakes and often eaten as steaks, sandwiches, and crown roasts for special events. Within Wisconsin, Minnesota and the Dakotas, tiger meat, a dish similar to steak tartare, is common.

Last on the table are the dessert bars and brownies, created originally in 1898 in Chicago, now a global food and international favorite.
Further south, barbecue has its own style in places in Kansas City and St. Louis different from the South and American West. Kansas City and St. Louis were and are important hubs for the railroad that connected the plains with the Great Lakes and cities farther east, like Philadelphia.

At the turn of the 19th century, the St. Louis area, Omaha, and Kansas City had huge stockyards, waystations for cattle and pigs on their way east to the cities of the coast and north to the Great Lakes. They all had large growing immigrant and migrant populations from Europe and the South respectively, so the region has developed unique styles of barbecue.

St. Louis–style barbecue favors a heavy emphasis on a sticky sweet barbecue sauce. Its standbys include the pork steak, a cut taken from the shoulder of the pig, grilled then slowly stewed in a pan over charcoal; crispy snoots, a cut from the cheek and nose of the pig that is fried up like cracklins and eaten dipped in sauce; pork spare ribs; and a mix of either beer-boiled bratwurst or grilled Italian sausage, flavored with fennel.

Dessert is usually something like gooey butter cake, invented in the city in the 1930s.

Kansas City–style barbecue uses several different kinds of meat, more than most styles of American barbecue—turkey, mutton, pork, and beef to name a few—but is distinct from St. Louis in that the barbecue sauce adds molasses in with the tomato-based recipe and typically has a more tart taste.

Traditionally, Kansas City uses a low-and-slow method of smoking the meat in addition to just stewing it in the sauce. It also favors using hickory wood for smoking and continual watering or layering of the sauce while cooking to form a glaze; with burnt ends this step is necessary to create the &quot;bark&quot; or charred outer layer of the brisket.

===Southern United States===


When referring to the American South as a region, typically it should indicate Southern Maryland and the states that were once part of the Old Confederacy, with the dividing line between the East and West jackknifing about 100 miles west of Dallas, Texas, and mostly south of the old Mason–Dixon line. Cities found in this area include New Orleans, Atlanta, Washington, D.C., Memphis, Charleston, and Charlotte with Houston, Texas being the largest. The Florida Panhandle is usually considered part of the South, but the Florida peninsula (especially its lower half) is not.

These states are much more closely tied to each other and have been part of U.S. territory for much longer than states much farther west than East Texas, and in the case of food, the influences and cooking styles are strictly separated as the terrain begins to change to prairie and desert from bayou and hardwood forest.
This section of the country has some of the oldest known U.S. foodways, with some recipes almost 400 years old.

Native American influences are still quite visible in the use of cornmeal as an essential staple and found in the Southern predilection for hunting wild game, in particular wild turkey, deer, woodcock, and various kinds of waterfowl; for example, coastal North Carolina is a place where hunters will seek tundra swan as a part of Christmas dinner; the original English and Scottish settlers would have rejoiced at this revelation since such was banned among the commoner class in what is now the United Kingdom, and naturally, their descendants have not forgotten.

Native Americans also consumed turtles and catfish, specifically the snapping turtle, the alligator snapping turtle, and blue catfish. Catfish are often caught with one&#x27;s bare hands, gutted, breaded, and fried to make a Southern variation on English fish and chips and turtles are turned into stews and soups.

Native American tribes of the region such as the Cherokee or Choctaw often cultivated or gathered local plants like pawpaw, maypop and several sorts of squashes and corn as food. They also used spicebush and sassafras as spices, and the aforementioned fruits are still cultivated as food in the South.

Maize is to this day found in dishes for breakfast, lunch and dinner in the form of grits, hoecakes, baked cornbread, and spoonbread, and nuts like the hickory, black walnut and pecan are commonly included in desserts and pastries as varied as mince pies, pecan pie, pecan rolls and honey buns (both are types of sticky bun), and quick breads, which were themselves invented in the South during the American Civil War.

Peaches have been grown in this region since the 17th century and are a staple crop as well as a favorite fruit, with peach cobbler being a signature dessert.

====Early history====
European influence began soon after the settlement of Jamestown in 1607 and the earliest recipes emerged by the end of the 17th century. Specific influences from Europe were quite varied, and they remain traditional and essential to the modern cookery overall.

German speakers often settled in the Piedmont on small farms from the coast, and invented an American delicacy that is now nationally beloved, apple butter, based on their recipe for &quot;apfelkraut&quot;, and later they introduced red cabbage and rye.

From the British Isles, an enormous amount of influence was bestowed upon the South, specifically foodways from 17th- and 18th-century Ulster, the borderlands between England and Scotland, the Scottish Highlands, portions of Wales, the West Midlands, the West Country, Black Country and Southern England. Settlers bound for America fled the tumult of the Civil War, Ulster and the Highland Clearances.

Often ships&#x27; manifests show their belongings nearly always included cookpots or bakestones and seed stock for plants like peaches, plums, and apples to grow orchards which they planted in their hundreds. Each group brought foods and ideas from their respective regions.

Settlers from Ireland and Scotland were well known for creating &quot;peatreak&quot; and &quot;poitín&quot;, strong hard liquor based on fermenting potatoes or barley. In time they came up with a method for distilling a corn mash with added sugar and aging in charred barrels made of select hardwoods, which created a whiskey with a high proof. This gave birth to American whiskey and Kentucky bourbon, and its cousins moonshine and Everclear.

Closer to the coast, 18th-century recipes for English trifle turned into tipsy cakes, replacing the sherry with whiskey and their recipe for pound cake, brought to the South around the same time, still works with American baking units: one pound sugar, one pound eggs, one pound butter, one pound flour.

====Common features====

Pork is the popular choice in 80% of Southern style barbecue and features in other preparations like sausages and sandwiches. For most Southerners in the antebellum period, corn and pork were staples of the diet. Country sausage is an ingredient in the Southern breakfast dish of biscuits and gravy. Country ham is often served for breakfast and cured with salt or sugar and hickory-smoked.

Accompanying many meals is the southern style fluffy biscuit, where the leavening agent is baking powder and often includes buttermilk, and for breakfast they often accompany country ham, grits, and scrambled eggs.

====Desserts====

Desserts in the South tend to be quite rich and very much a legacy of entertaining to impress guests, since a Southern housewife was (and to a degree still is) expected to show her hospitality by laying out as impressive a banquet as she is able to manage.

Desserts are vast and encompass Lane cake, sweet potato pie, peach cobbler, pecan pie, hummingbird cake, Jefferson Davis pie, peanut brittle, coconut cake, apple fritters, peanut cookies, Moravian spice cookies, chess pie, doberge cake, Lady Baltimore cake, bourbon balls, and caramel cake.
American-style sponge cakes tend to be the rule rather than the exception as is American buttercream, a place where Southern baking intersects with the rest of the United States. Nuts like pecan and hickory tend to be revered as garnishes for these desserts, and they make their way into local bakeries as fillings for chocolates.

====Cajun and Creole cuisine of Louisiana====

In Louisiana, cooking methods have more in common with rustic French cuisines of the 17th and 18th century than anything ever found at the French court in Versailles or the bistros of 19th- and 20th-century Paris; this is especially true of Cajun cuisine.

Cajun French is more closely related to dialects spoken in Northern Maine, New Brunswick, and to a lesser degree Haiti than anything spoken in modern France, and likewise their terminology, methodology, and culture concerning food is much more closely related to the styles of these former French colonies even today.

Unlike other areas of the South, Cajuns were and still are largely Catholics and thus much of what they eat is seasonal; for example pork is an important component of the Cajun &quot;boucherie&quot; (a large community event where the hog is butchered, prepared with a fiery spice mix, and eaten snout to tail) but it is never consumed in the five weeks of Lent, when such would be forbidden.

Cajun cuisine tends to focus on what is locally available, historically because Cajuns were often poor, illiterate, independent farmers and not plantation owners but today it is because such is deeply imbedded in local culture.

&quot;Boudin&quot; is a type of sausage found only in this area of the country, and it is often by far more spicy than anything found in France or Belgium. &quot;Chaudin&quot; is unique to the area, and the method of cooking is comparable to the Scottish dish haggis: the stuffing includes onions, rice, bell peppers, spices, and pork sewn up in the stomach of a pig, and served in slices piping hot.

Crawfish are a staple of the Cajun grandmother&#x27;s cookpot, as they are abundant in the bayous of Southern Louisiana and a main source of livelihood, as are blue crabs, shrimp, corn on the cob, and red potatoes, since these are the basic ingredients of the Louisiana crawfish boil.
New Orleans has been the capital of Creole culture since before Louisiana was a state. This culture is that of the colonial French and Spanish that evolved in the city of New Orleans, which was and still is quite distinct from the rural culture of Cajuns and dovetails with what would have been eaten in antebellum Louisiana plantation culture long ago.

Cooking to impress and show one&#x27;s wealth was a staple of Creole culture, which often mixed French, Spanish, Italian, German, African, Caribbean and Native American cooking methods, producing rich dishes like oysters bienville, pompano en papillote, and even the muffaletta sandwich.

However, Louisiana Creole cuisine tends to diverge from the original ideas brought to the region in ingredients: profiteroles, for example, use a near identical choux pastry to that which is found in modern Paris but often use vanilla or chocolate ice cream rather than custard as the filling, pralines nearly always use pecan and not almonds, and bananas foster came about when New Orleans was a key port for the import of bananas from the Caribbean Sea.

Gumbos tend to be thickened with okra, or the leaves of the sassafrass tree. &quot;Andouille&quot; is often used, but not the &quot;andouille&quot; currently known in France, since French &quot;andouille&quot; uses tripe whereas Louisiana &quot;andouille&quot; is made from a Boston butt, usually inflected with pepper flakes, and smoked for hours over pecan wood.

Other ingredients that are native to Louisiana and not found in the cuisine of modern France would include rice, which has been a staple of both Creole and Cajun cooking for generations, and sugarcane, which has been grown in Louisiana since the early 1800s.
Ground cayenne pepper is a key spice of the region, as is the meat of the American alligator, something settlers learned from the Choctaws and Houma. The maypop plant has been a favorite of Southerners for 350 years; it gives its name to the Ocoee River in Tennessee, a legacy of the Cherokees, and in Southern Louisiana it is known as &quot;liane de grenade&quot;, indicating its consumption by Cajuns. It is a close relative of the commercial passionfruit, similar in size, and is a common plant growing in gardens all over the South as a source of fresh summertime fruit.

====African American influences====
West African influences came with enslaved peoples from Ghana, Benin, Mali, Congo, Angola, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, and other portions of the Gold Coast, and the mark Africans and their descendants, the African Americans, have made on Southern food is strong today and an essential addition to the Southern table.

Crops like okra, sorghum, sesame seeds, eggplant, and many different kinds of melons were brought with them from West Africa along with the incredibly important introduction of rice to the Carolinas and later to Texas and Louisiana, whence it became a staple grain of that region and still remains a staple in those areas today, found in dishes like Hoppin John, purloo, and Charleston red rice.

Like the poorer indentured servants that came to the South, slaves often got the leftovers of what was slaughtered for the consumption of the master of the plantation and so many recipes had to be adapted for offal, like pig&#x27;s ears and fatback though other methods encouraged low and slow methods of cooking to tenderize the tougher cuts of meat, like braising, smoking, and pit roasting, the last of which was a method known to West Africans in the preparation of roasting goat.

Peanut soup is one of the oldest known recipes brought to Virginia by Africans and over time, through their descendants, it has become creamier and milder tasting than the original.

====Florida cuisine====
Certain portions of the South often have their own distinct subtypes of cuisine owing to local history and landscape. Floridian cuisine, for example, has a distinct way of cooking that includes different ingredients, especially south of Tampa and Orlando.

Spain had control of the state until the early 19th century and used the southern tip as an outpost to guard the Spanish Main beginning in the 1500s, but Florida kept and still maintains ties with the Caribbean Sea, including the Bahamas, Haiti, Cuba, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, and Jamaica.

South of Tampa, there are and have been for a long time many speakers of Caribbean Spanish, Haitian French, Jamaican Patois, and Haitian Creole and each Caribbean culture has a strong hold on cooking methods and spices in Florida. In turn, each mixes and matches with the foodways of the Seminole tribe and Anglophone settlers. Thus, for almost 200 years, Floridian cooking has had a more tropical flavor than any other Southern state.

Allspice, a spice originally from Jamaica, is an ingredient found in spice mixes in summer barbecues along with ginger, garlic, scotch bonnet peppers, sea salt, and nutmeg; in Floridian cooking this is often a variant of Jamaican jerk spice. Coconuts are grown in the areas surrounding Miami and are shipped in daily through its port for consumption of the milk, meat, and water of the coconut.

Bananas are not just the yellow Cavendish variety found in supermarkets across America: in Florida they are available as &quot;bananitos&quot;, &quot;colorados&quot;, &quot;plátanos&quot;, and &quot;maduros&quot;. The first of these is a tiny miniature banana only about 4–5 inches (10–13 cm) in length and it is sweet. The second has a red peel and an apple-like aftertaste, and the third and fourth are used as a starch on nearly every Caribbean island as a side dish, baked or fried: all of the above are a staple of Florida outdoor markets when in season and all have been grown in the Caribbean for almost 400 years.

Mangoes are grown as a backyard plant in Southern Florida and otherwise are a favorite treat coming in many different shapes in sizes from &quot;Nam Doc Mai&quot;, brought to Florida after the Vietnam War, to &quot;Madame Francis&quot;, a mango from Haiti. Sweetsop and soursop are popular around Miami, but nearly unheard of in other areas of the South.

Citrus is a major crop of Florida, and features at many breakfast tables and many markets, with the height of the season near the first week of January. Hamlin oranges are the main cultivar planted, and from this crop the rest of the United States and to a lesser extent Europe gets orange juice. Other plantings include grapefruits, tangerines, clementines, limes, and even a few more rare ones, like Cara Cara navel oranges, tangelos, and the Jamaican Ugli fruit. Tomatoes, bell peppers, habanero peppers, and figs, especially taken from the Florida strangler fig, complete the produce menu.

Blue crab, conch, Florida stone crab, red drum, dorado, and marlins tend to be local favorite ingredients. Dairy is available in this region, but it is less emphasized due to the year round warmth.

Traditional key lime pie, a dessert from the islands off the coast of Miami, is made with condensed milk to form the custard with the eye wateringly tart limes native to the Florida Keys in part because milk would spoil in an age before refrigeration.

Pork in this region tends to be roasted in methods similar to those found in Puerto Rico and Cuba, owing to mass emigration from those countries in the 20th century, especially in the counties surrounding Miami.

Orange blossom honey is a specialty of the state, and is widely available in farmer&#x27;s markets. Caribbean lobster is a favorite special meal eagerly sought after by Floridians as it is found as far north as Fort Myers: spear diving and collecting them from reefs in the Florida Keys and near rocky shoals is a common practice of local scuba divers.

====Other small game====
Ptarmigan, grouse, crow, blackbirds, dove, duck and other game fowl are consumed in the United States. In the American state of Arkansas, beaver tail stew is consumed in Cotton town. Squirrel, raccoon, possum, bear, muskrat, chipmunk, skunk, groundhog, pheasant, armadillo and rabbit are also consumed in the United States.

===Cuisine in the West===

Cooking in the American West gets its influence from Native American and Hispanophone cultures, as well as later settlers that came in the 19th century: Texas, for example, has some influence from Germany in its choice of barbecue by using sausages.

Another instance can be found in the Northwestern region, which encompasses Oregon, Washington, and Northern California. All of the aforementioned rely on local seafood and a few classics of their own.

In New Mexico, Colorado, Nevada, Arizona, Utah, West Texas, and Southern California, Mexican flavors and influences are extremely common, especially from the Mexican states of Chihuahua, Baja California, and Sonora.

====Northwest====

The Pacific Northwest as a region includes Alaska and the state of Washington near the Canada-US border and terminates near Sacramento, California and the San Francisco Bay Area of Northern California, and for culinary purposes includes the historic influence of the Monterey Bay area. Here, the terrain is mostly temperate rainforest on the coast mixed with pine forest as one approaches the Canada-US border inland.

One of the core favorite foodstuffs is Pacific salmon, native to many of the larger rivers of the area and often smoked or grilled on cedar planks. In Alaska, wild game like ptarmigan and moose meat feature extensively since much of the state is wilderness.

Fresh fish like steelhead trout, Pacific cod, Pacific halibut, and pollock are fished for extensively and feature on the menu of many restaurants, as do a plethora of fresh berries and vegetables, like Cameo apples from Washington state, the headquarters of the U.S. apple industry, cherries from Oregon, blackberries, and marionberries, a feature of many pies. Hazelnuts are grown extensively in this region and are a feature of baking, such as in chocolate hazelnut pie, an Oregon favorite, and Almond Roca is a local candy.

Like its counterpart on the opposite coast to the East, there is a grand variety of shellfish in this region. Geoducks are a native species of giant clam that have incredibly long necks; they are eaten by the bucketful and shipped to Asia for millions of dollars as they are believed to be an aphrodisiac. Gaper clams are a favorite food, often grilled or steamed in a sauce.

Native California abalone is protected as a food source, and a traditional foodway predating settlement by whites, today featuring heavily in the cooking of fine restaurants as well as in home cooking, in mirin-flavored soups (the influence of Japanese cooking is strong in the region) noodle dishes and on the barbecue.

Native Olympia oysters are served on the half shell as well as the Kumamoto oyster, introduced by Japanese immigrants and a staple at dinner as an appetizer.

California mussels are a delicacy of the region, and have been a feature of the cooking for generations. There is evidence that Native American tribes consumed them up and down the California coast for centuries.

Crabs are a delicacy, and included in this are Alaskan king crab, red crab, yellow crab, and Dungeness crab. Californian and Oregonian sportsmen pursue the last three extensively using hoop nets, and prepare them in a multitude of ways.

Alaskan king crab, able to grow as large as 10 kg, is often served steamed for a whole table with lemon-butter sauce or put in chunks of salad with avocado, and native crabs are the base of dishes like the California roll, cioppino, a tomato-based fisherman&#x27;s stew, and Crab Louie, another kind of salad native to San Francisco.

Favorite grains are mainly wheat, and the region is known for sourdough bread. Cheeses of the region include Humboldt Fog, Monterey Jack, Cougar Gold and Teleme.

====Southwest and Southern California====
The states of the Four Corners (Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Utah) plus Nevada, Southern California, and West Texas make up a large chunk of the United States.

There is a distinct Hispanic accent to the cookery here, with each having cultural capitals in Albuquerque, Denver, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Santa Fe, San Diego, and Tucson.

For centuries, prior to California&#x27;s statehood in the 1850s, it was part of the Spanish Empire, namely Alta California (modern California), Santa Fe de Nuevo México (modern New Mexico), and Tejas (modern Texas). Today it is home of a large population of Native Americans, Hispanos, descendants of the American frontier, Asian Americans, and immigrants from Mexico and Latin America.

California, New Mexico, and Texas continue to hold their unique identities which is reflected in their distinct regional cuisines, the multiple cuisines of California, New Mexican cuisine, Texan cuisine, and Tex-Mex. Spanish is a commonly spoken secondary language here; the state of New Mexico has its own distinct dialect.

With the exception of Southern California, the signature meat is beef, since this is one of the two regions in which cowboys lived and modern cattle ranchers still eke out their living today. High-quality beefstock is a feature that has been present in the region for more than 200 years and the many cuts of beef are unique to the United States. These cuts of meat are different from the related Mexican cuisine over the border in that certain kind of offal, like &quot;lengua&quot; (tongue), &quot;cabeza&quot; (head), and &quot;tripas&quot; (tripe) are considered less desirable and are thus less emphasized. Typical cuts would include the ribs, brisket, sirloin, flank steak, skirt steak, and t-bone.
Historically, Spanish settlers that came to the region found it completely unsuitable to the mining operations that much older settlements in Mexico had to offer as their technology was not advanced enough to extract the silver that would later be found. They had no knowledge of the gold in California, which would not be found until 1848, and knew even less about the silver in Nevada, undiscovered until after the Civil War.

Instead, in order to make the pueblos prosper, they adapted the old rancho system of places like Andalusia in Spain and brought the earliest beefstock, among these were breeds that would go feral and become the Texas longhorn, and Navajo-Churro sheep, still used as breeding stock because they are easy to keep and well adapted to the extremely arid and hot climate, where temperatures easily exceed 38 °C.

Later, cowboys learned from their management practices, many of which still stand today, like the practical management of stock on horseback using the Western saddle.
Likewise, settlers learned the cooking methods of those who came before and local tribes as well, for example, portions of Arizona and New Mexico still use the aforementioned beehive shaped clay contraption called an &quot;horno&quot;, an outdoor wood-fired oven both Native American tribes like the Navajo and Spaniards used for roasting meat, maize, and baking bread.

Meats that see frequent use are elk meat, a favorite in crown roasts and burgers, and nearer the Mexican border rattlesnake, often skinned and stewed.

The taste for alcohol tends toward light and clean flavors found in tequila, a staple of this region since the days of the Wild West and a staple in the bartender&#x27;s arsenal for cocktails, especially in Las Vegas. In Utah, a state heavily populated by Mormons, alcohol is frowned upon by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints but still available in area bars in Salt Lake City, mainly consumed by the populations of Catholics and other Protestant denominations living there.

Introduction of agriculture was limited prior to the 20th century and the development of better irrigation techniques, but included the addition of peaches, a crop still celebrated by Native American tribes like the Havasupai, and oranges. Today in Arizona, Texas, and New Mexico the favored orange today is the Moro blood orange, which often finds its way into the local cuisine, like cakes and marmalade.

Pine nuts are a particular regional specialty and feature often in fine dining and cookies; in Nevada the Native American tribes that live there are by treaty given rights to exclusive harvest, and in New Mexico they reserve usage of the term &quot;piñon&quot; for certain species of indigenous pine nuts.

From Native Americans, Westerners learned the practice of eating cactus fruit from the myriad species of opuntia that occupy the Chihuahuan, Sonoran, and Mojave desert lands. In California, Spanish missionaries brought with them the mission fig, and today this fruit is a delicacy.
Cuisine in this region tends to have certain key ingredients: tomatoes, onions, black beans, pinto beans, rice, bell peppers, chile peppers, and cheese, in particular Monterey Jack, invented to the north in the Central Coast area of California in the 19th century and itself often further altered into pepper Jack where spicy jalapeño peppers are incorporated into the cheese to create a smoky taste.

Chili peppers play an important role in the cuisine, with a few native to the region. This is especially true with the region&#x27;s distinct New Mexico chile pepper, still grown by Hispanos of New Mexico and Puebloans the most sought after of which come from the Hatch valley, Albuquerque&#x27;s Central Rio Grande, Chimayo, and Pueblos.

In New Mexico, chile is eaten on a variety of foods, such as the green chile cheeseburger, made popular by fast food chains such as Blake&#x27;s Lotaburger. Indeed, even national fast food chains operating in the state, such as McDonald&#x27;s, offer locally grown chile on many of their menu items.

In the 20th century a few more recent additions have arrived like the poblano pepper, rocoto pepper, ghost pepper, thai chili pepper, and Korean pepper, the last three especially when discussing Southern California and its large population from East and South Asia.

Cornbread is consumed, however the recipe differs from ones in the East in that the batter is cooked in a cast-iron skillet.

Outdoor cooking is popular and still utilizes an old method settlers brought from the East with them, in which a cast-iron Dutch oven is covered with the coals of the fire and stacked or hung from a tripod: this is different from the earthenware pots of Mexico.

Tortillas are still made the traditional way here and form an important component of the spicy breakfast burrito, which contains ham, eggs, and salsa or &quot;pico de gallo&quot;. They are also used for regular burritos, which contains any combination of marinated meats, vegetables, and piquant chilis; smothered burritos, often both containing and topped with New Mexico chile sauces; quesadillas, a much loved grilled dish where cheese and other ingredients are stuffed between two tortillas and served by the slice; and steak fajitas, where sliced skirt steak sizzles in a skillet with caramelized onions.
Unlike Mexico, tortillas of this region also may incorporate vegetables like spinach into the flatbread dough to make wraps, which were invented in Southern California. Food here tends to use pungent spices and condiments, typically &quot;chili verde&quot; sauce, various kinds of hot sauce, sriracha sauce, chili powder, cayenne pepper, white pepper, cumin, paprika, onion powder, thyme and black pepper. Nowhere is this fiery mix of spice more evident than in the dishes chili con carne, a meaty stew, and cowboy beans, both of which are a feature of regional cookoffs.

Southern California has several additions like five spice powder, rosemary, curry powder, kimchi, and lemongrass, with many of these brought by recent immigration to the region and often a feature of Southern California&#x27;s fusion cuisine, popular in fine dining.

In Texas, the local barbecue is often entirely made up of beef brisket or large rib racks, where the meat is seasoned with a spice rub and cooked over coals of mesquite. In other portions of the state they smoke the meat and peppery sausages over high heat using pecan, apple, and oak wood and serve it with a side of pickled vegetables, a legacy of German and Czech settlers of the late 1800s.

California is home to Santa Maria–style barbecue, where the spices involved generally are black pepper, paprika, and garlic salt, and grill over the coals of coast live oak.
Native American additions may include Navajo frybread and corn on the cob, often roasted on the grill in its husk. A typical accompaniment or appetizer of all these states is the tortilla chip, which sometimes includes cornmeal from cultivars of corn that are blue or red in addition to the standard yellow of sweetcorn, and is served with salsa of varying hotness.

Tortilla chips also are an ingredient in the Tex Mex dish nachos, where these chips are loaded with any combination of ground beef, melted Monterey Jack, cheddar, or Colby cheese, guacamole, sour cream, and salsa, and Texas usually prefers a version of potato salad as a side dish.

For alcohol, a key ingredient is tequila: this spirit has been made on both sides of the US-Mexican border for generations, and in modern cuisine it is a must-have in a bartender&#x27;s arsenal as well as an addition to dishes for sauteeing.

Southern California is focused more towards the coast and has had more contact with immigration from the West Pacific and Baja California, in addition to having the international city of Los Angeles as its capital. Here, the prime mode of transportation is by car.

Drive through fast food was invented in this area, but so was the concept of the gourmet burger movement, giving birth to chains like In-N-Out Burger, with many variations of burgers including chili, multiple patties, avocado, special sauces, and Angus or wagyu beef. Common accompaniments include thick milkshakes in various flavors like mint, chocolate, peanut butter, vanilla, strawberry, and mango.

Smoothies are a common breakfast item made with fresh fruit juice, yogurt, and crushed ice. &quot;Agua fresca&quot;, a drink originated by Mexican immigrants, is a common hot-weather beverage sold in many supermarkets and at mom and pop stands, available in citrus, watermelon, and strawberry flavors; the California version usually served chilled without grain in it.
The weather in Southern California is such that the temperature rarely drops below in winter, thus, sun-loving crops like pistachios, kiwifruit, avocadoes, strawberries, and tomatoes are staple crops of the region, the last often dried in the sun and a feature of salads and sandwiches.

Olive oil is a staple cooking oil of the region and has been since the days of Junípero Serra; today the mission olive is a common tree growing in a Southern Californian&#x27;s back garden. As a crop olives are increasingly a signature of the region along with Valencia oranges and Meyer lemons.

Soybeans, bok choy, Japanese persimmon, thai basil, Napa cabbage, nori, mandarin oranges, water chestnuts, and mung beans are other crops brought to the region from East Asia and are common additions to salads as the emphasis on fresh produce in both Southern and Northern California is strong.

Other vegetables and herbs have a distinct Mediterranean flavor which would include oregano, basil, summer squash, eggplant, and broccoli, with all of the above extensively available at farmers&#x27; markets all around Southern California.

Naturally, salads native to Southern California tend to be hearty affairs, like Cobb salad and Chinese chicken salad, and dressings like green goddess and ranch are a staple.

California-style pizza tends to have disparate ingredients with an emphasis on vegetables, with any combination of chili oil, prawns, eggs, chicken, shiitake mushrooms, olives, bell pepper, goat cheese, and feta cheese. Peanut noodles tend to include a sweet dressing with lo mein noodles and chopped peanuts.

Fresh fish and shellfish in Southern California tends to be expensive in restaurants, but every year since the end of WWII, the Pismo clam festival has taken place where the local population takes a large species of clam and bakes, stuffs, and roasts it as it is a regional delicacy.

Fishing for pacific species of octopus and the Humboldt squid are common, and both are a feature of East Asian and other L.A. fish markets. Lingcod is a coveted regional fish that is often caught in the autumn off the coast of San Diego and in the Channel Islands and often served baked. California sheephead are often grilled and are much sought after by spear fishermen and the immigrant Chinese population, in which case it is basket steamed.

Most revered of all in recent years is the California spiny lobster, a beast that can grow to 44 lb, and is a delicacy that now rivals the fishery for Dungeness crab in its importance.

===Pacific and Hawaiian cuisine===
Hawaii is often considered to be one of the most culturally diverse U.S. states, as well as being the only state with an Asian-majority population and one of the few places where United States territory extends into the tropics. As a result, Hawaiian cuisine borrows elements of a variety of cuisines, particularly those of Asian and Pacific-rim cultures, as well as traditional native Hawaiian and a few additions from the American mainland.

American influence in the last 150 years has brought cattle, goats, and sheep to the islands, introducing cheese, butter, and yogurt products, as well as crops like red cabbage.

Major Asian and Polynesian influences on modern Hawaiian cuisine are from Japan, Korea, Vietnam, China (especially near the Pearl River delta,) Samoa, and the Philippines. From Japan, the concept of serving raw fish as a meal with rice was introduced, as was soft tofu, setting the stage for the popular dish called poke.

From Korea, immigrants to Hawaii brought a love of spicy garlic marinades for meat and &quot;kimchi&quot;. From China, their version of &quot;char siu baau&quot; became modern &quot;manapua&quot;, a type of steamed pork bun with a spicy filling.

Filipinos brought vinegar, &quot;bagoong&quot;, and &quot;lumpia&quot;, and during the 20th century immigrants from American Samoa brought the open pit fire &quot;umu&quot; and the Vietnamese introduced lemongrass and fish sauce.

Each East Asian culture brought several different kinds of noodles, including udon, ramen, &quot;mei fun&quot;, and &quot;pho&quot;, and today these are common lunchtime meals.

Much of this cuisine mixes and melts into traditions like the &quot;lu&#x27;au&quot;, whose traditional elaborate fare was once the prerogative of kings and queens but is today the subject of parties for both tourists and also private parties for the &quot;‘ohana&quot; (meaning family and close friends.)

Traditionally, women and men ate separately under the Hawaiian &quot;kapu&quot; system, a system of religious beliefs that honored the Hawaiian gods similar to the Maori &quot;tapu&quot; system, though in this case had some specific prohibitions towards females eating things like coconut, pork, turtle meat, and bananas as these were considered parts of the male gods. Punishment for violation could be severe, as a woman might endanger a man&#x27;s &quot;mana&quot;, or soul, by eating with him or otherwise by eating the forbidden food because doing so dishonored the male gods.

As the system broke down after 1810, introductions of foods from laborers on plantations began to be included at feasts and much cross pollination occurred, where Asian foodstuffs mixed with Polynesian foodstuffs like breadfruit, kukui nuts, and purple sweet potatoes.

Some notable Hawaiian fare includes seared ahi tuna, &quot;opakapaka&quot; (snapper) with passionfruit, Hawaiian island-raised lamb, beef and meat products, Hawaiian plate lunch, and Molokai shrimp. Seafood traditionally is caught fresh in Hawaiian waters, and particular delicacies are &quot;ula poni&quot;, &quot;papaikualoa&quot;, &quot;‘opihi&quot;, and &quot;‘opihi malihini&quot;, better known as Hawaiian spiny lobster, Kona crab, Hawaiian limpet, and abalone, the last brought over with Japanese immigrants.

Some cuisine also incorporates a broad variety of produce and locally grown agricultural products, including tomatoes, sweet Maui onions, taro, and macadamia nuts. Tropical fruits also play an important role in the cuisine as a flavoring in cocktails and in desserts, including local cultivars of bananas, sweetsop, mangoes, lychee, coconuts, papayas, and &quot;lilikoi&quot; (passionfruit). Pineapples have been an island staple since the 19th century and figure into many marinades and drinks.

===Common dishes found on a regional level===

==Ethnicity-specific and immigrant influence==

The influence of ethnicity-specific cuisines like Italian cuisine and Mexican cuisine was present in the United States by World War I. There are recipes for Chilean meat pies, chicken chop suey, chow mein, Mexican pork pastries and Italian meatballs going back to at least the 1930s, but many of the recipes were Anglicized and they appeared relatively infrequently compared to Northern European recipes.

19th-century cookbooks bear evidence of diverse influences with some including recipes like Indian pickle, Italian pork and various curries. 19th-century literature shows knowledge of Jewish, Russian, Italian, Chinese and Greek-American cuisines, and foreign cookbooks continued to grow more detailed through World War I including recipes like Peruvian chicken, Mexican enchiladas, Chilean corn pudding and Hindustan chicken curry.

Louise Rice, author of &quot;Dainty Dishes from Foreign Lands&quot; describes the recipes in her book as &quot;not wholly vegetarian&quot; though noting at the time of publication in 1911 that most of the recipes would likely be new to average American cooks and likely contain higher proportions of vegetables to meat. She includes Italian pasta recipes like macaroni in milk, soups and polentas and German recipes like liver dumplings called &quot;Leberknödel&quot; and a variation of Sauerbraten.

The demand for ethnic foods in the United States reflects the nation&#x27;s changing diversity as well as its development over time. According to the National Restaurant Association, 
Restaurant industry sales are expected to reach a record high of $476 billion in 2005, an increase of 4.9 percent over 2004... Driven by consumer demand, the ethnic food market reached record sales in 2002, and has emerged as the fastest growing category in the food and beverage product sector, according to USBX Advisory Services. Minorities in the U.S. spend a combined $142 billion on food and by 2010, America&#x27;s ethnic population is expected to grow by 40 percent.

A movement began during the 1980s among popular leading chefs to reclaim America&#x27;s ethnic foods within its regional traditions, where these trends originated. One of the earliest was Paul Prudhomme, who in 1984 began the introduction of his influential cookbook, &quot;Paul Prodhomme&#x27;s Louisiana Kitchen&quot;, by describing the over 200-year history of Creole and Cajun cooking; he aims to &quot;preserve and expand the Louisiana tradition.&quot; Prodhomme&#x27;s success quickly inspired other chefs. Norman Van Aken embraced a Floridian type cuisine fused with many ethnic and globalized elements in his &quot;Feast of Sunlight&quot; cookbook in 1988. California became swept up in the movement, then seemingly started to lead the trend itself, in, for example, the popular restaurant Chez Panisse in Berkeley.

Examples of the Chez Panisse phenomenon, chefs who embraced a new globalized cuisine, were celebrity chefs like Jeremiah Tower and Wolfgang Puck, both former colleagues at the restaurant. Puck went on to describe his belief in contemporary, new style American cuisine in the introduction to &quot;The Wolfgang Puck Cookbook&quot;:

Another major breakthrough, whose originators were once thought to be crazy, is the mixing of ethnic cuisines. It is not at all uncommon to find raw fish listed next to tortillas on the same menu. Ethnic crossovers also occur when distinct elements meet in a single recipe. This country is, after all, a huge melting pot. Why should its cooking not illustrate the American transformation of diversity into unity?
Puck&#x27;s former colleague, Jeremiah Tower became synonymous with California Cuisine and the overall American culinary revolution. Meanwhile, the restaurant that inspired both Puck and Tower became a distinguished establishment, popularizing its so called &quot;mantra&quot; in its book by Paul Bertolli and owner Alice Waters, &quot;Chez Panisse Cooking&quot;, in 1988. Published well after the restaurants&#x27; founding in 1971, this new cookbook from the restaurant seemed to perfect the idea and philosophy that had developed over the years. The book embraced America&#x27;s natural bounty, specifically that of California, while containing recipes that reflected Bertoli and Waters&#x27; appreciation of both northern Italian and French style foods.

===Early ethnic influences===

While the earliest cuisine of the United States was influenced by Native Americans, the thirteen colonies, or the antebellum South, the overall culture of the nation, its gastronomy and the growing culinary arts became ever more influenced by its changing ethnic mix and immigrant patterns from the 18th and 19th centuries unto the present. Some of the ethnic groups that continued to influence the cuisine were here in prior years; others arrived more numerously during &quot;The Great Transatlantic Migration&quot; (of 1870–1914) or other mass migrations.

Some of the ethnic influences could be found across the nation after the American Civil War and into the continental expansion for most of the 19th century. Ethnic influences already in the nation at that time would include the following groups and their respective cuisines:
* Select nationalities of Europe and the respective developments from early modern European cuisine of the colonial age:
** British-Americans and on-going developments in New England cuisine, the national traditions founded in the cuisine of the original thirteen colonies, The Cuisine of the Southern United States, and many aspects of other regional cuisine.
** Spanish Americans and early modern Spanish cuisine, as well as Basque-Americans and Basque cuisine.
** Early German-American or Pennsylvania Dutch and Pennsylvania Dutch cuisine
** French Americans and their New World regional identities such as:
*** Acadian
*** Cajun and Cajun cuisine
** Louisiana Creole and Louisiana Creole cuisine. Louisiana Creole (also called French Créole) refers to native-born people of the New Orleans area who are descended from the Colonial French and Spanish settlers of Colonial French Louisiana, before it became part of the United States in 1803 with the Louisiana Purchase.
* The various ethnicities originating from the early gastronomy and cuisines of the New World, Latin American cuisine, and North American cuisine:
** Native Americans in the United States and Native American cuisine
** African Americans and Soul food.
** Puerto Rican cuisine
** Mexican Americans and Mexican-American cuisine; as well as related regional cuisines:
*** Tex-Mex (regional Texas and Mexican fusion)
*** Some aspects of &quot;Southwestern cuisine&quot;.
** New Mexican cuisine from New Mexico and the historical region of Santa Fe de Nuevo México, and now ethnically tied to the Pueblos and Hispanos of New Mexico.

===Later ethnic and immigrant influence===

Mass migrations of immigrants to the United States came over time. Historians identify several waves of migration to the United States: one from 1815 to 1860, in which some five million English, Irish, German, Scandinavian, and others from northwestern Europe came to the United States; one from 1865 to 1890, in which some 10 million immigrants, also mainly from northwestern Europe, settled; and a third from 1890 to 1914, in which 15 million immigrants, mainly from central, eastern, and southern Europe (many Austrian, Hungarian, Turkish, Lithuanian, Russian, Jewish, Greek, Italian, and Romanian) settled in the United States.

Together with earlier arrivals to the United States (including the indigenous Native Americans, Hispanic and Latino Americans, particularly in the West, Southwest, and Texas; African Americans who came to the United States in the Atlantic slave trade; and early colonial migrants from Europe), these new waves of immigrants had a profound impact on national or regional cuisine. Some of these more prominent groups include the following:
* Albanian Americans—Albanian cuisine
* Arab Americans, particularly Lebanese Americans (the largest ethnic Arab group in the United States)—Arab cuisine, Lebanese cuisine
* Argentine Americans—Argentine cuisine
* Armenian Americans—Armenian cuisine
* Brazilian Americans—Brazilian cuisine
* Cambodian Americans—Cambodian cuisine
* Chinese Americans—American Chinese cuisine, Chinese cuisine
* Colombian Americans—Colombian cuisine
* Cuban Americans—Cuban cuisine
* Dominican Americans—Dominican Republic cuisine
* Dutch Americans—Dutch cuisine
* Ethiopian Americans—Eritrean Americans: Ethiopian cuisine, Eritrean cuisine in Los Angeles, Washington, D.C., Denver, New York
* Filipino Americans—Filipino cuisine, Filipino-American cuisine
* French Americans—French cuisine
* German Americans—German cuisine (the Pennsylvania Dutch, although descended from Germans, arrived earlier than the bulk of German migrants and have distinct culinary traditions)
* Greek Americans—Greek-American cuisine, Greek cuisine, Mediterranean cuisine
* Guatemalan Americans—Guatemalan cuisine
* Haitian Americans—Haitian cuisine
* Honduran Americans—Honduran cuisine
* Hungarian Americans—Hungarian cuisine
* Indian Americans—Indian cuisine
* Irish Americans—Irish cuisine
* Italian Americans—Italian-American cuisine, Italian cuisine
* Japanese Americans—Japanese cuisine, with influences on the Hawaiian cuisine
* Jewish Americans—Jewish cuisine, with particular influence on New York City cuisine
* Korean Americans—Korean cuisine
* Lithuanian Americans—Lithuanian cuisine, Midwest
* Nicaraguan American—Nicaraguan cuisine
* Nigerian Americans—Nigerian cuisine
* Pakistani Americans—Pakistani cuisine
* Peruvian Americans—Peruvian cuisine
* Polish Americans—Polish cuisine, with particular impact on Midwest
* Polynesian Americans—Hawaiian cuisine
* Portuguese Americans—Portuguese cuisine
* Romanian Americans—Romanian cuisine
* Russian Americans—Russian cuisine, with particular impact on Midwest
* Salvadoran Americans—Salvadoran cuisine
* Scottish Americans—Scottish cuisine
* Spanish Americans—Spanish cuisine
* Thai Americans—Thai cuisine
* Turkish Americans—Turkish cuisine, Balkan cuisine
* Venezuelan Americans—Venezuelan cuisine
* Vietnamese Americans—Vietnamese cuisine
* West Indian Americans—Caribbean cuisine, Jamaican cuisine, Trinidad and Tobago cuisine, Barbadian cuisine, Bahamian cuisine

Italian, Mexican and Chinese (Cantonese) cuisines have indeed joined the mainstream. These three cuisines have become so ingrained in the American culture that they are no longer foreign to the American palate. According to the study, more than nine out of 10 consumers are familiar with and have tried these foods, and about half report eating them frequently. The research also indicates that Italian, Mexican and Chinese (Cantonese) have become so adapted to such an extent that &quot;authenticity&quot; is no longer a concern to customers.
Contributions from these ethnic foods have become as common as traditional &quot;American&quot; fares such as hot dogs, hamburgers, beef steak, which are derived from German cuisine, (chicken-fried steak, for example, is a variation on German schnitzel), cherry pie, Coca-Cola, milkshakes, fried chicken (Fried chicken is of English, Scottish, and African influence), Pepsi, Dr Pepper and so on. Nowadays, Americans also have a ubiquitous consumption of foods like pizza and pasta, tacos and burritos to &quot;General Tso&#x27;s chicken&quot; and fortune cookies. Fascination with these and other ethnic foods may also vary with region.

==Other popular foods==
===Fast food===

The United States has a large fast food industry. Major American fast food chains include McDonald&#x27;s, Burger King, Wendy&#x27;s, Domino&#x27;s, Pizza Hut, KFC, Popeyes, Subway, Taco Bell, Arby&#x27;s, Starbucks, Dunkin&#x27; Donuts, White Castle, In-N-Out Burger, Sonic Drive-In, Chick-fil-A, Church&#x27;s Chicken, and Raising Cane&#x27;s, among numerous other multinational, national, regional, and local chains. Traditional American fast food items are hamburgers, french fries, breaded chicken, and pizza, though several chains also offer items from different cuisines modified for American palates, such as tacos, pasta, and stir-fry. Many American fast food chains have expanded abroad to other countries, typically offering standard American fare alongside items adapted to appeal to regional tastes within their markets.

===Desserts===

A classic American dessert is apple pie. Some other famous American desserts are banana split, Boston cream pie, key lime pie, and bananas foster. Other famous American desserts are chocolate chip cookies, pecan pie, carrot cake, banana pudding, S&#x27;more, black and white cookies, pumpkin pie, coconut cake, funnel cake, brownies and red velvet cake.

==Influential figures and American cuisine on television==

American chefs have been influential both in the food industry and in popular culture. Some important 19th-century American chefs include Charles Ranhofer of Delmonico&#x27;s Restaurant in New York, and Bob Payton, who is credited with bringing American-style pizza to the UK. Later, chefs Charles Scotto, Louis Pacquet, John Massironi were founded the American Culinary Federation in 1930, taking after similar organizations across Europe. In the 1940s, Chef James Beard hosted the first nationally televised cooking show &quot;I Love to Eat.&quot; His name is also carried by the foundation and prestigious cooking award recognizing excellence in the American cooking community. Since Beard, many chefs and cooking personalities have taken to television, and the success of the Cooking Channel and Food Network have contributed to the popularity of American cuisine. In 1946, the Culinary Institute of America was founded by Katharine Angel and Frances Roth. This would become the United States&#x27; most prestigious culinary school, where many of the most talented American chefs would study prior to successful careers. The American Culinary community has grown due to both restaurants and media, through the work of many talented chefs.

=== Influential figures ===
Notable American restaurant chefs include Samin Nosrat (Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat), Thomas Keller (The French Laundry), Charlie Trotter (Trotter&#x27;s), Grant Achatz (Alinea), Alfred Portale (Portale), Paul Prudhomme (K-Paul&#x27;s), Paul Bertolli (Oliveto), Jonathan Waxman (Barbuto), Mark Peel (Campanile), Frank Stitt (Bottega), Alice Waters (Chez Panisse), Wolfgang Puck (Spago), Patrick O&#x27;Connell (The Inn), Eric Ripert (Le Bernardin), Todd English (Olives) and Anthony Bourdain (Les Halles). Many of these chefs have received much critical acclaim, as Keller, Achatz, Ripert and O&#x27;Connell have all received three Michelin stars, the highest distinction which a restaurant can be given. Keller was given this award for The French Laundry, Achatz for Alinea, Ripert for Le Bernardin and O&#x27;Connell for The Inn at Little Washington.

Celebrity chefs have also helped to expand the culinary arts into popular culture, with chefs such as David Chang (Chef&#x27;s Table), Alton Brown (Iron Chef America), Emeril Lagasse (Emeril Live), Cat Cora (Iron Chef America), Erik Davidson (Phat Erik&#x27;s), Michael Symon (The Chew), Bobby Flay (Beat Bobby Flay), Ina Garten (Barefoot Contessa) and Guy Fieri (Diners, Drive-ins and Dives). Many of these celebrity chefs, such as David Chang, Emeril Lagasse and Bobby Flay began their careers in restaurants before branching out into television. The shows have a wide variety of formats, including cooking competitions, such as Iron Chef, documentaries, such as Anthony Bourdain&#x27;s &quot;Parts Unknown&quot;, shows that take a look into restaurants, as Chef&#x27;s Table does, and shows that teach cooking. The success of food television specifically in the United States has helped American Cuisine grow around the world.

=== Regional cuisine chefs ===
Regional chefs are emerging as localized celebrity chefs with growing broader appeal, such as Peter Merriman (Hawaii Regional Cuisine), Roy Choi (Korean American Cuisine), Jerry Traunfeld, Alan Wong (Pacific Rim cuisine), Rick Bayless and Daniela Soto-Innes (traditional Mexican cuisine with modern interpretations), Norman Van Aken (New World Cuisine – fusion Latin, Caribbean, Asian, African and American), and Mark Miller (American Southwest cuisine).

==See also==

* Cuisine of the Americas
** Indigenous cuisine of the Americas
* Soul food

===Types===
* American wine

===Regional===
* Cuisine of California
* Cuisine of Minnesota 
* Cuisine of New England
* Cuisine of New York City
* Cuisine of the Southern United States
** Cuisine of Atlanta
** Cuisine of Houston
** Cuisine of Kentucky
* Tex-Mex cuisine

===Ethnic===
* American Chinese cuisine
* Mexican-American cuisine
* Italian-American cuisine
* Greek-American cuisine
* Puerto Rican cuisine

===Other===
* &quot;High on the Hog: How African American Cuisine Transformed America&quot;
* Cuisine of Antebellum America
* List of American desserts
* List of American breads
** Bread in American cuisine
* List of American foods
* List of American regional and fusion cuisines
* List of American breakfast foods
* Tlingit cuisine
* Cuisine of the Americas
* Cuisine of the Pennsylvania Dutch
* Cuisine of the Southern United States
* American tea culture

==References==
===Works cited===
* .
* .
* Fried, Stephen. &quot;Appetite for America: How Visionary Businessman Fred Harvey Built a Railroad Hospitality Empire That Civilized the Wild West&quot; (Bantam; 2010)
* .
* .
* .
* 
* .
* 
* Veit, Helen Zoe. &quot;Modern Food, Moral Food: Self-Control, Science, and the Rise of Modern American Eating in the Early Twentieth Century&quot; (2013)

== Further reading ==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40578" start="0" end="16" title="American cuisine" label="American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="86" end="99" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q579316" start="313" end="321" title="European cuisine" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492088" start="323" end="338" title="Indigenous cuisine of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q555997" start="340" end="349" title="soul food" label="soul food"/>
<link wikidata="Q969579" start="380" end="385" title="Cajun cuisine" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645076" start="387" end="403" title="Louisiana Creole cuisine" label="Louisiana Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203300" start="405" end="423" title="Cuisine of the Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105044417" start="425" end="440" title="Mormon foodways" label="Mormon foodways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708243" start="442" end="447" title="Texan cuisine" label="Texan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29359" start="449" end="456" title="Tex-Mex" label="Tex-Mex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010123" start="458" end="469" title="New Mexican cuisine" label="New Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810748" start="475" end="482" title="Tlingit cuisine" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743373" start="529" end="545" title="American Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese American"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="547" end="562" title="German Americans#German-American influence" label="German American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699131" start="564" end="580" title="Italian-American cuisine" label="Italian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601734" start="582" end="596" title="Greek-American cuisine" label="Greek American"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088370" start="598" end="613" title="American Jewish cuisine" label="Jewish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q105896860" start="619" end="635" title="Mexican-American cuisine" label="Mexican American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="820" end="836" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q767253" start="961" end="999" title="Columbian exchange" label="mix of new world and Old World cookery"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="1763" end="1772" title="milkshake" label="milkshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859544" start="1775" end="1783" title="Barbecue in the United States" label="barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q300472" start="1805" end="1810" title="Frying" label="fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="1932" end="1937" title="pizza" label="pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q181055" start="1939" end="1946" title="hot dog" label="hot dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160522" start="2036" end="2041" title="gumbo" label="gumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068892" start="2047" end="2058" title="cheesesteak" label="cheesesteak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200953" start="2134" end="2140" title="Turkey as food" label="turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642692" start="2144" end="2163" title="Thanksgiving dinner" label="Thanksgiving dinner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2167" end="2183" title="Christmas dinner#United States" label="Christmas dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="2229" end="2238" title="fast food" label="fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q154383" start="2251" end="2259" title="take-out" label="take-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310583" start="2365" end="2379" title="celebrity chef" label="celebrity chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478954" start="3048" end="3061" title="Three Sisters (agriculture)" label="Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="3079" end="3083" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="3086" end="3091" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="3097" end="3103" title="Cucurbita" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210370" start="3246" end="3262" title="William Bradford (governor)" label="William Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q711498" start="3279" end="3286" title="Squanto" label="Squanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935508" start="3477" end="3495" title="companion planting" label="companion planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="3498" end="3507" title="Wild game" label="Wild game"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="3628" end="3636" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="3762" end="3768" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322019" start="3829" end="3837" title="Wabanaki Confederacy" label="Wabanaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="3946" end="3953" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q55290" start="3957" end="3964" title="Catawba people" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="Q289435" start="3973" end="3989" title="Common snapping turtle" label="snapping turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q147267" start="4012" end="4019" title="Virginia opossum" label="possums"/>
<link wikidata="Q130097" start="4155" end="4163" title="pemmican" label="pemmican"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="4261" end="4272" title="Game (hunting)" label="hunted game"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="4278" end="4283" title="biome" label="biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="4364" end="4370" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="4375" end="4381" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="4462" end="4472" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="4477" end="4484" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="4810" end="4816" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4853" end="4863" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="4872" end="4886" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4920" end="4933" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="4935" end="4939" title="Fish as food" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="4944" end="4953" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="5198" end="5206" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q749287" start="5210" end="5223" title="Raritan River" label="Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139927" start="5373" end="5376" title="Cod (food)" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="5413" end="5423" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="5437" end="5448" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="5477" end="5488" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071815" start="5490" end="5505" title="winter flounder" label="winter flounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577" start="5516" end="5524" title="flatfish" label="flatfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q659283" start="5554" end="5561" title="Alewife (fish)" label="alewife"/>
<link wikidata="Q545697" start="5563" end="5567" title="American shad" label="shad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396858" start="5569" end="5585" title="Atlantic herring" label="Atlantic herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q756893" start="5591" end="5608" title="Atlantic menhaden" label="Atlantic menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031462" start="5644" end="5661" title="Atlantic sturgeon" label="Atlantic sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216634" start="5666" end="5670" title="drum (fish)" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q592876" start="5732" end="5746" title="white sturgeon" label="white sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552149" start="5751" end="5765" title="green sturgeon" label="green sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409242" start="5767" end="5774" title="Oily fish" label="olachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q133325" start="5812" end="5843" title="Oncorhynchus" label="&amp;quot;Oncorhynchus&amp;quot; family"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="5858" end="5871" title="rainbow trout" label="rainbow trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717060" start="5873" end="5888" title="cutthroat trout" label="cutthroat trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q934874" start="5890" end="5901" title="coho salmon" label="coho salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330205" start="5903" end="5917" title="kokanee salmon" label="kokanee salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="5923" end="5937" title="chinook salmon" label="chinook salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="5987" end="6002" title="Lewis and Clark" label="Lewis and Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887539" start="6030" end="6050" title="Columbia River Basin" label="Columbia River Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="6180" end="6198" title="Pacific gray whale" label="Pacific gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="6204" end="6213" title="Humpback whale" label="humpbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886240" start="6289" end="6294" title="Makah" label="Makah"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="6329" end="6336" title="Catfish" label="Catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504001" start="6445" end="6451" title="Shrimp (food)" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="6453" end="6460" title="Lobster meat" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790289" start="6462" end="6470" title="Crayfish (food)" label="crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936093" start="6476" end="6490" title="dungeness crab" label="dungeness crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q844839" start="6533" end="6543" title="Callinectes sapidus" label="blue crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857439" start="6581" end="6588" title="abalone" label="abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068209" start="6593" end="6600" title="geoduck" label="geoduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017199" start="6648" end="6657" title="Atlantic surf clam" label="surf clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279087" start="6659" end="6665" title="quahog" label="quahog"/>
<link wikidata="Q20958" start="6675" end="6690" title="soft-shell clam" label="soft-shell clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="6692" end="6698" title="Oyster" label="Oyster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6735" end="6741" title="Mussel#As food" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27935" start="6747" end="6758" title="Common periwinkle" label="periwinkles"/>
<link wikidata="Q264619" start="6939" end="6947" title="Grilling" label="Grilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q22847" start="6966" end="6976" title="Spit roast" label="Spit roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q20136" start="7039" end="7053" title="root vegetable" label="root vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="7224" end="7238" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790530" start="7251" end="7264" title="stone boiling" label="stone boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="7470" end="7475" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829179" start="7496" end="7501" title="horno" label="horno"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="7516" end="7523" title="Conquistadors" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286140" start="7550" end="7558" title="cornmeal" label="cornmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q473594" start="7593" end="7602" title="Earth oven" label="pit ovens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="7970" end="7974" title="corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007443" start="8013" end="8021" title="clambake" label="clambake"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="8065" end="8100" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European settlement of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137163" start="8222" end="8230" title="History of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337543" start="8232" end="8244" title="History of Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137724" start="8246" end="8259" title="History of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="8580" end="8591" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q918277" start="8691" end="8710" title="British cuisine" label="consumed in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068545" start="8715" end="8722" title="Irish cuisine" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="9097" end="9126" title="French cuisine" label="French cuisine/French cookery"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="9145" end="9153" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="9166" end="9180" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797234" start="9288" end="9326" title="The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy" label="The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy"/>
<link wikidata="Q531876" start="9343" end="9356" title="Hannah Glasse" label="Hannah Glasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="9780" end="9787" title="bananas" label="bananas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="9789" end="9795" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="9798" end="9810" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="9812" end="9816" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="9822" end="9828" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q381416" start="9932" end="9948" title="Southern cuisine" label="Southern cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723587" start="9955" end="9980" title="expulsion of the Acadians" label="expulsion of the Acadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q969579" start="10059" end="10070" title="Cajun cuisine" label="in the diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="10288" end="10299" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="10311" end="10325" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="10372" end="10386" title="Recife, Brazil" label="Recife, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="10395" end="10406" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="10473" end="10481" title="molasses" label="molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q83376" start="10483" end="10486" title="rum" label="rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="10488" end="10493" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="10495" end="10502" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="10504" end="10513" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q201959" start="10515" end="10522" title="Capsicum" label="peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="10524" end="10528" title="corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="10530" end="10536" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175531" start="10540" end="10552" title="kidney beans" label="kidney beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987371" start="10554" end="10566" title="string beans" label="string beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200953" start="10571" end="10577" title="turkey (food)" label="turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="10627" end="10640" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="10961" end="10970" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841761" start="10993" end="11007" title="almond pudding" label="almond pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q625825" start="11014" end="11025" title="egg custard" label="egg custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076110" start="11038" end="11044" title="kosher food" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="11142" end="11154" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="11393" end="11404" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261477" start="11500" end="11512" title="English cuisine" label="from England"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="11626" end="11635" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="12274" end="12279" title="Wheat" label="Wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q426103" start="12467" end="12477" title="Johnnycake" label="Johnnycake"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="12670" end="12677" title="American bison" label="buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="12817" end="12821" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="12824" end="12828" title="stew" label="stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q131419" start="12831" end="12838" title="sausage" label="sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360264" start="12841" end="12844" title="pie" label="pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="12937" end="12943" title="mutton" label="mutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="12950" end="12957" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="12961" end="12968" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="12991" end="12996" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="13105" end="13110" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="13189" end="13205" title="animal husbandry" label="animal husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="13532" end="13535" title="Fat" label="Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="13541" end="13544" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194601" start="13709" end="13719" title="shortening" label="shortening"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="13731" end="13735" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q11106" start="13809" end="13814" title="bacon" label="bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="13972" end="13978" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="14028" end="14047" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="14052" end="14058" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="14122" end="14132" title="American Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83376" start="14178" end="14181" title="rum" label="rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="14186" end="14190" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="14355" end="14363" title="molasses" label="molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="14498" end="14505" title="whiskey" label="whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="14546" end="14556" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="14939" end="14943" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="14948" end="14954" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569779" start="15029" end="15046" title="southern colonies" label="southern colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="15109" end="15117" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816510" start="15126" end="15142" title="Atlantic coastal plain" label="coastal lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="15247" end="15254" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987371" start="15256" end="15268" title="string beans" label="string beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="15270" end="15274" title="corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="15276" end="15284" title="Cucurbita" label="squashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="15295" end="15301" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q80973" start="15342" end="15351" title="breakfast" label="breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269628" start="15889" end="15910" title="Rocky Mountain oyster" label="Rocky Mountain oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q147651" start="16010" end="16023" title="peanut butter" label="peanut butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369093" start="16050" end="16082" title="peanut butter and jelly sandwich" label="peanut butter and jelly sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q165112" start="16131" end="16138" title="popcorn" label="popcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="16140" end="16144" title="cola" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q108798661" start="16146" end="16159" title="fried chicken" label="fried chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108866" start="16161" end="16170" title="cornbread" label="cornbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q207220" start="16183" end="16189" title="muffin" label="muffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207220" start="16203" end="16219" title="poppyseed muffin" label="poppyseed muffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q503129" start="16225" end="16233" title="Chocolate brownie" label="brownies"/>
<link wikidata="Q783770" start="16296" end="16310" title="Agriculture in the United States" label="American farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="16365" end="16369" title="Edible salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="16371" end="16377" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="16379" end="16384" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="16390" end="16401" title="baking soda" label="baking soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="16475" end="16480" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="16487" end="16492" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405484" start="16544" end="16550" title="Salmon as food" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="16663" end="16669" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="16813" end="16821" title="molasses" label="molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="16827" end="16834" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="16845" end="16849" title="corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q864693" start="16882" end="16889" title="Chicken as food" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="16905" end="16910" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="16930" end="16935" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="16952" end="16959" title="ferment" label="ferment"/>
<link wikidata="Q618322" start="16970" end="16989" title="apple cider vinegar" label="apple cider vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="16991" end="16996" title="Fruit" label="Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="17002" end="17011" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="17018" end="17027" title="food preservation" label="preserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="17069" end="17077" title="pickling" label="pickling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="17109" end="17117" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q259550" start="17158" end="17170" title="apple butter" label="apple butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q426103" start="17207" end="17217" title="johnnycake" label="johnnycake"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="17241" end="17250" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987371" start="17315" end="17326" title="green beans" label="green beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q267129" start="17341" end="17362" title="chicken and dumplings" label="chicken and dumplings"/>
<link wikidata="Q170486" start="17370" end="17373" title="ham" label="ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="17382" end="17387" title="beans" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q165437" start="17392" end="17397" title="beets" label="beets"/>
<link wikidata="Q85803497" start="17399" end="17414" title="stewed tomatoes" label="stewed tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q945475" start="17430" end="17438" title="coleslaw" label="coleslaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="17456" end="17463" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366160" start="17502" end="17510" title="scrapple" label="scrapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="17518" end="17536" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="17601" end="17608" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286140" start="17647" end="17656" title="corn meal" label="corn meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186817" start="17682" end="17690" title="porridge" label="porridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="17875" end="17883" title="biscuits" label="biscuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474197" start="18327" end="18337" title="muckraking" label="muckraking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677667" start="18518" end="18541" title="Harvey Washington Wiley" label="Harvey Washington Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="18560" end="18590" title="U.S. Department of Agriculture" label="U.S. Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029367" start="18738" end="18760" title="Pure Food and Drug Act" label="Pure Food and Drug Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="18810" end="18813" title="FDA" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q174941" start="18832" end="18886" title="Good Housekeeping Seal" label="laboratories of &amp;quot;Good Housekeeping&amp;quot; Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="18912" end="18924" title="Progressives" label="Progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="19238" end="19259" title="Vitamin" label="vitamins and minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q902318" start="19291" end="19303" title="iodized salt" label="iodized salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121266" start="19355" end="19364" title="Food fortification" label="fortified"/>
<link wikidata="Q143263" start="19434" end="19443" title="Ergosterol" label="viosterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83187" start="19486" end="19506" title="Thiamine" label="thiamin (vitamin B1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121266" start="19570" end="19585" title="Food fortification" label="enriching bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="19691" end="19700" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406005" start="19757" end="19766" title="salt pork" label="salt pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="19862" end="19880" title="Appalachian region" label="Appalachian region"/>
<link wikidata="Q162075" start="19936" end="19944" title="pokeweed" label="pokeweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q30024" start="19946" end="19955" title="dandelion" label="dandelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360264" start="20059" end="20062" title="Pie" label="Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535" start="20209" end="20216" title="rhubarb" label="rhubarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="20221" end="20231" title="strawberry" label="strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="20243" end="20248" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="20250" end="20256" title="cherry" label="cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="20258" end="20268" title="blackberry" label="blackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="20270" end="20279" title="blueberry" label="blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131448" start="20281" end="20291" title="elderberry" label="elderberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="20296" end="20301" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="20315" end="20320" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856866" start="20358" end="20363" title="Bread in American cuisine" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="20365" end="20370" title="dairy" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066260" start="20405" end="20418" title="Tomato soup" label="tomato bisque"/>
<link wikidata="Q13228" start="20442" end="20447" title="cream" label="cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987371" start="20474" end="20486" title="string beans" label="string beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q167893" start="20491" end="20501" title="mayonnaise" label="mayonnaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231410" start="20538" end="20550" title="delicatessen" label="delicatessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="20669" end="20678" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q152964" start="20704" end="20716" title="potato salad" label="potato salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221624" start="20725" end="20736" title="schmierkase" label="schmierkase"/>
<link wikidata="Q327316" start="20750" end="20761" title="wienerwurst" label="wienerwurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077995" start="20779" end="20786" title="Herring as food" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="20797" end="20804" title="Pickling" label="pickles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="20814" end="20822" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465619" start="20850" end="20867" title="History of the Jews in the United States" label="Jewish immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133209" start="20928" end="20939" title="corned beef" label="corned beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347754" start="20962" end="20970" title="pastrami" label="pastrami"/>
<link wikidata="Q387405" start="20972" end="20986" title="Ice cream soda" label="Ice cream soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166154" start="21387" end="21403" title="Automatic milking" label="milking machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="21430" end="21444" title="Pasteurization" label="Pasteurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165158" start="21446" end="21460" title="Homogenization (chemistry)" label="homogenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417087" start="21462" end="21473" title="Evaporated milk" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830455" start="21475" end="21487" title="Condensed milk" label="condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="21493" end="21506" title="refrigeration" label="refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="21659" end="21670" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q387405" start="21759" end="21774" title="root beer float" label="root beer float"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="21783" end="21792" title="milkshake" label="milkshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="21795" end="21799" title="Pork" label="Pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q72827" start="21882" end="21886" title="Lard" label="Lard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495409" start="22079" end="22090" title="Fred Harvey Company" label="Fred Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="22126" end="22143" title="Santa Fe Railroad" label="Santa Fe Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412867" start="22295" end="22325" title="Dietary Reference Intake" label="Recommended Dietary Allowances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616470" start="22587" end="22599" title="Stigler diet" label="Stigler diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22740" end="22743" title="WW2" label="WW2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="22752" end="22762" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13030962" start="22805" end="22820" title="processed foods" label="processed foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q496696" start="22961" end="22974" title="powdered milk" label="powdered milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q844606" start="22976" end="22989" title="powdered eggs" label="powdered eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411001" start="22991" end="23004" title="potato flakes" label="potato flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219059" start="23010" end="23042" title="Frozen OJ" label="frozen concentrated orange juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q540912" start="23194" end="23207" title="food industry" label="food industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202833" start="23310" end="23319" title="TV dinner" label="TV dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13030962" start="23493" end="23509" title="Convenience food" label="Convenience food"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435805" start="23582" end="23601" title="Kraft Dinner" label="macaroni and cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="23829" end="23842" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030544" start="23844" end="23859" title="Campbell&amp;#x27;s" label="Campbell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q327751" start="23865" end="23876" title="Kraft Foods" label="Kraft Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686705" start="24104" end="24110" title="Jell-O" label="Jell-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="24134" end="24147" title="food coloring" label="food coloring"/>
<link wikidata="Q768267" start="24159" end="24175" title="breakfast cereal" label="breakfast cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310476" start="24254" end="24265" title="Froot Loops" label="Froot Loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744433" start="24335" end="24339" title="Tang (drink)" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750150" start="24341" end="24345" title="Hi-C" label="Hi-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331102" start="24414" end="24444" title="Easy Cheese" label="spray cheese in an aerosol can"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236127" start="24446" end="24453" title="pimento" label="pimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q969761" start="24474" end="24487" title="Capri Sun" label="drink pouches"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="24513" end="24527" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840504" start="24698" end="24715" title="Microwave popcorn" label="Microwave popcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465532" start="24816" end="24827" title="food system" label="food system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24865" end="24875" title="Agricultural subsidy#United States" label="subsidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="24876" end="24881" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="24970" end="24994" title="high-fructose corn syrup" label="high-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="25063" end="25069" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="25082" end="25087" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330911" start="25285" end="25301" title="food irradiation" label="food irradiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182726" start="25303" end="25332" title="genetically modified organism" label="genetically modified organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004082" start="25358" end="25369" title="Antibiotic use in livestock" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879756" start="25370" end="25378" title="Beef hormone controversy" label="hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158308" start="25384" end="25421" title="concentrated animal feeding operation" label="concentrated animal feeding operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q380778" start="25558" end="25573" title="organic produce" label="organic produce"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="25575" end="25583" title="veganism" label="veganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="25584" end="25597" title="vegetarianism" label="vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674120" start="25603" end="25611" title="Local food" label="locavore"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="25620" end="25629" title="Fast-food" label="Fast-food"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440002" start="25753" end="25767" title="Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921" label="highway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244034" start="25769" end="25781" title="White Castle (restaurant)" label="White Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15267446" start="25858" end="25875" title="A&amp;amp;W Root Beer" label="A&amp;amp;W Root Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="25881" end="25898" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="25980" end="25991" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q550258" start="25993" end="26005" title="Wendy&amp;#x27;s" label="Wendy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q191615" start="26007" end="26016" title="Pizza Hut" label="Pizza Hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q839466" start="26018" end="26037" title="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza" label="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="26039" end="26045" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q630866" start="26047" end="26058" title="Arby&amp;#x27;s" label="Arby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q524757" start="26060" end="26063" title="KFC" label="KFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330910" start="26065" end="26072" title="Popeyes" label="Popeyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q752941" start="26077" end="26086" title="Taco Bell" label="Taco Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="26172" end="26178" title="Fusion cuisine" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026" start="26270" end="26279" title="spaghetti" label="spaghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="26283" end="26290" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181055" start="26298" end="26305" title="hot dog" label="hot dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q47629" start="26311" end="26317" title="German cuisine" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q181055" start="26770" end="26777" title="Hot dog" label="Hot dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663" start="26783" end="26792" title="hamburger" label="hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q47629" start="26824" end="26830" title="German cuisine" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="26924" end="26929" title="Pizza" label="Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="26958" end="26965" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071808" start="27118" end="27131" title="Chicago-style pizza" label="Chicago style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844992" start="27186" end="27200" title="New York–style pizza" label="New York Slice"/>
<link wikidata="Q839206" start="27749" end="27775" title="General Tso&amp;#x27;s chicken" label="General Tso&amp;#x27;s chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q782794" start="28010" end="28024" title="fortune cookie" label="fortune cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310583" start="28144" end="28158" title="celebrity chef" label="celebrity chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q214477" start="28171" end="28182" title="Julia Child" label="Julia Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592982" start="28187" end="28198" title="Graham Kerr" label="Graham Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435969" start="28276" end="28288" title="Food Network" label="Food Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520977" start="28393" end="28408" title="The French Chef" label="The French Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005323" start="28599" end="28619" title="New American cuisine" label="New American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="28631" end="28645" title="fusion cuisine" label="fusion cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q862085" start="28673" end="28684" title="melting pot" label="melting pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q733573" start="28777" end="28797" title="molecular gastronomy" label="molecular gastronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="29158" end="29163" title="Vegan" label="Vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="29168" end="29178" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="29395" end="29401" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="29406" end="29412" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="29522" end="29533" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261477" start="29562" end="29577" title="English cuisine" label="English cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492088" start="29586" end="29609" title="Indigenous cuisine of the Americas" label="Native American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="29617" end="29624" title="Abenaki" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q609726" start="29626" end="29638" title="Narragansett people" label="Narragansett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464793" start="29640" end="29647" title="Niantic people" label="Niantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322019" start="29649" end="29657" title="Wabanaki Confederacy" label="Wabanaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="29659" end="29668" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="29729" end="29735" title="French cuisine" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="29737" end="29744" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180817" start="29750" end="29760" title="Portuguese cuisine" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="29828" end="29834" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="29838" end="29842" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="29845" end="29858" title="dairy product" label="dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="29864" end="29871" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="29873" end="29877" title="Corn" label="Corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="29915" end="29930" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588808" start="30031" end="30044" title="hasty pudding" label="hasty pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108866" start="30046" end="30055" title="cornbread" label="cornbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171047" start="30060" end="30072" title="corn chowder" label="corn chowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q402563" start="30127" end="30138" title="maple syrup" label="maple syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="30140" end="30151" title="cranberries" label="cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="30156" end="30168" title="Blueberry" label="blueberries."/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="30169" end="30174" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="30317" end="30328" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="30332" end="30339" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="30527" end="30533" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130250" start="30613" end="30622" title="succotash" label="succotash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076824" start="30624" end="30631" title="chowder" label="chowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q804297" start="30633" end="30644" title="baked beans" label="baked beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="30716" end="30722" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286140" start="30729" end="30737" title="cornmeal" label="cornmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750734" start="30768" end="30781" title="Anadama bread" label="Anadama bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q426103" start="30783" end="30793" title="johnnycake" label="johnnycake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996510" start="30796" end="30807" title="bulkie roll" label="bulkie roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138331" start="30810" end="30827" title="Parker House roll" label="Parker House roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640426" start="30830" end="30837" title="popover" label="popover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205199" start="30840" end="30845" title="ploye" label="ploye"/>
<link wikidata="Q940999" start="30852" end="30875" title="Brown bread" label="New England brown bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350388" start="30968" end="30984" title="Sylvester Graham" label="Sylvester Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q83165" start="31065" end="31071" title="nutmeg" label="nutmeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="31073" end="31079" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="31081" end="31089" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26736" start="31091" end="31096" title="clove" label="clove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963621" start="31103" end="31111" title="allspice" label="allspice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="31159" end="31164" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="31166" end="31178" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q282694" start="31180" end="31188" title="sea salt" label="sea salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111359" start="31194" end="31198" title="Salvia officinalis" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q402563" start="31227" end="31238" title="maple syrup" label="maple syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q214733" start="31262" end="31273" title="sugar maple" label="sugar maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="31275" end="31283" title="molasses" label="molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915430" start="31289" end="31304" title="cranberry sauce" label="cranberry sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q311720" start="31350" end="31364" title="Vitis labrusca" label="Vitis labrusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209756" start="31386" end="31397" title="grape juice" label="grape juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980538" start="31424" end="31436" title="Welch&amp;#x27;s" label="Welch&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q74048276" start="31449" end="31454" title="Fruit preserves" label="jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896889" start="31456" end="31467" title="Kosher wine" label="Kosher wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890467" start="31486" end="31497" title="Mogen David" label="Mogen David"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749872" start="31502" end="31514" title="Manischewitz" label="Manischewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="31934" end="31939" title="Apple" label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880722" start="32045" end="32052" title="Baldwin (apple)" label="Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q681784" start="32089" end="32103" title="Roxbury Russet" label="Roxbury Russet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429591" start="32105" end="32126" title="Rhode Island Greening" label="Rhode Island Greening"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209284" start="32128" end="32140" title="Sops of Wine" label="Sops of Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q440726" start="32224" end="32244" title="Duchess of Oldenburg (apple)" label="Duchess of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081045" start="32246" end="32256" title="Beach plum" label="Beach plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="32363" end="32374" title="Cranberries" label="Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q207220" start="33053" end="33059" title="muffin" label="muffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360264" start="33062" end="33065" title="pie" label="pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q44541" start="33071" end="33078" title="pancake" label="pancake"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715368" start="33571" end="33584" title="Angry Orchard" label="Angry Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588808" start="33794" end="33807" title="hasty pudding" label="hasty pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722559" start="33809" end="33822" title="blueberry pie" label="blueberry pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518177" start="33824" end="33835" title="whoopie pie" label="whoopie pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q894562" start="33838" end="33854" title="Boston cream pie" label="Boston cream pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118270" start="33856" end="33867" title="pumpkin pie" label="pumpkin pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q60755899" start="33869" end="33880" title="Joe Frogger" label="Joe Frogger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="33903" end="33912" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="33914" end="33920" title="Hermit" label="Hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169302" start="33938" end="33959" title="chocolate chip cookie" label="chocolate chip cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="33973" end="33986" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="34111" end="34120" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q609726" start="34125" end="34137" title="Narragansett Indian Tribe of Rhode Island" label="Narragansett"/>
<link wikidata="Q199788" start="34226" end="34229" title="Atlantic cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q188879" start="34231" end="34237" title="Atlantic salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071815" start="34239" end="34254" title="winter flounder" label="winter flounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202406" start="34256" end="34263" title="haddock" label="haddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q842647" start="34265" end="34277" title="striped bass" label="striped bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123445" start="34279" end="34286" title="pollock" label="pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289807" start="34288" end="34292" title="hake" label="hake"/>
<link wikidata="Q461432" start="34294" end="34302" title="bluefish" label="bluefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299834" start="34334" end="34340" title="tautog" label="tautog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420441" start="34406" end="34417" title="fish finger" label="fish finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302413" start="34469" end="34483" title="Smoked salmon" label="smoking salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125440" start="34695" end="34705" title="Clam cakes" label="Clam cakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q723654" start="34899" end="34910" title="brook trout" label="brook trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q755105" start="34912" end="34927" title="largemouth bass" label="largemouth bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="34933" end="34940" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q898886" start="35052" end="35060" title="Fly fishing" label="fly fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11271477" start="35173" end="35189" title="pot roast" label="Yankee pot roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110708" start="35194" end="35219" title="New England boiled dinner" label="New England boiled dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15850295" start="35240" end="35250" title="picnic ham" label="picnic ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193919" start="35913" end="35920" title="Pilgrim (sandwich)" label="Pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605242" start="36067" end="36077" title="steak bomb" label="steak bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171047" start="36167" end="36179" title="corn chowder" label="corn chowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q957434" start="36207" end="36211" title="Veal" label="Veal"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="36276" end="36288" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11125856" start="36310" end="36318" title="linguiça" label="linguiça"/>
<link wikidata="Q816412" start="36660" end="36680" title="Ben and Jerry&amp;#x27;s" label="Ben and Jerry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q590283" start="37286" end="37299" title="peekytoe crab" label="peekytoe crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271957" start="37304" end="37314" title="Jonah crab" label="Jonah crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="37638" end="37646" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="37755" end="37762" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122402" start="37912" end="37920" title="lobster roll" label="sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="38109" end="38118" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38150" end="38167" title="Cherrystone clam#Alternative names" label="little neck clams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311395" start="38169" end="38181" title="Scallop" label="sea scallops"/>
<link wikidata="Q27855" start="38183" end="38194" title="blue mussel" label="blue mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="38197" end="38203" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q20958" start="38206" end="38222" title="Soft-shell clam" label="soft shell clams"/>
<link wikidata="Q378093" start="38228" end="38245" title="Atlantic jackknife clam" label="razor shell clams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007443" start="38312" end="38320" title="clambake" label="clambake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844271" start="38646" end="38662" title="mignonette sauce" label="mignonette sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094882" start="38843" end="38855" title="clam chowder" label="clam chowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125472" start="38884" end="38896" title="clams casino" label="clams casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q134283" start="38953" end="38960" title="oregano" label="oregano"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="39203" end="39225" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="39244" end="39252" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="39254" end="39264" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="39275" end="39283" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="39339" end="39344" title="pizza" label="pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="39656" end="39664" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="39666" end="39676" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="39678" end="39686" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="39688" end="39700" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="39715" end="39723" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="39831" end="39839" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="40576" end="40593" title="global power city" label="global power city"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="40755" end="40773" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q140258" start="40800" end="40812" title="Zagat&amp;#x27;s" label="Zagat&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12408621" start="40999" end="41014" title="Lobster Newberg" label="Lobster Newberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q209464" start="41016" end="41029" title="waldorf salad" label="waldorf salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294686" start="41031" end="41042" title="vichyssoise" label="vichyssoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q58263" start="41044" end="41057" title="eggs benedict" label="eggs benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624099" start="41067" end="41087" title="New York strip steak" label="New York strip steak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184537" start="41189" end="41205" title="Delmonico&amp;#x27;s" label="Delmonico&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123997" start="41249" end="41270" title="Waldorf-Astoria Hotel" label="Waldorf-Astoria Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q426337" start="41299" end="41311" title="cream cheese" label="cream cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="41419" end="41433" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q268057" start="41642" end="41655" title="Cosmopolitan (cocktail)" label="Cosmopolitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052769" start="41657" end="41677" title="Long Island iced tea" label="Long Island iced tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414032" start="41680" end="41690" title="Manhattan (cocktail)" label="Manhattans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543646" start="41692" end="41700" title="Rob Roy (cocktail)" label="Rob Roys"/>
<link wikidata="Q703541" start="41702" end="41713" title="Tom Collins" label="Tom Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q790813" start="41715" end="41724" title="Aviation (cocktail)" label="Aviations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890786" start="41730" end="41740" title="Greyhound (cocktail)" label="Greyhounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q273027" start="41785" end="41796" title="Martini (cocktail)" label="gin martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="41975" end="41987" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="42206" end="42216" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="42221" end="42231" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q166247" start="42240" end="42243" title="American Viticultural Area" label="AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="42317" end="42330" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="42458" end="42469" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q756654" start="42685" end="42700" title="Gewürtztraminer" label="Gewürtztraminer"/>
<link wikidata="Q456471" start="42705" end="42713" title="Riesling" label="Riesling"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="42844" end="42852" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="42854" end="42866" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="42872" end="42881" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q945475" start="44020" end="44028" title="coleslaw" label="coleslaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q167893" start="44119" end="44129" title="mayonnaise" label="mayonnaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q192783" start="44136" end="44144" title="doughnut" label="doughnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q918216" start="44326" end="44333" title="zeppole" label="zeppole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138371" start="44495" end="44504" title="Crab cake" label="Crab cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q70125" start="44540" end="44549" title="croquette" label="croquette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44610" end="44629" title="Crab boil#Maryland" label="Maryland crab feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q844839" start="44691" end="44700" title="Callinectes sapidus" label="blue crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="44748" end="44756" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="44758" end="44768" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="44774" end="44782" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065437" start="44943" end="44951" title="Cape May" label="Cape May"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="44957" end="44971" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="44977" end="44988" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182763" start="45069" end="45092" title="Philadelphia Pepper Pot" label="Philadelphia Pepper Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q690048" start="45230" end="45241" title="turtle soup" label="turtle soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650544" start="45283" end="45299" title="roasted chestnut" label="roasted chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q717040" start="45336" end="45356" title="Christmas traditions" label="Christmas traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660010" start="45416" end="45432" title="Christmas cookie" label="Christmas cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q178600" start="45493" end="45504" title="gingerbread" label="gingerbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301328" start="45509" end="45521" title="sugar cookie" label="sugar cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q558298" start="45638" end="45652" title="Christmas meal" label="Christmas meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366160" start="45655" end="45663" title="Scrapple" label="Scrapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="45757" end="45762" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="46303" end="46311" title="Irish language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049423" start="46357" end="46370" title="Castle Garden" label="Castle Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q729307" start="46677" end="46688" title="coffin ship" label="coffin ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="46723" end="46729" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="47680" end="47683" title="Holy See" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q39459" start="47699" end="47707" title="John Carroll (bishop)" label="Carrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q132612" start="47899" end="47912" title="Catholic Mass" label="Catholic Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="48122" end="48127" title="stout" label="stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55597285" start="48132" end="48139" title="Irish red ale" label="red ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4276394" start="48405" end="48420" title="McSorley&amp;#x27;s" label="McSorley&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="48637" end="48646" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="48757" end="48768" title="English Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844844" start="48883" end="48899" title="Guy Fawkes Night" label="Guy Fawkes Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q153093" start="48978" end="48993" title="Reformation Day" label="Reformation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="49148" end="49161" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993311" start="49570" end="49579" title="barmbrack" label="barmbrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q168739" start="49592" end="49609" title="Apple bobbing" label="bobbed for apples"/>
<link wikidata="Q47195" start="49684" end="49691" title="Trick-or-treating" label="guising"/>
<link wikidata="Q47195" start="49855" end="49872" title="trick-or-treating" label="trick-or-treating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105083" start="49999" end="50012" title="caramel apple" label="caramel apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358074" start="50015" end="50026" title="candy apple" label="candy apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280948" start="50029" end="50038" title="dirt cake" label="dirt cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121224" start="50041" end="50046" title="Punch (drink)" label="punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q134768" start="50048" end="50056" title="cocktail" label="cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="50059" end="50064" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977438" start="50085" end="50088" title="Apple cider" label="non"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118270" start="50091" end="50102" title="pumpkin pie" label="pumpkin pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12054162" start="50104" end="50114" title="candy corn" label="candy corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856472" start="50116" end="50133" title="chocolate turtles" label="chocolate turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q708823" start="50135" end="50149" title="peanut brittle" label="peanut brittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892214" start="50151" end="50156" title="Taffy (candy)" label="taffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808983" start="50158" end="50168" title="tipsy cake" label="tipsy cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q221009" start="50222" end="50237" title="Jack-o&amp;#x27;-lantern" label="jack-o-lanterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="50733" end="50739" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="50741" end="50749" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="50751" end="50756" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="50762" end="50770" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572829" start="51303" end="51327" title="spaghetti with meatballs" label="spaghetti with meatballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844992" start="51329" end="51349" title="New York–style pizza" label="New York–style pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815560" start="51351" end="51359" title="calzones" label="calzones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379588" start="51365" end="51375" title="baked ziti" label="baked ziti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137803" start="51558" end="51573" title="pasta e fagioli" label="pasta e fagioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q581462" start="51578" end="51588" title="minestrone" label="minestrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q20034" start="51779" end="51786" title="lasagna" label="lasagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q181055" start="51923" end="51930" title="hot dog" label="hot dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q681770" start="52022" end="52041" title="Frankfurter Würstchen" label="frankfurter sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q327316" start="52058" end="52072" title="Vienna sausage" label="wiener sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q154166" start="52229" end="52239" title="sauerkraut" label="sauerkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="52631" end="52647" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="52656" end="52669" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="52841" end="52853" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319505" start="52858" end="52878" title="Nathan&amp;#x27;s Famous" label="Nathan&amp;#x27;s Famous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585209" start="52954" end="52971" title="Nathan Handwerker" label="Nathan Handwerker"/>
<link wikidata="Q13305" start="53346" end="53357" title="Italian ice" label="Italian ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q70612" start="53414" end="53421" title="granita" label="granita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197677" start="53523" end="53542" title="Piragua (food)" label="&amp;quot;piragua&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761152" start="53902" end="53912" title="Taylor Ham" label="Taylor Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="53933" end="53943" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q156036" start="54059" end="54070" title="kaiser roll" label="kaiser roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q156036" start="54087" end="54124" title="Kummelweck" label="roll brought to the area by Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230139" start="54284" end="54293" title="pork roll" label="pork roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231410" start="54453" end="54465" title="delicatessen" label="delicatessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="54608" end="54615" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="54852" end="54858" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="54925" end="54934" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365891" start="55202" end="55209" title="dill pickle" label="pickles"/>
<link wikidata="Q215348" start="55480" end="55490" title="cheesecake" label="cheesecake"/>
<link wikidata="Q326900" start="55544" end="55550" title="rennet" label="rennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q272502" start="55662" end="55667" title="bagel" label="bagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388689" start="55673" end="55679" title="bialys" label="bialys"/>
<link wikidata="Q790433" start="55702" end="55715" title="Challah bread" label="Challah bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347754" start="55717" end="55725" title="Pastrami" label="Pastrami"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842721" start="55879" end="55894" title="Whitefish salad" label="Whitefish salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302413" start="55896" end="55899" title="smoked salmon" label="lox"/>
<link wikidata="Q559201" start="55905" end="55921" title="matzoh ball soup" label="matzoh ball soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993581" start="56061" end="56069" title="Rugelach" label="Rugelach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519830" start="56082" end="56093" title="hamentashen" label="hamentashen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="56191" end="56200" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65058271" start="56217" end="56227" title="Jewish rye" label="Jewish rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q203401" start="56458" end="56471" title="Edward Hopper" label="Edward Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879758" start="56671" end="56683" title="beef on weck" label="beef on weck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094882" start="56685" end="56707" title="Manhattan clam chowder" label="Manhattan clam chowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093380" start="56713" end="56726" title="club sandwich" label="club sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072203" start="56728" end="56741" title="Buffalo wings" label="Buffalo wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068892" start="56743" end="56767" title="Philadelphia cheesesteak" label="Philadelphia cheesesteak"/>
<link wikidata="Q338242" start="56773" end="56795" title="black and white cookie" label="black and white cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279804" start="56797" end="56808" title="shoofly pie" label="shoofly pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q690048" start="56810" end="56822" title="snapper soup" label="snapper soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q754727" start="56824" end="56841" title="Smith Island cake" label="Smith Island cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407625" start="56843" end="56856" title="blackout cake" label="blackout cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597000" start="56858" end="56867" title="grape pie" label="grape pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="56869" end="56878" title="milkshake" label="milkshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297383" start="56889" end="56898" title="egg cream" label="egg cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="57128" end="57139" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="57153" end="57165" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988707" start="57360" end="57386" title="Kansas City–style barbecue" label="Kansas City–style barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141050" start="57394" end="57415" title="Chicago-style hot dog" label="Chicago-style hot dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="57559" end="57585" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="57601" end="57609" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="57712" end="57717" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q947650" start="57719" end="57724" title="Osage people" label="Osage"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="57726" end="57733" title="Arapaho" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="57739" end="57747" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478954" start="57818" end="57831" title="Three Sisters (agriculture)" label="Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="57915" end="57920" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q605981" start="58008" end="58020" title="buffalo jump" label="buffalo jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="58196" end="58199" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="58536" end="58546" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="58572" end="58576" title="northern pike" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="58578" end="58585" title="walleye" label="walleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118871" start="58590" end="58597" title="panfish" label="panfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="58619" end="58628" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="58630" end="58639" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="58645" end="58653" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454630" start="58691" end="58699" title="fish fry" label="fish fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43794" start="58781" end="58788" title="turkeys" label="turkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="58790" end="58797" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="58804" end="58809" title="geese" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927465" start="58996" end="59003" title="Buckeye chicken" label="Buckeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085160" start="59008" end="59017" title="Wyandotte chicken" label="Wyandotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q207544" start="59095" end="59108" title="L. Frank Baum" label="L. Frank Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q948827" start="59215" end="59221" title="asimina triloba" label="pawpaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q158356" start="59227" end="59246" title="diospyros virginiana" label="American persimmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q158356" start="59526" end="59544" title="American persimmon" label="American persimmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170363" start="59702" end="59719" title="persimmon pudding" label="persimmon pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342574" start="59739" end="59753" title="crème anglaise" label="crème anglaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q831681" start="59818" end="59827" title="wild rice" label="wild rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="60089" end="60098" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978035" start="60112" end="60125" title="Wealthy (apple)" label="Wealthy apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q19841027" start="60239" end="60249" title="Wolf River (apple)" label="Wolf River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669886" start="60263" end="60270" title="Melrose (apple)" label="Melrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154755" start="60272" end="60281" title="Paula Red" label="Paula Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441174" start="60283" end="60294" title="Rome Beauty" label="Rome Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140024" start="60296" end="60306" title="Honeycrisp" label="Honeycrisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117265" start="60316" end="60329" title="Red Delicious" label="Red Delicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="60358" end="60366" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="60371" end="60380" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="60392" end="60403" title="cranberries" label="cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q104819" start="60471" end="60480" title="Crabapple" label="Crabapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q899882" start="60828" end="60837" title="Bratwurst" label="Bratwurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676111" start="60872" end="60888" title="tailgate parties" label="tailgate parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="60897" end="60914" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="60916" end="60929" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="60934" end="60947" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q154166" start="60988" end="60998" title="sauerkraut" label="sauerkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q829720" start="61121" end="61129" title="kielbasa" label="kielbasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q697800" start="61415" end="61422" title="pierogi" label="pierogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961496" start="61689" end="61710" title="Maxwell Street Polish" label="Maxwell Street Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209879" start="61808" end="61818" title="Polish boy" label="Polish boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="61968" end="61987" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Cleveland Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="61989" end="62003" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="62005" end="62017" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="62019" end="62036" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="62042" end="62059" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141050" start="62193" end="62206" title="Chicago-style hot dog" label="Chicago style"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="62271" end="62286" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120346" start="62318" end="62334" title="Cincinnati chili" label="Cincinnati chili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306889" start="62608" end="62615" title="potluck" label="potluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911091" start="62855" end="62862" title="hotdish" label="hotdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516025" start="62972" end="62982" title="tater tots" label="tater tots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571519" start="63024" end="63038" title="glorified rice" label="glorified rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944127" start="63146" end="63152" title="Booyah (stew)" label="booyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q888720" start="63266" end="63271" title="Lefse" label="Lefse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296872" start="63417" end="63424" title="venison" label="venison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801531" start="63585" end="63595" title="tiger meat" label="tiger meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q749593" start="63615" end="63628" title="steak tartare" label="steak tartare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265045" start="63668" end="63679" title="dessert bar" label="dessert bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q503129" start="63685" end="63693" title="Chocolate brownie" label="brownies"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="63795" end="63803" title="barbecue" label="barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589551" start="64429" end="64453" title="St. Louis–style barbecue" label="St. Louis–style barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230138" start="64537" end="64547" title="pork steak" label="pork steak"/>
<link wikidata="Q11554312" start="64720" end="64729" title="Cracklings" label="cracklins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967823" start="64762" end="64772" title="spare ribs" label="spare ribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q899882" start="64806" end="64815" title="bratwurst" label="bratwurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057717" start="64901" end="64918" title="gooey butter cake" label="gooey butter cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988707" start="64956" end="64982" title="Kansas City–style barbecue" label="Kansas City–style barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000244" start="65500" end="65510" title="burnt ends" label="burnt ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="65658" end="65672" title="American South" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="65775" end="65790" title="Confederate States of America" label="Old Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="65877" end="65890" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q530472" start="65920" end="65936" title="Mason–Dixon line" label="Mason–Dixon line"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="65972" end="65983" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="65985" end="65992" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="65994" end="66010" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="66012" end="66019" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="66021" end="66031" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="66037" end="66046" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="66052" end="66066" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430068" start="66090" end="66107" title="Florida Panhandle" label="Florida Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286140" start="66712" end="66720" title="cornmeal" label="cornmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844" start="66820" end="66831" title="wild turkey" label="wild turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="66833" end="66837" title="white tailed deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q694319" start="66839" end="66847" title="American woodcock" label="woodcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="66870" end="66879" title="waterfowl" label="waterfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q26603" start="66952" end="66963" title="tundra swan" label="tundra swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="67244" end="67250" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q650212" start="67282" end="67297" title="snapping turtle" label="snapping turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q457872" start="67303" end="67328" title="alligator snapping turtle" label="alligator snapping turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q882644" start="67334" end="67346" title="blue catfish" label="blue catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434042" start="67366" end="67399" title="noodling" label="caught with one&amp;#x27;s bare hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q203925" start="67468" end="67482" title="fish and chips" label="fish and chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="67578" end="67586" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="67590" end="67597" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q948827" start="67645" end="67651" title="asimina triloba" label="pawpaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q128939" start="67653" end="67659" title="maypop" label="maypop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="67681" end="67689" title="squash (plant)" label="squashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="67694" end="67698" title="corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q311790" start="67723" end="67732" title="spicebush" label="spicebush"/>
<link wikidata="Q131532" start="67737" end="67746" title="sassafras" label="sassafras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543770" start="67916" end="67921" title="grits" label="grits"/>
<link wikidata="Q426103" start="67923" end="67931" title="hoecakes" label="hoecakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108866" start="67939" end="67948" title="cornbread" label="cornbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579159" start="67954" end="67964" title="spoonbread" label="spoonbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="67984" end="67991" title="hickory" label="hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q852572" start="67993" end="68005" title="black walnut" label="black walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q333877" start="68010" end="68015" title="pecan" label="pecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552548" start="68076" end="68085" title="mince pie" label="mince pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284379" start="68088" end="68097" title="pecan pie" label="pecan pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116108" start="68115" end="68124" title="honey bun" label="honey bun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616330" start="68145" end="68155" title="sticky bun" label="sticky bun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276778" start="68162" end="68173" title="quick bread" label="quick bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q503494" start="68370" end="68383" title="peach cobbler" label="peach cobbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="68733" end="68741" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q259550" start="68839" end="68851" title="apple butter" label="apple butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q263203" start="68929" end="68940" title="red cabbage" label="red cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="68945" end="68948" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="69086" end="69092" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="69144" end="69162" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="69176" end="69181" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q48038" start="69187" end="69200" title="West Midlands (region)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="69206" end="69218" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q767049" start="69220" end="69233" title="Black Country" label="Black Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="69306" end="69315" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q393046" start="69317" end="69323" title="Ulster Plantation" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="69332" end="69351" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849337" start="69439" end="69448" title="bakestone" label="bakestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="69481" end="69486" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="69490" end="69494" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="69501" end="69506" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q917046" start="69694" end="69714" title="Peatreek" label="&amp;quot;peatreak&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315113" start="69725" end="69731" title="poitín" label="poitín"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011065" start="69865" end="69876" title="added sugar" label="added sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q694536" start="69994" end="70010" title="American whiskey" label="American whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q543127" start="70015" end="70031" title="Kentucky bourbon" label="Kentucky bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q917046" start="70049" end="70058" title="moonshine" label="moonshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061451" start="70063" end="70072" title="Everclear" label="Everclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q616601" start="70129" end="70135" title="trifle" label="trifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808983" start="70148" end="70158" title="tipsy cake" label="tipsy cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q29443" start="70216" end="70226" title="pound cake" label="pound cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="70405" end="70409" title="Pork" label="Pork"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70559" end="70576" title="History of the Southern United States#Antebellum era (1789–1861)" label="antebellum period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250421" start="70618" end="70633" title="Country sausage" label="Country sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917275" start="70685" end="70703" title="biscuits and gravy" label="biscuits and gravy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823327" start="70705" end="70716" title="Country ham" label="Country ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917272" start="70850" end="70857" title="biscuit (bread)" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q29476" start="70888" end="70901" title="baking powder" label="baking powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612" start="70921" end="70931" title="buttermilk" label="buttermilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823327" start="70972" end="70983" title="country ham" label="country ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543770" start="70985" end="70990" title="grits" label="grits"/>
<link wikidata="Q668855" start="70996" end="71010" title="scrambled eggs" label="scrambled eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="71031" end="71038" title="Dessert" label="Dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485461" start="71321" end="71330" title="Lane cake" label="Lane cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246340" start="71332" end="71348" title="sweet potato pie" label="sweet potato pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q503494" start="71350" end="71363" title="peach cobbler" label="peach cobbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284379" start="71365" end="71374" title="pecan pie" label="pecan pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941057" start="71376" end="71392" title="hummingbird cake" label="hummingbird cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093340" start="71394" end="71413" title="Jefferson Davis pie" label="Jefferson Davis pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q708823" start="71415" end="71429" title="peanut brittle" label="peanut brittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139845" start="71431" end="71443" title="coconut cake" label="coconut cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q690292" start="71445" end="71459" title="fritter" label="apple fritters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909359" start="71477" end="71499" title="Moravian spice cookies" label="Moravian spice cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093340" start="71501" end="71510" title="chess pie" label="chess pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286572" start="71512" end="71524" title="doberge cake" label="doberge cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004703" start="71526" end="71545" title="Lady Baltimore cake" label="Lady Baltimore cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950110" start="71547" end="71559" title="bourbon ball" label="bourbon ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049852" start="71595" end="71606" title="sponge cake" label="sponge cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429013" start="71669" end="71680" title="buttercream" label="buttercream"/>
<link wikidata="Q969579" start="72200" end="72213" title="Cajun cuisine" label="Cajun cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083213" start="72216" end="72228" title="Cajun French" label="Cajun French"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="72284" end="72289" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="72291" end="72304" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="72329" end="72334" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q13475519" start="73163" end="73169" title="Boudin" label="Boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961551" start="73319" end="73326" title="Chaudin" label="Chaudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133124" start="73559" end="73567" title="Procambarus clarkii" label="Crawfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930074" start="73719" end="73728" title="blue crab" label="blue crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="73731" end="73737" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171058" start="73739" end="73754" title="corn on the cob" label="corn on the cob"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="73844" end="73855" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927617" start="74412" end="74429" title="Oysters Bienville" label="oysters bienville"/>
<link wikidata="Q11697651" start="74431" end="74451" title="pompano en papillote" label="pompano en papillote"/>
<link wikidata="Q655235" start="74466" end="74476" title="muffaletta" label="muffaletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645076" start="74497" end="74521" title="Louisiana Creole cuisine" label="Louisiana Creole cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152821" start="74601" end="74612" title="profiterole" label="profiterole"/>
<link wikidata="Q898344" start="74649" end="74661" title="choux pastry" label="choux pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q116150719" start="74782" end="74790" title="praline (nut confection)" label="pralines"/>
<link wikidata="Q333877" start="74809" end="74814" title="pecan" label="pecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564638" start="74836" end="74850" title="bananas foster" label="bananas foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160522" start="74945" end="74950" title="Gumbo" label="Gumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80531" start="74978" end="74982" title="okra" label="okra"/>
<link wikidata="Q584469" start="75005" end="75020" title="sassafras albidum" label="sassafrass tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q492769" start="75028" end="75037" title="Andouille" label="Andouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420447" start="75221" end="75232" title="Boston butt" label="Boston butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="75502" end="75511" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598" start="75577" end="75591" title="cayenne pepper" label="cayenne pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q193327" start="75644" end="75662" title="American alligator" label="American alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="76015" end="76027" title="passionfruit" label="passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="76238" end="76243" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="76245" end="76250" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="76252" end="76256" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="76258" end="76263" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="76265" end="76271" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="76273" end="76285" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="76287" end="76294" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="76322" end="76332" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="76383" end="76400" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80531" start="76506" end="76510" title="okra" label="okra"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="76512" end="76519" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763698" start="76521" end="76533" title="sesame seeds" label="sesame seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540" start="76535" end="76543" title="eggplant" label="eggplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881191" start="76573" end="76578" title="melon" label="melon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747220" start="76684" end="76693" title="Carolinas" label="Carolinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="76707" end="76712" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="76717" end="76726" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763911" start="76845" end="76856" title="Hoppin John" label="Hoppin John"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084201" start="76870" end="76889" title="Charleston red rice" label="Charleston red rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="76908" end="76927" title="indentured servants" label="indentured servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255814" start="77113" end="77128" title="pig&amp;#x27;s ear (food)" label="pig&amp;#x27;s ears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437342" start="77133" end="77140" title="fatback" label="fatback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907985" start="77378" end="77389" title="Peanut soup" label="Peanut soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385654" start="77955" end="77967" title="Spanish Main" label="Spanish Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="78043" end="78056" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="78072" end="78079" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="78081" end="78086" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="78088" end="78092" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="78094" end="78105" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="78111" end="78129" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="78135" end="78142" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q772345" start="78218" end="78235" title="Caribbean Spanish" label="Caribbean Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004144" start="78237" end="78251" title="Haitian French" label="Haitian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35939" start="78253" end="78268" title="Jamaican Patois" label="Jamaican Patois"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="78274" end="78288" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465576" start="78417" end="78425" title="foodways" label="foodways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963621" start="78582" end="78590" title="Allspice" label="Allspice"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="78616" end="78623" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="78694" end="78700" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="78702" end="78708" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q466854" start="78710" end="78731" title="scotch bonnet peppers" label="scotch bonnet peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127463" start="78803" end="78816" title="Jamaican jerk" label="Jamaican jerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="79151" end="79159" title="Cooking banana" label="plátanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="79601" end="79606" title="Mango" label="Mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591528" start="79746" end="79757" title="Nam Doc Mai" label="Nam Doc Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q275620" start="79858" end="79866" title="Sweetsop" label="Sweetsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709343" start="79871" end="79878" title="soursop" label="soursop"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="79957" end="79963" title="Citrus" label="Citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="80117" end="80124" title="Orange (fruit)" label="oranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q219059" start="80240" end="80252" title="orange juice" label="orange juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q41350" start="80278" end="80288" title="grapefruit" label="grapefruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q516494" start="80291" end="80300" title="tangerine" label="tangerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q460517" start="80303" end="80313" title="clementine" label="clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="80316" end="80321" title="Lime (fruit)" label="limes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105272" start="80359" end="80381" title="Cara Cara navel orange" label="Cara Cara navel orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q148866" start="80384" end="80391" title="tangelo" label="tangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757759" start="80411" end="80421" title="Ugli fruit" label="Ugli fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="80423" end="80429" title="Tomato" label="Tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="80433" end="80444" title="bell pepper" label="bell pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q764375" start="80447" end="80462" title="habanero pepper" label="habanero pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="80469" end="80473" title="Ficus" label="figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561277" start="80501" end="80522" title="Florida strangler fig" label="Florida strangler fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930074" start="80552" end="80561" title="Blue crab" label="Blue crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q62603" start="80563" end="80568" title="Queen conch" label="conch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461759" start="80570" end="80588" title="Florida stone crab" label="Florida stone crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168496" start="80590" end="80598" title="red drum" label="red drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14443" start="80600" end="80606" title="common dolphinfish" label="dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q123478185" start="80612" end="80618" title="marlin" label="marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518169" start="80763" end="80775" title="key lime pie" label="key lime pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830455" start="80841" end="80855" title="condensed milk" label="condensed milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q537749" start="80925" end="80937" title="Florida Keys" label="Florida Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q166343" start="81317" end="81334" title="Panulirus argus" label="Caribbean lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q506451" start="81428" end="81438" title="Fort Myers" label="Fort Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q537749" start="81491" end="81503" title="Florida Keys" label="Florida Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q162029" start="81596" end="81605" title="Ptarmigan" label="Ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201240" start="81607" end="81613" title="grouse" label="grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="81615" end="81619" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="81724" end="81732" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="81734" end="81740" title="American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81779" end="81787" title="Tree squirrel#In the US" label="Squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="81789" end="81796" title="Cooning" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q147267" start="81798" end="81804" title="Virginia opossum" label="possum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="81806" end="81810" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q26283" start="81812" end="81819" title="muskrat" label="muskrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752125" start="81821" end="81829" title="chipmunk" label="chipmunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="81831" end="81836" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q221612" start="81838" end="81847" title="groundhog" label="groundhog"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="81849" end="81857" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840543" start="81859" end="81868" title="armadillo" label="armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="81873" end="81879" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="82275" end="82281" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="82283" end="82293" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="82405" end="82415" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="82417" end="82425" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="82427" end="82433" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="82435" end="82442" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="82444" end="82448" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="82450" end="82460" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="82466" end="82485" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="82578" end="82587" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="82589" end="82604" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="82610" end="82616" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="82681" end="82687" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="82762" end="82784" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="82793" end="82815" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="82819" end="82838" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="82905" end="82917" title="Monterey Bay" label="Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q133325" start="83096" end="83110" title="Pacific salmon" label="Pacific salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="83208" end="83214" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q162029" start="83231" end="83240" title="ptarmigan" label="ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="83245" end="83250" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="83332" end="83347" title="Rainbow trout" label="steelhead trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q783575" start="83349" end="83360" title="Pacific cod" label="Pacific cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819782" start="83362" end="83377" title="Pacific halibut" label="Pacific halibut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123445" start="83383" end="83390" title="pollock" label="pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="83536" end="83546" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="83583" end="83588" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="83599" end="83607" title="cherries" label="cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="83613" end="83619" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="83621" end="83633" title="blackberries" label="blackberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765470" start="83639" end="83652" title="marionberries" label="marionberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q578307" start="83678" end="83686" title="Hazelnut" label="Hazelnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733892" start="83813" end="83824" title="Almond Roca" label="Almond Roca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068209" start="83954" end="83961" title="Geoduck" label="Geoduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q211420" start="84137" end="84148" title="aphrodisiac" label="aphrodisiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012763" start="84150" end="84161" title="Tresus" label="Gaper clams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857439" start="84239" end="84246" title="abalone" label="abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013007" start="84550" end="84565" title="Ostrea lurida" label="Olympia oysters"/>
<link wikidata="Q61695271" start="84610" end="84625" title="Kumamoto oyster" label="Kumamoto oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016358" start="84702" end="84719" title="California mussel" label="California mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q721171" start="84963" end="84980" title="Alaskan king crab" label="Alaskan king crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031457" start="84982" end="84990" title="cancer productus" label="red crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822385" start="84992" end="85003" title="Metacarcinus anthonyi" label="yellow crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936093" start="85009" end="85023" title="Dungeness crab" label="Dungeness crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139527" start="85360" end="85375" title="California roll" label="California roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104721" start="85377" end="85385" title="cioppino" label="cioppino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180222" start="85429" end="85439" title="Crab Louie" label="Crab Louie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360560" start="85551" end="85566" title="sourdough bread" label="sourdough bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143234" start="85598" end="85610" title="Humboldt Fog" label="Humboldt Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056415" start="85612" end="85625" title="Monterey Jack" label="Monterey Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952139" start="85627" end="85638" title="Cougar Gold cheese" label="Cougar Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696347" start="85643" end="85649" title="Teleme" label="Teleme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15672" start="85712" end="85724" title="Four Corners" label="Four Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="85726" end="85733" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="85735" end="85745" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="85747" end="85755" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="85761" end="85765" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="85772" end="85778" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="85780" end="85799" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="85805" end="85815" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="85956" end="85967" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="85969" end="85975" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="85977" end="85986" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="85988" end="85999" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="86001" end="86008" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="86010" end="86018" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="86020" end="86029" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="86035" end="86041" title="Tucson" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="86129" end="86143" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="86152" end="86167" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="86176" end="86186" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="86189" end="86213" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Santa Fe de Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="86222" end="86232" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505587" start="86239" end="86244" title="Spanish Texas" label="Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="86253" end="86258" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="86303" end="86319" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="86350" end="86367" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="86369" end="86384" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="86406" end="86412" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="86417" end="86430" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192766" start="86577" end="86599" title="Cuisine of California" label="cuisines of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010123" start="86601" end="86620" title="New Mexican cuisine" label="New Mexican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708243" start="86622" end="86635" title="Texan cuisine" label="Texan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29359" start="86641" end="86648" title="Tex-Mex" label="Tex-Mex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="86650" end="86657" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="86717" end="86727" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982357" start="86749" end="86756" title="New Mexican Spanish" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="86824" end="86828" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="86876" end="86882" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="86901" end="86916" title="Ranch" label="cattle ranchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="87606" end="87612" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="87881" end="87890" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="87990" end="87999" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="88003" end="88008" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q390214" start="88104" end="88118" title="Texas longhorn" label="Texas longhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981618" start="88124" end="88143" title="Navajo-Churro sheep" label="Navajo-Churro sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072752" start="88452" end="88466" title="Western saddle" label="Western saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="88591" end="88598" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="88603" end="88613" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829179" start="88691" end="88696" title="horno" label="horno"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="88768" end="88774" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="88813" end="88818" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="88871" end="88874" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282840" start="88951" end="88962" title="rattlesnake" label="rattlesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q122195" start="89059" end="89066" title="tequila" label="tequila"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="89114" end="89123" title="Wild West" label="Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="89247" end="89254" title="Mormons" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="89283" end="89330" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="89367" end="89381" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="89629" end="89634" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500686" start="89697" end="89706" title="Havasupai" label="Havasupai"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="89730" end="89737" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="89739" end="89744" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="89750" end="89760" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q303669" start="89798" end="89810" title="blood orange" label="blood orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q212933" start="89889" end="89897" title="Pine nut" label="Pine nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="90301" end="90308" title="opuntia" label="opuntia"/>
<link wikidata="Q855658" start="90325" end="90335" title="Chihuahuan Desert" label="Chihuahuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="90337" end="90344" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="90350" end="90356" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878814" start="90429" end="90440" title="mission fig" label="mission fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="90540" end="90546" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="90550" end="90555" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15062992" start="90558" end="90569" title="black turtle bean" label="black beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q323635" start="90571" end="90581" title="pinto bean" label="pinto bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="90584" end="90588" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="90590" end="90601" title="bell pepper" label="bell pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="90604" end="90616" title="chile pepper" label="chile pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="90623" end="90629" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056415" start="90645" end="90658" title="Monterey Jack" label="Monterey Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413435" start="90689" end="90702" title="Central Coast (California)" label="Central Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q504133" start="90804" end="90812" title="jalapeño" label="jalapeño"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750898" start="91022" end="91038" title="New Mexico chile" label="New Mexico chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="91062" end="91084" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispanos of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="91089" end="91098" title="Puebloans" label="Puebloans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322357" start="91144" end="91149" title="Hatch, New Mexico" label="Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="91158" end="91169" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712839" start="91177" end="91195" title="Albuquerque metropolitan area" label="Central Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055512" start="91197" end="91204" title="Chimayo" label="Chimayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="91210" end="91216" title="Pueblo" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924308" start="91352" end="91375" title="Blake&amp;#x27;s Lotaburger" label="Blake&amp;#x27;s Lotaburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="91448" end="91463" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q897746" start="91591" end="91605" title="poblano pepper" label="poblano pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q133428" start="91607" end="91620" title="Capsicum pubescens" label="rocoto pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q426850" start="91622" end="91634" title="ghost pepper" label="ghost pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q432426" start="91636" end="91653" title="thai chili pepper" label="thai chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q167881" start="91659" end="91672" title="Korean pepper" label="Korean pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108866" start="91788" end="91797" title="Cornbread" label="Cornbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q262515" start="92037" end="92047" title="Dutch oven" label="Dutch oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642411" start="92177" end="92185" title="Tortilla" label="Tortilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004446" start="92272" end="92289" title="breakfast burrito" label="breakfast burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q177564" start="92336" end="92349" title="pico de gallo" label="pico de gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q390823" start="92388" end="92395" title="burrito" label="burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q865325" start="92564" end="92574" title="quesadilla" label="quesadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q871272" start="92707" end="92713" title="fajita" label="fajita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599125" start="92905" end="92910" title="wraps" label="wraps"/>
<link wikidata="Q522171" start="93068" end="93077" title="hot sauce" label="hot sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392674" start="93079" end="93093" title="sriracha sauce" label="sriracha sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072946" start="93095" end="93107" title="chili powder" label="chili powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598" start="93109" end="93123" title="cayenne pepper" label="cayenne pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="93125" end="93137" title="white pepper" label="white pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q132624" start="93139" end="93144" title="cumin" label="cumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127593" start="93146" end="93153" title="paprika" label="paprika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093931" start="93155" end="93167" title="onion powder" label="onion powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="93169" end="93174" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="93179" end="93191" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q863794" start="93260" end="93275" title="chili con carne" label="chili con carne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179571" start="93295" end="93307" title="cowboy beans" label="cowboy beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051492" start="93407" end="93424" title="five spice powder" label="five spice powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="93426" end="93434" title="rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144935" start="93436" end="93448" title="curry powder" label="curry powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q141898" start="93450" end="93456" title="kimchi" label="kimchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727732" start="93462" end="93472" title="lemongrass" label="lemongrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324342" start="93691" end="93698" title="brisket" label="brisket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257988" start="93753" end="93762" title="spice rub" label="spice rub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315767" start="93788" end="93796" title="mesquite" label="mesquite"/>
<link wikidata="Q333877" start="93891" end="93896" title="pecan" label="pecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="93898" end="93903" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="93909" end="93912" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419708" start="94046" end="94072" title="Santa Maria–style barbecue" label="Santa Maria–style barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="94114" end="94126" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127593" start="94128" end="94135" title="paprika" label="paprika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935156" start="94141" end="94152" title="garlic salt" label="garlic salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q514052" start="94182" end="94196" title="coast live oak" label="coast live oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214426" start="94236" end="94251" title="Frybread" label="Navajo frybread"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171058" start="94256" end="94271" title="corn on the cob" label="corn on the cob"/>
<link wikidata="Q175641" start="94377" end="94390" title="tortilla chip" label="tortilla chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q249114" start="94538" end="94543" title="Salsa (sauce)" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q466430" start="94623" end="94629" title="nachos" label="nachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q207968" start="94745" end="94754" title="guacamole" label="guacamole"/>
<link wikidata="Q840171" start="94756" end="94766" title="sour cream" label="sour cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q152964" start="94818" end="94830" title="potato salad" label="potato salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q122195" start="94881" end="94888" title="tequila" label="tequila"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="95196" end="95208" title="West Pacific" label="West Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="95213" end="95228" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="95278" end="95289" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205312" start="95491" end="95506" title="In-N-Out Burger" label="In-N-Out Burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q212348" start="95604" end="95609" title="Angus beef" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757956" start="95613" end="95623" title="wagyu beef" label="wagyu beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="95661" end="95670" title="milkshake" label="milkshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q13290" start="95761" end="95769" title="Smoothie" label="Smoothie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694505" start="95859" end="95870" title="Agua fresca" label="Agua fresca"/>
<link wikidata="Q36071" start="96252" end="96261" title="pistachio" label="pistachio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194" start="96264" end="96273" title="kiwifruit" label="kiwifruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37153" start="96275" end="96282" title="avocado" label="avocado"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="96286" end="96298" title="strawberries" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="96304" end="96310" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="96418" end="96427" title="Olive oil" label="Olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="96497" end="96511" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878494" start="96523" end="96536" title="mission olive" label="mission olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246629" start="96679" end="96694" title="Valencia orange" label="Valencia orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401979" start="96700" end="96711" title="Meyer lemon" label="Meyer lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="96715" end="96722" title="Soybean" label="Soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q165178" start="96725" end="96733" title="bok choy" label="bok choy"/>
<link wikidata="Q158482" start="96735" end="96753" title="Japanese persimmon" label="Japanese persimmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073413" start="96755" end="96765" title="thai basil" label="thai basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360268" start="96767" end="96779" title="Napa cabbage" label="Napa cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q201565" start="96781" end="96785" title="nori" label="nori"/>
<link wikidata="Q125337" start="96787" end="96802" title="mandarin orange" label="mandarin orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q621471" start="96805" end="96819" title="water chestnut" label="water chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q484447" start="96826" end="96835" title="mung bean" label="mung bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q134283" start="97095" end="97102" title="oregano" label="oregano"/>
<link wikidata="Q38859" start="97104" end="97109" title="basil" label="basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119307" start="97111" end="97124" title="summer squash" label="summer squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540" start="97126" end="97134" title="eggplant" label="eggplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47722" start="97140" end="97148" title="broccoli" label="broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104585" start="97332" end="97342" title="Cobb salad" label="Cobb salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100723" start="97347" end="97368" title="Chinese chicken salad" label="Chinese chicken salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603528" start="97389" end="97402" title="Green goddess dressing" label="green goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q507816" start="97407" end="97412" title="ranch dressing" label="ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020186" start="97428" end="97450" title="California-style pizza" label="California-style pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013275" start="97938" end="97959" title="pismo clam" label="large species of clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q925444" start="98071" end="98085" title="Humboldt squid" label="Humboldt squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81964" start="98164" end="98171" title="Lingcod" label="Lingcod"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="98251" end="98260" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q306147" start="98272" end="98287" title="Channel Islands (California)" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q601000" start="98312" end="98332" title="California sheephead" label="California sheephead"/>
<link wikidata="Q452353" start="98514" end="98538" title="California spiny lobster" label="California spiny lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936093" start="98622" end="98636" title="Dungeness crab" label="Dungeness crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295586" start="98934" end="98950" title="Hawaii regional cuisine" label="Hawaiian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301187" start="99026" end="99037" title="Pacific Rim" label="Pacific-rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q263203" start="99301" end="99312" title="red cabbage" label="red cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q177378" start="99579" end="99583" title="tofu" label="tofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208574" start="99631" end="99636" title="Poke (Hawaii)" label="poke."/>
<link wikidata="Q141898" start="99731" end="99737" title="kimchi" label="kimchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207732" start="99780" end="99793" title="char siu baau" label="char siu baau"/>
<link wikidata="Q122828168" start="99820" end="99827" title="manapua" label="manapua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842073" start="99918" end="99925" title="bagoong" label="bagoong"/>
<link wikidata="Q96475732" start="99943" end="99949" title="lumpia" label="lumpia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="100001" end="100015" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q473594" start="100042" end="100057" title="Earth oven" label="&amp;quot;umu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727732" start="100088" end="100098" title="lemongrass" label="lemongrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q545985" start="100103" end="100113" title="fish sauce" label="fish sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q471861" start="100194" end="100198" title="udon" label="udon"/>
<link wikidata="Q234646" start="100200" end="100205" title="ramen" label="ramen"/>
<link wikidata="Q716004" start="100213" end="100220" title="mei fun" label="mei fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q420646" start="100238" end="100241" title="pho" label="pho"/>
<link wikidata="Q277768" start="100356" end="100378" title="luau" label="&amp;quot;lu&amp;#x27;au&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q63213676" start="100670" end="100674" title="Kapu (Hawaiian culture)" label="kapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="100765" end="100770" title="Māori people" label="Maori"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="101402" end="101412" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160961" start="101414" end="101424" title="Aleurites moluccanus" label="kukui nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="101437" end="101449" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496403" start="101620" end="101631" title="plate lunch" label="plate lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224072" start="101741" end="101761" title="Panulirus marginatus" label="&amp;quot;ula poni&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219121" start="101763" end="101786" title="Kona crab" label="&amp;quot;papaikualoa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167443" start="101788" end="101806" title="Cellana" label="&amp;quot;‘opihi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011996" start="101812" end="101839" title="haliotis discus" label="&amp;quot;‘opihi malihini&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="102080" end="102086" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="102268" end="102274" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q275620" start="102277" end="102285" title="sweetsop" label="sweetsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="102287" end="102292" title="mango" label="mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q13182" start="102296" end="102302" title="lychee" label="lychee"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="102304" end="102311" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="102314" end="102320" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="102348" end="102360" title="passionfruit" label="passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="102363" end="102372" title="Pineapple" label="Pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="102613" end="102628" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207965" start="102633" end="102648" title="Mexican cuisine" label="Mexican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="102685" end="102696" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q269100" start="102747" end="102756" title="chop suey" label="chop suey"/>
<link wikidata="Q964107" start="102758" end="102767" title="chow mein" label="chow mein"/>
<link wikidata="Q284288" start="103153" end="103159" title="Jewish cuisine" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12505" start="103161" end="103168" title="Russian cuisine" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="103170" end="103177" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="103179" end="103186" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601734" start="103191" end="103213" title="Greek-American cuisine" label="Greek-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q876096" start="103339" end="103348" title="enchilada" label="enchilada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794713" start="103359" end="103371" title="corn pudding" label="corn pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607" start="103790" end="103797" title="polenta" label="polenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854639" start="103829" end="103837" title="dumpling" label="dumpling"/>
<link wikidata="Q872625" start="103852" end="103863" title="Leberknödel" label="Leberknödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153352" start="103889" end="103900" title="Sauerbraten" label="Sauerbraten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978094" start="104053" end="104084" title="National Restaurant Association" label="National Restaurant Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377468" start="104751" end="104765" title="Paul Prudhomme" label="Paul Prudhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645076" start="104927" end="104933" title="Louisiana Creole cuisine" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105811" start="105361" end="105373" title="Chez Panisse" label="Chez Panisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q78893" start="105519" end="105532" title="Wolfgang Puck" label="Wolfgang Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026802" start="106201" end="106219" title="California Cuisine" label="California Cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192953" start="106245" end="106264" title="culinary revolution" label="culinary revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149348" start="106425" end="106438" title="Paul Bertolli" label="Paul Bertolli"/>
<link wikidata="Q434513" start="106449" end="106461" title="Alice Waters" label="Alice Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="106989" end="107005" title="Native American cuisine" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192812" start="107011" end="107028" title="Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies" label="thirteen colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828546" start="107037" end="107053" title="Cuisine of Antebellum America" label="antebellum South"/>
<link wikidata="Q171141" start="107094" end="107104" title="gastronomy" label="gastronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111686" start="107121" end="107134" title="culinary arts" label="culinary arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="107179" end="107185" title="ethnic" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="107194" end="107203" title="immigrant" label="immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833790" start="107410" end="107433" title="Transatlantic Migration" label="Transatlantic Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784066" start="107464" end="107478" title="mass migration" label="mass migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="107555" end="107573" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q787170" start="107587" end="107608" title="History of United States continental expansion" label="continental expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q741725" start="107828" end="107857" title="early modern European cuisine" label="early modern European cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969441" start="107882" end="107899" title="British-Americans" label="British-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740486" start="107929" end="107948" title="New England cuisine" label="New England cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041917" start="108122" end="108138" title="Spanish American" label="Spanish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q622512" start="108157" end="108172" title="Spanish cuisine" label="Spanish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886395" start="108185" end="108200" title="Basque-American" label="Basque-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q521179" start="108206" end="108220" title="Basque cuisine" label="Basque cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="108231" end="108246" title="German-American" label="German-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="108250" end="108268" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203300" start="108273" end="108299" title="Pennsylvania Dutch cuisine" label="Pennsylvania Dutch cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369944" start="108303" end="108318" title="French American" label="French American"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="108330" end="108339" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="108373" end="108380" title="Acadian" label="Acadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="108385" end="108390" title="Cajun" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q969579" start="108395" end="108408" title="Cajun cuisine" label="Cajun cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="108412" end="108428" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Louisiana Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645076" start="108433" end="108457" title="Louisiana Creole cuisine" label="Louisiana Creole cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="108711" end="108729" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q171141" start="108784" end="108794" title="gastronomy" label="gastronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778821" start="108799" end="108806" title="cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="108815" end="108824" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707196" start="108826" end="108848" title="Latin American cuisine" label="Latin American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="108881" end="108918" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="108923" end="108946" title="Native American cuisine" label="Native American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="108950" end="108967" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q555997" start="108972" end="108981" title="Soul food" label="Soul food"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682049" start="108986" end="109006" title="Puerto Rican cuisine" label="Puerto Rican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="109010" end="109027" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q105896860" start="109032" end="109056" title="Mexican-American cuisine" label="Mexican-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29359" start="109100" end="109107" title="Tex-Mex" label="Tex-Mex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192808" start="109170" end="109190" title="Southwestern cuisine" label="Southwestern cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010123" start="109201" end="109220" title="New Mexican cuisine" label="New Mexican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="109226" end="109236" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="109266" end="109290" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Santa Fe de Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="109323" end="109330" title="Pueblos" label="Pueblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="109335" end="109357" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispanos of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="109590" end="109597" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="109599" end="109604" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="109606" end="109612" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="109614" end="109625" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414323" start="109644" end="109663" title="northwestern Europe" label="northwestern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="109873" end="109880" title="Central Europe" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="109882" end="109889" title="Eastern Europe" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="109895" end="109910" title="southern Europe" label="southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q237534" start="109917" end="109925" title="Austrian people" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="109927" end="109936" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="109938" end="109945" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q186192" start="109947" end="109957" title="Lithuanian people" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="109959" end="109966" title="Russian people" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="109968" end="109974" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="109976" end="109981" title="Greek people" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="109983" end="109990" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="109996" end="110004" title="Romanian people" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="110133" end="110162" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="110184" end="110188" title="Western United States" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="110190" end="110199" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="110205" end="110210" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="110212" end="110228" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="110267" end="110287" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849258" start="110477" end="110495" title="Albanian Americans" label="Albanian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199173" start="110496" end="110512" title="Albanian cuisine" label="Albanian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q787519" start="110515" end="110528" title="Arab American" label="Arab American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510842" start="110544" end="110561" title="Lebanese American" label="Lebanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q623970" start="110616" end="110628" title="Arab cuisine" label="Arab cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q929239" start="110630" end="110646" title="Lebanese cuisine" label="Lebanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789371" start="110649" end="110668" title="Argentine Americans" label="Argentine Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q579500" start="110669" end="110686" title="Argentine cuisine" label="Argentine cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325516" start="110689" end="110707" title="Armenian Americans" label="Armenian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q684343" start="110708" end="110724" title="Armenian cuisine" label="Armenian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958704" start="110727" end="110746" title="Brazilian Americans" label="Brazilian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q614394" start="110747" end="110764" title="Brazilian cuisine" label="Brazilian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025138" start="110767" end="110786" title="Cambodian Americans" label="Cambodian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q139430" start="110787" end="110804" title="Cambodian cuisine" label="Cambodian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="110807" end="110823" title="Chinese American" label="Chinese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743373" start="110825" end="110849" title="American Chinese cuisine" label="American Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="110851" end="110866" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147921" start="110869" end="110888" title="Colombian Americans" label="Colombian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q909057" start="110889" end="110906" title="Colombian cuisine" label="Colombian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="110909" end="110923" title="Cuban American" label="Cuban American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328358" start="110925" end="110938" title="Cuban cuisine" label="Cuban cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290725" start="110941" end="110959" title="Dominican American" label="Dominican American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444032" start="110961" end="110987" title="Dominican Republic cuisine" label="Dominican Republic cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058496" start="110990" end="111005" title="Dutch Americans" label="Dutch Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988266" start="111006" end="111019" title="Dutch cuisine" label="Dutch cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403534" start="111022" end="111041" title="Ethiopian Americans" label="Ethiopian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152605" start="111042" end="111060" title="Eritrean Americans" label="Eritrean Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q257508" start="111062" end="111079" title="Ethiopian cuisine" label="Ethiopian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q846275" start="111081" end="111097" title="Eritrean cuisine" label="Eritrean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="111151" end="111169" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520796" start="111170" end="111186" title="Filipino cuisine" label="Filipino cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324835" start="111188" end="111213" title="Filipino-American cuisine" label="Filipino-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369944" start="111216" end="111232" title="French Americans" label="French Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="111233" end="111247" title="French cuisine" label="French cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="111250" end="111266" title="German Americans" label="German Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q47629" start="111267" end="111281" title="German cuisine" label="German cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="111287" end="111305" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150312" start="111430" end="111444" title="Greek American" label="Greek American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601734" start="111446" end="111468" title="Greek-American cuisine" label="Greek-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744027" start="111470" end="111483" title="Greek cuisine" label="Greek cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="111485" end="111506" title="Mediterranean cuisine" label="Mediterranean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614258" start="111509" end="111529" title="Guatemalan Americans" label="Guatemalan Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407615" start="111530" end="111548" title="Guatemalan cuisine" label="Guatemalan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639720" start="111551" end="111567" title="Haitian American" label="Haitian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560444" start="111569" end="111584" title="Haitian cuisine" label="Haitian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892930" start="111587" end="111605" title="Honduran Americans" label="Honduran Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q843526" start="111606" end="111622" title="Honduran cuisine" label="Honduran cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q948126" start="111625" end="111643" title="Hungarian American" label="Hungarian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q264327" start="111645" end="111662" title="Hungarian cuisine" label="Hungarian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="111665" end="111680" title="Indian American" label="Indian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="111682" end="111696" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="111699" end="111713" title="Irish American" label="Irish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068545" start="111715" end="111728" title="Irish cuisine" label="Irish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="111731" end="111747" title="Italian American" label="Italian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699131" start="111749" end="111773" title="Italian-American cuisine" label="Italian-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="111775" end="111790" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="111793" end="111810" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="111812" end="111828" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295586" start="111853" end="111869" title="Hawaiian cuisine" label="Hawaiian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="111872" end="111888" title="Jewish Americans" label="Jewish Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q284288" start="111889" end="111903" title="Jewish cuisine" label="Jewish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111934" end="111955" title="Cuisine of New York City#NYC Eastern European Jewish Cuisine" label="New York City cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="111958" end="111973" title="Korean American" label="Korean American"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="111975" end="111989" title="Korean cuisine" label="Korean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749358" start="111992" end="112011" title="Lithuanian American" label="Lithuanian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q19360432" start="112013" end="112031" title="Lithuanian cuisine" label="Lithuanian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192803" start="112033" end="112040" title="Cuisine of the Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024433" start="112043" end="112062" title="Nicaraguan American" label="Nicaraguan American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024467" start="112063" end="112081" title="Nicaraguan cuisine" label="Nicaraguan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032863" start="112084" end="112102" title="Nigerian Americans" label="Nigerian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033037" start="112103" end="112119" title="Nigerian cuisine" label="Nigerian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125803" start="112122" end="112140" title="Pakistani American" label="Pakistani American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089120" start="112142" end="112159" title="Pakistani cuisine" label="Pakistani cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171142" start="112162" end="112180" title="Peruvian Americans" label="Peruvian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q749847" start="112181" end="112197" title="Peruvian cuisine" label="Peruvian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="112200" end="112215" title="Polish American" label="Polish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q756020" start="112217" end="112231" title="Polish cuisine" label="Polish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192803" start="112259" end="112266" title="Cuisine of the Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="112269" end="112288" title="Polynesian American" label="Polynesian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295586" start="112290" end="112306" title="Hawaiian cuisine" label="Hawaiian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267812" start="112309" end="112328" title="Portuguese American" label="Portuguese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q180817" start="112330" end="112348" title="Portuguese cuisine" label="Portuguese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916714" start="112351" end="112368" title="Romanian American" label="Romanian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q265309" start="112370" end="112386" title="Romanian cuisine" label="Romanian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140588" start="112389" end="112405" title="Russian American" label="Russian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q12505" start="112407" end="112422" title="Russian cuisine" label="Russian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192803" start="112450" end="112457" title="Cuisine of the Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406487" start="112460" end="112479" title="Salvadoran American" label="Salvadoran American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406497" start="112481" end="112499" title="Salvadoran cuisine" label="Salvadoran cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="112502" end="112519" title="Scottish American" label="Scottish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897293" start="112521" end="112537" title="Scottish cuisine" label="Scottish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041917" start="112540" end="112557" title="Spanish Americans" label="Spanish Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q622512" start="112558" end="112573" title="Spanish cuisine" label="Spanish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450068" start="112576" end="112589" title="Thai American" label="Thai American"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="112591" end="112603" title="Thai cuisine" label="Thai cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464565" start="112606" end="112622" title="Turkish American" label="Turkish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q654493" start="112624" end="112639" title="Turkish cuisine" label="Turkish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q805060" start="112641" end="112655" title="Balkan cuisine" label="Balkan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919819" start="112658" end="112678" title="Venezuelan Americans" label="Venezuelan Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149423" start="112679" end="112697" title="Venezuelan cuisine" label="Venezuelan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657969" start="112700" end="112719" title="Vietnamese American" label="Vietnamese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q826059" start="112721" end="112739" title="Vietnamese cuisine" label="Vietnamese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985442" start="112742" end="112762" title="West Indian American" label="West Indian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729345" start="112764" end="112781" title="Caribbean cuisine" label="Caribbean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821205" start="112783" end="112799" title="Jamaican cuisine" label="Jamaican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842450" start="112801" end="112828" title="Trinidad and Tobago cuisine" label="Trinidad and Tobago cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747587" start="112830" end="112847" title="Barbadian cuisine" label="Barbadian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014931" start="112849" end="112865" title="Bahamian cuisine" label="Bahamian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213062" start="113548" end="113553" title="steak" label="steak"/>
<link wikidata="Q47629" start="113578" end="113592" title="German cuisine" label="German cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096304" start="113595" end="113614" title="chicken-fried steak" label="chicken-fried steak"/>
<link wikidata="Q11293688" start="113654" end="113663" title="schnitzel" label="schnitzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="113678" end="113687" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="113689" end="113698" title="milkshake" label="milkshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261477" start="113736" end="113743" title="English cuisine" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897293" start="113745" end="113753" title="Scottish cuisine" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q386284" start="113759" end="113766" title="African cuisine" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="113779" end="113784" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q623561" start="113786" end="113795" title="Dr Pepper" label="Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="113876" end="113881" title="pizza" label="pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="113886" end="113891" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="113893" end="113897" title="taco" label="taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q390823" start="113903" end="113910" title="burrito" label="burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q839206" start="113921" end="113947" title="General Tso&amp;#x27;s chicken" label="General Tso&amp;#x27;s chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q782794" start="113958" end="113972" title="fortune cookie" label="fortune cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="114180" end="114195" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="114197" end="114208" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q550258" start="114210" end="114222" title="Wendy&amp;#x27;s" label="Wendy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q839466" start="114224" end="114237" title="Domino&amp;#x27;s" label="Domino&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q191615" start="114239" end="114248" title="Pizza Hut" label="Pizza Hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q524757" start="114250" end="114253" title="KFC" label="KFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330910" start="114255" end="114262" title="Popeyes" label="Popeyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="114264" end="114270" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q752941" start="114272" end="114281" title="Taco Bell" label="Taco Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q630866" start="114283" end="114294" title="Arby&amp;#x27;s" label="Arby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="114296" end="114305" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q847743" start="114307" end="114326" title="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts" label="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244034" start="114328" end="114340" title="White Castle (restaurant)" label="White Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205312" start="114342" end="114357" title="In-N-Out Burger" label="In-N-Out Burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561808" start="114359" end="114373" title="Sonic Drive-In" label="Sonic Drive-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q491516" start="114375" end="114386" title="Chick-fil-A" label="Chick-fil-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089932" start="114388" end="114409" title="Church&amp;#x27;s Chicken" label="Church&amp;#x27;s Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285144" start="114415" end="114434" title="Raising Cane&amp;#x27;s" label="Raising Cane&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068034" start="114971" end="114980" title="apple pie" label="apple pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q245752" start="115022" end="115034" title="banana split" label="banana split"/>
<link wikidata="Q894562" start="115036" end="115052" title="Boston cream pie" label="Boston cream pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518169" start="115054" end="115066" title="key lime pie" label="key lime pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564638" start="115072" end="115086" title="bananas foster" label="bananas foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169302" start="115123" end="115145" title="chocolate chip cookies" label="chocolate chip cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284379" start="115147" end="115156" title="pecan pie" label="pecan pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q656071" start="115158" end="115169" title="carrot cake" label="carrot cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853875" start="115171" end="115185" title="banana pudding" label="banana pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339814" start="115187" end="115198" title="S&amp;#x27;more" label="S&amp;#x27;more"/>
<link wikidata="Q338242" start="115200" end="115222" title="black and white cookie" label="black and white cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118270" start="115225" end="115236" title="pumpkin pie" label="pumpkin pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139845" start="115238" end="115250" title="coconut cake" label="coconut cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q539429" start="115252" end="115263" title="funnel cake" label="funnel cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q503129" start="115265" end="115273" title="chocolate brownie" label="brownies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284887" start="115278" end="115293" title="red velvet cake" label="red velvet cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499072" start="115365" end="115369" title="chef" label="chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918191" start="115494" end="115510" title="Charles Ranhofer" label="Charles Ranhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184537" start="115514" end="115541" title="Delmonico&amp;#x27;s Restaurant" label="Delmonico&amp;#x27;s Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="115545" end="115553" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711805" start="116136" end="116151" title="Cooking Channel" label="Cooking Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435969" start="116156" end="116168" title="Food Network" label="Food Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970030" start="116670" end="116682" title="Samin Nosrat" label="Samin Nosrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q57262935" start="116684" end="116705" title="Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat" label="Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q382550" start="116708" end="116721" title="Thomas Keller" label="Thomas Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364717" start="116723" end="116741" title="The French Laundry" label="The French Laundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085621" start="116744" end="116759" title="Charlie Trotter" label="Charlie Trotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596095" start="116778" end="116790" title="Grant Achatz" label="Grant Achatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723302" start="116801" end="116815" title="Alfred Portale" label="Alfred Portale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377468" start="116827" end="116841" title="Paul Prudhomme" label="Paul Prudhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149348" start="116859" end="116872" title="Paul Bertolli" label="Paul Bertolli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274728" start="116884" end="116899" title="Jonathan Waxman" label="Jonathan Waxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804713" start="116901" end="116908" title="Barbuto (restaurant)" label="Barbuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769201" start="116911" end="116920" title="Mark Peel (chef)" label="Mark Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489800" start="116934" end="116945" title="Frank Stitt" label="Frank Stitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q434513" start="116957" end="116969" title="Alice Waters" label="Alice Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q78893" start="116986" end="116999" title="Wolfgang Puck" label="Wolfgang Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147365" start="117009" end="117031" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Connell (chef)" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812355" start="117071" end="117083" title="Todd English" label="Todd English"/>
<link wikidata="Q426582" start="117097" end="117113" title="Anthony Bourdain" label="Anthony Bourdain"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="117254" end="117268" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364717" start="117359" end="117377" title="The French Laundry" label="The French Laundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726773" start="117390" end="117396" title="Alinea (restaurant)" label="Alinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506539" start="117409" end="117421" title="Le Bernardin" label="Le Bernardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742075" start="117445" end="117473" title="The Inn at Little Washington" label="The Inn at Little Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017652" start="117578" end="117589" title="David Chang" label="David Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736872" start="117611" end="117622" title="Alton Brown" label="Alton Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q339838" start="117644" end="117658" title="Emeril Lagasse" label="Emeril Lagasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232577" start="117674" end="117682" title="Cat Cora" label="Cat Cora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072379" start="117684" end="117701" title="Iron Chef America" label="Iron Chef America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834741" start="117738" end="117751" title="Michael Symon" label="Michael Symon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858327" start="117764" end="117774" title="Bobby Flay" label="Bobby Flay"/>
<link wikidata="Q273371" start="117794" end="117804" title="Ina Garten" label="Ina Garten"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057690" start="117829" end="117838" title="Guy Fieri" label="Guy Fieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028299" start="117840" end="117867" title="Diners, Drive-ins and Dives" label="Diners, Drive-ins and Dives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017652" start="117909" end="117920" title="David Chang" label="David Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q339838" start="117922" end="117936" title="Emeril Lagasse" label="Emeril Lagasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q858327" start="117941" end="117951" title="Bobby Flay" label="Bobby Flay"/>
<link wikidata="" start="118171" end="118184" title="Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown" label="Parts Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164367" start="118236" end="118253" title="Chef&amp;#x27;s Table" label="Chef&amp;#x27;s Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175852" start="118532" end="118546" title="Peter Merriman" label="Peter Merriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210760" start="118574" end="118582" title="Roy Choi" label="Roy Choi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513434" start="118610" end="118625" title="Jerry Traunfeld" label="Jerry Traunfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830621" start="118627" end="118636" title="Alan Wong" label="Alan Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331230" start="118660" end="118672" title="Rick Bayless" label="Rick Bayless"/>
<link wikidata="Q63342286" start="118677" end="118695" title="Daniela Soto-Innes" label="Daniela Soto-Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207965" start="118709" end="118724" title="Mexican cuisine" label="Mexican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q468817" start="118910" end="118933" title="Cuisine of the Americas" label="Cuisine of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492088" start="118937" end="118971" title="Indigenous cuisine of the Americas" label="Indigenous cuisine of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q555997" start="118974" end="118983" title="Soul food" label="Soul food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968496" start="118999" end="119012" title="American wine" label="American wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192766" start="119031" end="119052" title="Cuisine of California" label="Cuisine of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q122059184" start="119055" end="119075" title="Cuisine of Minnesota" label="Cuisine of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740486" start="119079" end="119101" title="Cuisine of New England" label="Cuisine of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q903260" start="119104" end="119128" title="Cuisine of New York City" label="Cuisine of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q381416" start="119131" end="119168" title="Cuisine of the Southern United States" label="Cuisine of the Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192762" start="119172" end="119190" title="Cuisine of Atlanta" label="Cuisine of Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192774" start="119194" end="119212" title="Cuisine of Houston" label="Cuisine of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192779" start="119216" end="119235" title="Cuisine of Kentucky" label="Cuisine of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q29359" start="119238" end="119253" title="Tex-Mex cuisine" label="Tex-Mex cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743373" start="119270" end="119294" title="American Chinese cuisine" label="American Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105896860" start="119297" end="119321" title="Mexican-American cuisine" label="Mexican-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699131" start="119324" end="119348" title="Italian-American cuisine" label="Italian-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601734" start="119351" end="119373" title="Greek-American cuisine" label="Greek-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682049" start="119376" end="119396" title="Puerto Rican cuisine" label="Puerto Rican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="119418" end="119483" title="High on the Hog: How African American Cuisine Transformed America" label="High on the Hog: How African American Cuisine Transformed America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828546" start="119492" end="119521" title="Cuisine of Antebellum America" label="Cuisine of Antebellum America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932906" start="119524" end="119549" title="List of American desserts" label="List of American desserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354589" start="119552" end="119575" title="List of American breads" label="List of American breads"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856866" start="119579" end="119604" title="Bread in American cuisine" label="Bread in American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508701" start="119607" end="119629" title="List of American foods" label="List of American foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561616" start="119632" end="119677" title="List of American regional and fusion cuisines" label="List of American regional and fusion cuisines"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715384" start="119680" end="119712" title="List of American breakfast foods" label="List of American breakfast foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810748" start="119715" end="119730" title="Tlingit cuisine" label="Tlingit cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q468817" start="119733" end="119756" title="Cuisine of the Americas" label="Cuisine of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203300" start="119759" end="119792" title="Cuisine of the Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Cuisine of the Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q381416" start="119795" end="119832" title="Cuisine of the Southern United States" label="Cuisine of the Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745546" start="119835" end="119855" title="American tea culture" label="American tea culture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2176" wikidata="Q200029" url="?curid=2176" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud">
<text>Ahmad Shah Massoud (Dari: , ; September 2, 1953September 9, 2001) was an Afghan military leader and politician. He was a guerrilla commander during the resistance against the Soviet occupation during the Soviet–Afghan War from 1979 to 1989. In the 1990s, he led the government&#x27;s military wing against rival militia, and actively fought against the Taliban, from the time the regime rose to power in 1996, and until his assassination in 2001.

Massoud came from an ethnic Tajik of Sunni Muslim background in the Panjshir Valley in Northern Afghanistan. He began studying engineering at Polytechnical University of Kabul in the 1970s, where he became involved with religious anti-communist movements around Burhanuddin Rabbani, a leading Islamist. He participated in a failed uprising against Mohammed Daoud Khan&#x27;s government. He later joined Rabbani&#x27;s Jamiat-e Islami party. During the Soviet–Afghan War, his role as an insurgent leader of the Afghan mujahideen earned him the nickname &quot;Lion of Panjshir&quot; () among his followers. Supported by Britain&#x27;s MI6 and to a lesser extent by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), he successfully resisted the Soviets from taking the Panjshir Valley. In 1992, he signed the Peshawar Accord, a peace and power-sharing agreement, in the post-communist Islamic State of Afghanistan. He was appointed the Minister of Defense as well as the government&#x27;s main military commander. His militia fought to defend Kabul against militias led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and other warlords who were bombing the city, as well as later against the Taliban, who laid siege to the capital in January 1995 after the city had seen fierce fighting with at least 60,000 civilians killed.

Following the rise of the Taliban in 1996, Massoud, who rejected the Taliban&#x27;s fundamentalist interpretation of Islam, returned to armed opposition until he was forced to flee to Kulob, Tajikistan, strategically destroying the Salang Tunnel on his way north. He became the military and political leader of the United Islamic Front for the Salvation of Afghanistan or Northern Alliance, which by 2000 controlled only between 5 and 10 percent of the country. In 2001 he visited Europe and urged European Parliament leaders to pressure Pakistan on its support for the Taliban. He also asked for humanitarian aid to combat the Afghan people&#x27;s gruesome conditions under the Taliban. On September 9, 2001, Massoud was injured in a suicide bombing by two al-Qaeda assassins, ordered personally by the al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden himself; he lost his life while en route to a hospital across the border in Tajikistan. Two days later, the September 11 attacks occurred in the United States, which ultimately led to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) invading Afghanistan and allying with Massoud&#x27;s forces. The Northern Alliance eventually won the two-month-long war in December 2001, removing the Taliban from power.

Massoud has been described as one of the greatest guerrilla leaders of the 20th century and has been compared to Josip Broz Tito, Ho Chi Minh and Che Guevara. Massoud was posthumously named &quot;National Hero&quot; by the order of President Hamid Karzai after the Taliban were ousted from power. The date of Massoud&#x27;s death, September 9, was observed as a national holiday known as &quot;Massoud Day&quot; until the Taliban takeover in August 2021. His followers call him &quot;Amer Sāhib-e Shahīd&quot; (), which translates to &quot;(our) martyred commander&quot;. A street in New Delhi was named after him in 2007. He has been posthumously honored by a plaque in France in 2021, and in the same year was awarded with the highest honor of Tajikistan.

==Early life==

Ahmad Shah Massoud was born in 1953 in the small village of Jangalak, Bazarak in the Panjshir Valley (now administered as part of the Panjshir Province), to a well-to-do family native to the Panjshir Valley. Massoud&#x27;s name at birth was &#x27;Ahmad Shah&#x27; after King Ahamad Shah Durrani, founder of the modern, unified state of Afghanistan, later taking the name &#x27;Massoud&#x27; as a &quot;nom de guerre&quot; in 1974 when he joined the resistance movement against the forces of Daoud Khan. Massoud&#x27;s father, Dost Mohammad, was a colonel in the Royal Afghan Army; his mother, Bibi Khorshid has been described as a &quot;modern-minded&quot; woman who taught herself to read and write determined to educate her daughters no less than her sons.

Moving along with his father&#x27;s postings, the adolescent Massoud attended primary school in Afghanistan&#x27;s western city of Herat before his father was dispatched to Kabul. There, Massoud was sent to the Franco-Afghan Lycée Esteqlal (lit. Independence High School) where he attained his proficiency in French. Massoud&#x27;s experience at Lycée would be formative and, as he would later remark, was the happiest period of his life. At Lycée his classes were taught by French and Afghan tutors educated in France and the students donned Western jackets, neckties, trousers, skirts, scarves, and stockings. Although his knowledge of the French language would earn him greater affinity among French journalists and politicians, later conservative Islamist opponents such as Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and the Taliban would derogatorily dub him &quot;The Frenchmen&quot; or &quot;The Parisian&quot; suggestive of his sympathies to Western culture.

While at the Lycée, Massoud was described as an intellectually-gifted student, hard-working, religiously devout, and mature for his age with a particular interest in ethics, politics, universal justice. Friends and family recall an instance where Massoud, returning from school, came to the defense of a younger boy leaving the three bullies knocked-out on the pavement. More formatively, Massoud followed closely reports of the 1967 Six-Day War and the defiant statements of Arab leaders like Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser. He later told researcher Peter DeNeufville that, at fourteen, the war left him determined to be a soldier and gave him a new regard for Pan-Islamism after hearing the stories told by Jordanian, Egyptian, and Syrian soldiers defending their homelands. Massoud refused repeated suggestions to apply for a scholarship to study in France expressing his desire to remain in Afghanistan and apply to the nation&#x27;s military academy in Kabul.

By protest of his father and eldest brother, Massoud enrolled at Kabul Polytechnic Institute, then Kabul University&#x27;s newest and most prestigious addition founded, financed, and operated by the Soviet Union. Massoud studied engineering and architecture but never attempted to learn Russian. There he found interest in politics, political Islam, and anti-Communism which often put him and his pious peers at odds with communist-inspired students. According to Soviet intelligence reports on Massoud, in 1974–75, he was trained in guerilla warfare tactics in Lebanon and Egypt where he took part in combat operations and terrorist attacks with armed Palestinian resistance groups such as the PLO.

==1975 rebellion in Panjshir==

In 1973, former Prime Minister Mohammed Daoud Khan was brought to power in a coup d&#x27;état backed by the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan, and the Republic of Afghanistan was established. These developments gave rise to an Islamist movement opposed to the increasing communist and Soviet influence over Afghanistan. During that time, while studying at Kabul University, Massoud became involved with the Muslim Youth (Sazman-i Jawanan-i Musulman), the student branch of the Jamiat-e Islami (Islamic Society), whose chairman then was the professor Burhanuddin Rabbani. Kabul University was a center for political debate and activism during that time.

Infuriated by the arrogance of his communist peers and Russian professors, a physical altercation between Massoud and his Russian professor led Massoud to walk out of the university, and shortly after, Kabul. Two days later, Massoud and a number of fellow militant students traveled to Pakistan where, goaded by another trainee of the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), Gulbaddin Hekmatyar, Massoud agreed to take part in a coup against Daoud with his forces rising up in the Panjshir and Hekmatyar&#x27;s elsewhere. In July 1975, Massoud, with help from the Pakistani intelligence, led the first rebellion of Panjshir residents against the government of Daoud Khan. While the uprising in the Panjshir saw initial success, even taking the military garrison in Rokha, the promised support from Kabul never came and the rebellion was suppressed by Daoud Khan&#x27;s forces sending Massoud back into Pakistan (after a day hiding in Jangalak) where he would attend a secret, paramilitary ISI training center in Cherat. Dissatisfied, Massoud left the center and returned to Peshawar where he committed himself to personal military studies. Massoud read Mao Tse-tung&#x27;s writings on the Long March, of Che Guevara&#x27;s career, the memoirs of General de Gaulle, General Võ Nguyên Giáp, Sun Tzu&#x27;s Art of War, and an unnamed handbook on counterterrorism by an American general which Massoud called &quot;the most instructive of all&quot;.

After this failure, a &quot;profound and long-lasting schism&quot; within the Islamist movement began to emerge. The Islamic Society split between supporters of the more moderate forces around Massoud and Rabbani, who led the Jamiat-i Islami, and more radical Islamist elements surrounding Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, who founded the Hezb-i Islami. The conflict reached such a point that Hekmatyar reportedly tried to kill Massoud, then 22 years old.

==Resistance against communism==

===Resistance against the PDPA (1978)===

The government of Mohammed Daoud Khan tried to scale back the communist People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan&#x27;s influence, dismissing PDPA members from their government posts, appointing conservatives to replace them, and finally dissolved the PDPA, with the arrests of senior party members. On April 27, 1978, the PDPA and military units loyal to it killed Daoud Khan, his immediate family, and bodyguards in a violent coup, and seized control of the capital Kabul declaring the new Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA). The new communist government, led by a revolutionary council, did not enjoy the support of the masses. It implemented a doctrine hostile to political dissent, whether inside or outside the party. The PDPA started reforms along Marxist–Leninist and Soviet lines. The reforms and the PDPA&#x27;s affinity to the Soviet Union were met with strong resistance by the population, especially as the government attempted to enforce its Marxist policies by arresting or executing those who resisted. Between 50,000 and 100,000 people were estimated to have been arrested and killed by communist troops in the countryside alone. Due to the repression, large parts of the country, especially the rural areas, organized into open revolt against the PDPA government. By spring 1979, unrest had reached 24 out of 28 Afghan provinces, including major urban areas. Over half of the Afghan army either deserted or joined the insurrection.

With religious elders declaring a jihad against the government, in May 1979 Massoud prepared in Peshawar to oppose the new communist government in Panjshir. Along with twenty-four of his friends, Massoud took a bus to Bajaur and, with arms-smuggling Pashtun tribesmen, marched on foot into the Panjshir Valley. Massoud&#x27;s group seized control over a number of government outposts in the Valley, entered the Shomali Plain to capture Gulbahar, and cut off the Salang Highway, the main supply route between Kabul and the Soviet border raising alarm in both Kabul and Moscow which brought upon Massoud and his group a government counterattack.

Believing that an uprising against the Soviet-backed communists would be supported by the people, Massoud, on July 6, 1979, started an insurrection in the Panjshir, which initially failed. Massoud decided to avoid conventional confrontation with the larger government forces and to wage a guerrilla war. He subsequently took full control of Panjshir, pushing out Afghan communist troops. Oliver Roy writes that in the following period, Massoud&#x27;s &quot;personal prestige and the efficiency of his military organization persuaded many local commanders to come and learn from him.&quot;

===Resistance against the Soviet Union (1979–1989)===

Following the 1979 Soviet invasion and occupation of Afghanistan, Massoud devised a strategic plan for expelling the invaders and overthrowing the communist regime. The first task was to establish a popularly based resistance force that had the loyalty of the people. The second phase was &quot;active defense&quot; of the Panjshir stronghold, while carrying out asymmetric warfare. In the third phase, the &quot;strategic offensive&quot;, Massoud&#x27;s forces would gain control of large parts of Northern Afghanistan. The fourth phase was the &quot;general application&quot; of Massoud&#x27;s principles to the whole country, and the defeat of the Afghan communist government.

Massoud&#x27;s mujahideen attacked the occupying Soviet forces, ambushing Soviet and Afghan communist convoys travelling through the Salang Pass, and causing fuel shortages in Kabul. The Soviets mounted a series of offensives against the Panjshir. Between 1980 and 1985, these offensives were conducted twice a year. Despite engaging more men and hardware on each occasion, the Soviets were unable to defeat Massoud&#x27;s forces. In 1982, the Soviets began deploying major combat units in the Panjshir, numbering up to 30,000 men. Massoud pulled his troops back into subsidiary valleys, where they occupied fortified positions. When the Soviet columns advanced onto these positions, they fell into ambushes. When the Soviets withdrew, Afghan army garrisons took over their positions. Massoud and his mujahideen forces attacked and recaptured them one by one.

In 1983, the Soviets offered Massoud a temporary truce, which he accepted in order to rebuild his own forces and give the civilian population a break from Soviet attacks. He put the respite to good use. In this time he created the Shura-e Nazar (Supervisory Council), which subsequently united 130 commanders from 12 Afghan provinces in their fight against the Soviet army. This council existed outside the Peshawar parties, which were prone to internecine rivalry and bickering, and served to smooth out differences between resistance groups, due to political and ethnic divisions. It was the predecessor of what could have become a unified Islamic Afghan army.

Relations with the party headquarters in Peshawar were often strained, as Rabbani insisted on giving Massoud no more weapons and supplies than to other Jamiat commanders, even those who did little fighting. To compensate for this deficiency, Massoud relied on revenues drawn from exports of emeralds and lapis lazuli, that are traditionally exploited in Northern Afghanistan.

Regarding infighting among different mujahideen factions, following a Soviet truce, Massoud said in an interview:

Britain&#x27;s MI6 having activated long-established networks of contacts in Pakistan were able to support Massoud, and soon became their key ally. MI6 sent an annual mission of two of their officers as well as military instructors to Massoud and his fighters. They also gave supplies to Massoud which included sniper rifles with silencers and mortars. As well as training Massoud&#x27;s junior commanders, MI6 team&#x27;s most important contribution was help with organisation and communication via radio equipment which was highly useful for Massoud to coordinate his forces and be warned of any impending Soviet attacks. The United States provided him with comparatively less support than other factions. Part of the reason was that it permitted its funding and arms distribution to be administered by Pakistan, which favored the rival mujahideen leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. In an interview, Massoud said, &quot;We thought the CIA knew everything. But they didn&#x27;t. They supported some bad people [meaning Hekmatyar].&quot; Primary advocates for supporting Massoud were the US State Department&#x27;s Edmund McWilliams and Peter Tomsen, who were on the ground in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Others included two Heritage Foundation foreign policy analysts, Michael Johns and James A. Phillips, both of whom championed Massoud as the Afghan resistance leader most worthy of U.S. support under the Reagan Doctrine. Thousands of foreign Islamic volunteers entered Afghanistan to fight with the mujahideen against the Soviet troops.

To organize support for the mujahideen, Massoud established an administrative system that enforced law and order (&quot;nazm&quot;) in areas under his control. The Panjshir was divided into 22 bases (&quot;qarargah&quot;) governed by a military commander and a civilian administrator, and each had a judge, a prosecutor and a public defender. Massoud&#x27;s policies were implemented by different committees: an economic committee was charged with funding the war effort. The health committee provided health services, assisted by volunteers from foreign humanitarian non-governmental organizations, such as Aide médicale internationale. An education committee was charged with the training of the military and administrative cadre. A culture committee and a judiciary committee were also created.

This expansion prompted Babrak Karmal to demand that the Red Army resume their offensives, in order to crush the Panjshir groups. Massoud received warning of the attack through Britain&#x27;s GCHQ intelligence and he evacuated all 130,000 inhabitants from the valley into the Hindukush mountains, leaving the Soviet bombings to fall on empty ground and the Soviet battalions to face the mountains.

With the defeat of the Soviet-Afghan attacks, Massoud carried out the next phase of his strategic plan, expanding the resistance movement and liberating the northern provinces of Afghanistan. In August 1986, he captured Farkhar in Takhar Province. In November 1986, his forces overran the headquarters of the government&#x27;s 20th division at Nahrin in Baghlan Province, scoring an important victory for the resistance. This expansion was also carried out through diplomatic means, as more mujahideen commanders were persuaded to adopt the Panjshir military system.

Despite almost constant attacks by the Red Army and the Afghan army, Massoud increased his military strength. Starting in 1980 with a force of less than 1,000 ill-equipped guerrillas, the Panjshir valley mujahideen grew to a 5,000-strong force by 1984. After expanding his influence outside the valley, Massoud increased his resistance forces to 13,000 fighters by 1989. The junior commanders were trained by Britain&#x27;s SAS as well as private military contractors, some being sent as far as Oman and even SAS training grounds in the Scottish Highlands. These forces were divided into different types of units: the locals (mahalli) were tasked with static defense of villages and fortified positions. The best of the mahalli were formed into units called grup-i zarbati (shock troops), semi-mobile groups that acted as reserve forces for the defense of several strongholds. A different type of unit was the mobile group (grup-i-mutaharek), a lightly equipped commando-like formation numbering 33 men, whose mission was to carry out hit-and-run attacks outside the Panjshir, sometimes as far as 100 km from their base. These men were professional soldiers, well-paid and trained, and, from 1983 on, they provided an effective strike force against government outposts. Uniquely among the mujahideen, these groups wore uniforms, and their use of the &quot;pakul&quot; made this headwear emblematic of the Afghan resistance.

Massoud&#x27;s military organization was an effective compromise between the traditional Afghan method of warfare and the modern principles of guerrilla warfare which he had learned from the works of Mao Zedong and Che Guevara. His forces were considered the most effective of all the various Afghan resistance movements.

The Soviet army and the Afghan communist army were mainly defeated by Massoud and his mujahideen in numerous small engagements between 1984 and 1988. After describing the Soviet Union&#x27;s military engagement in Afghanistan as &quot;a bleeding wound&quot; in 1986, Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev began a withdrawal of Soviet troops from the nation in May 1988. On February 15, 1989, in what was depicted as an improbable victory for the mujahideen, the last Soviet soldier left the nation.

===Fall of the Afghan communist regime (1992)===
After the departure of Soviet troops in 1989, the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan regime, then headed by Mohammad Najibullah, held its own against the mujahideen. Backed by a massive influx of weapons from the Soviet Union, the Afghan armed forces reached a level of performance they had never reached under direct Soviet tutelage. They maintained control over all of Afghanistan&#x27;s major cities. During late 1990, helped by hundreds of mujahideen forces, Massoud targeted the Tajik Supreme Soviet, trying to oust communism from the neighboring Tajikistan to further destabilize the dying Soviet Union, which would also impact the Afghan government. At that time, as per Asad Durrani, the director-general of the ISI during this period, Massoud&#x27;s base camp was in Garam Chashma, in Pakistan. By 1992, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Afghan regime eventually began to crumble. Food and fuel shortages undermined the capacities of the government&#x27;s army, and a resurgence of factionalism split the regime between Khalq and Parcham supporters.

A few days after Najibullah had lost control of the nation, his army commanders and governors arranged to turn over authority to resistance commanders and local warlords throughout the country. Joint councils (&quot;shuras&quot;) were immediately established for local government, in which civil and military officials of the former government were usually included. In many cases, prior arrangements for transferring regional and local authority had been made between foes.

Collusions between military leaders quickly brought down the Kabul government. In mid-January 1992, within three weeks of the demise of the Soviet Union, Massoud was aware of conflict within the government&#x27;s northern command. General Abdul Momim, in charge of the Hairatan border crossing at the northern end of Kabul&#x27;s supply highway, and other non-Pashtun generals based in Mazar-i-Sharif, feared removal by Najibullah and replacement by Pashtun officers. When the generals rebelled, Abdul Rashid Dostum, who held general rank as head of the Jowzjani militia, also based in Mazar-i-Sharif, took over.

He and Massoud reached a political agreement, together with another major militia leader, Sayyed Mansour, of the Ismaili community based in Baghlan Province. These northern allies consolidated their position in Mazar-i-Sharif on March 21. Their coalition covered nine provinces in the north and northeast. As turmoil developed within the government in Kabul, no government force stood between the northern allies and the major air force base at Bagram, some seventy kilometers north of Kabul. By mid-April 1992, the Afghan air force command at Bagram had capitulated to Massoud. On March 18, 1992, Najibullah decided to resign. On April 17, as his government fell, he tried to escape but was stopped at Kabul Airport by Dostum&#x27;s forces. He took refuge at the United Nations mission, where he remained unharmed until 1996, while Massoud controlled the area surrounding the mission.

Senior communist generals and officials of the Najibullah administration acted as a transitional authority to transfer power to Ahmad Shah Massoud&#x27;s alliance. The Kabul interim authority invited Massoud to enter Kabul as the new Head of State, but he held back. Massoud ordered his forces, positioned to the north of Kabul, not to enter the capital until a political solution was in place. He called on all the senior Afghan party leaders, many then based in exile in Peshawar, to work out a political settlement acceptable to all sides and parties.

==War in Afghanistan (1992–2001)==

===War in Kabul and other parts of the country (1992–1996)===
====Peace and power-sharing agreement (1992)====
With United Nations support, most Afghan political parties decided to appoint a legitimate national government to succeed communist rule, through an elite settlement. While the external Afghan party leaders were residing in Peshawar, the military situation around Kabul involving the internal commanders was tense. A 1991 UN peace process brought about some negotiations, but the attempted elite settlement did not develop. In April 1992, resistance leaders in Peshawar tried to negotiate a settlement. Massoud supported the Peshawar process of establishing a broad coalition government inclusive of all resistance parties, but Hekmatyar sought to become the sole ruler of Afghanistan, stating, &quot;In our country coalition government is impossible because, this way or another, it is going to be weak and incapable of stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan.&quot;

Massoud wrote:

All the parties had participated in the war, in jihad in Afghanistan, so they had to have their share in the government, and in the formation of the government. Afghanistan is made up of different nationalities. We were worried about a national conflict between different tribes and different nationalities. In order to give everybody their own rights and also to avoid bloodshed in Kabul, we left the word to the parties so they should decide about the country as a whole. We talked about it for a temporary stage and then after that the ground should be prepared for a general election.

A recorded radio communication between the two leaders showed the divide as Massoud asked Hekmatyar:

The Kabul regime is ready to surrender, so instead of the fighting we should gather. ... The leaders are meeting in Peshawar. ... The troops should not enter Kabul, they should enter later on as part of the government.

Hekmatyar&#x27;s response:

We will march into Kabul with our naked sword. No one can stop us. ... Why should we meet the leaders?&quot;
Massoud answered:

&quot;It seems to me that you don&#x27;t want to join the leaders in Peshawar nor stop your threat, and you are planning to enter Kabul ... in that case I must defend the people.

At that point Osama bin Laden, trying to mediate, urged Hekmatyar to &quot;go back with your brothers&quot; and to accept a compromise. Bin Laden reportedly &quot;hated Ahmad Shah Massoud&quot;. Bin Laden was involved in ideological and personal disputes with Massoud and had sided with Gulbuddin Hekmatyar against Massoud in the inner-Afghan conflict since the late 1980s. But Hekmatyar refused to accept a compromise, confident that he would be able to gain sole power in Afghanistan.

On April 24, 1992, the leaders in Peshawar agreed on and signed the Peshawar Accord, establishing the post-communist Islamic State of Afghanistan – which was a stillborn &#x27;state&#x27; with a paralyzed &#x27;government&#x27; right from its inception, until its final succumbing in September 1996. The creation of the Islamic State was welcomed though by the General Assembly of the United Nations and the Islamic State of Afghanistan was recognized as the legitimate entity representing Afghanistan until June 2002, when its successor, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, was established under the interim government of Hamid Karzai. Under the 1992 Peshawar Accord, the Defense Ministry was given to Massoud while the Prime Ministership was given to Hekmatyar. Hekmatyar refused to sign. With the exception of Hekmatyar&#x27;s Hezb-e Islami, all of the other Peshawar resistance parties were unified under this peace and power-sharing accord in April 1992.

====Escalating war over Kabul (1992)====
Although repeatedly offered the position of prime minister, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar refused to recognize the peace and power-sharing agreement. His Hezb-e Islami militia initiated a massive bombardment campaign against the Islamic State and the capital city Kabul. Gulbuddin Hekmatyar received operational, financial and military support from neighboring Pakistan. The Director of the Centre for Arab and Islamic Studies at the Australian National University, Amin Saikal, writes in &quot;Modern Afghanistan: A History of Struggle and Survival&quot; that without Pakistan&#x27;s support, Hekmatyar &quot;would not have been able to target and destroy half of Kabul.&quot; Saikal states that Pakistan wanted to install a favorable regime under Hekmatyar in Kabul so that it could use Afghan territory for access to Central Asia.

Hekmatyar&#x27;s rocket bombardments and the parallel escalation of violent conflict between two militias, Ittihad and Wahdat, which had entered some suburbs of Kabul, led to a breakdown in law and order. Shia Iran and Sunni Wahabbi Saudi Arabia, as competitors for regional hegemony, encouraged conflict between the Ittihad and Wahdat factions. On the one side was the Shia Hazara Hezb-i Wahdat of Abdul Ali Mazari and on the other side, the Sunni Pashtun Ittihad-i Islami of Abdul Rasul Sayyaf.

According to Human Rights Watch, Iran was strongly supporting the Hezb-i Wahdat forces, with Iranian intelligence officials providing direct orders, while Saudi Arabia supported Sayyaf and his Ittihad-i Islami faction to maximize Wahhabi influence. Kabul descended into lawlessness and chaos, as described in reports by Human Rights Watch and the Afghanistan Justice Project. Massoud&#x27;s Jamiat commanders, the interim government, and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) repeatedly tried to negotiate ceasefires, which broke down in only a few days. Another militia, the Junbish-i Milli of former communist general Abdul Rashid Dostum, was backed by Uzbekistan. Uzbek president Islam Karimov was keen to see Dostum controlling as much of Afghanistan as possible, especially in the north. Dostum repeatedly changed allegiances.

The Afghanistan Justice Project (AJP) says, that &quot;while [Hekmatyar&#x27;s anti-government] Hizb-i Islami is frequently named as foremost among the factions responsible for the deaths and destruction in the bombardment of Kabul, it was not the only perpetrator of these violations.&quot; According to the AJP, &quot;the scale of the bombardment and kinds of weapons used represented disproportionate use of force&quot; in a capital city with primarily residential areas by all the factions involved – including the government forces. Crimes were committed by individuals within the different armed factions. Gulbuddin Hekmatyar released 10,000 dangerous criminals from the main prisons into the streets of Kabul to destabilize the city and cut off Kabul from water, food and energy supplies. The Iran-controlled Wahdat of Abdul Ali Mazari, as well as the Ittihad of Abdul Rasul Sayyaf supported by Saudi Arabia, targeted civilians of the &#x27;opposite side&#x27; in systematic atrocities. Abdul Rashid Dostum allowed crimes as a perceived payment for his troops.

==== Afshar operation (February 1993) ====
&quot;The major criticism of Massoud&#x27;s human rights record&quot; is the escalation of the Afshar military operation in 1993. A report by the Afghanistan Justice Project describes Massoud as failing to prevent atrocities carried out by his forces and those of their factional ally, Ittihad-i Islami, against civilians on taking the suburb of Afshar during a military operation against an anti-state militia allied to Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. They shelled residential areas in the capital city in February 1993. Critics said that Massoud should have foreseen these problems. A meeting convened by Massoud on the next day ordered a halt to killing and looting, but it failed to stop abuses. Human Rights Watch, in a report based largely on the material collected by the Afghanistan Justice Project, concurs that Massoud&#x27;s Jamiat forces bear a share of the responsibility for human rights abuses throughout the war, including the indiscriminate targeting of civilians in Afshar, and that Massoud was personally implicated in some of these abuses. Roy Gutman has argued that the witness reports about Afshar cited in the AJP report implicated only the Ittihad forces, and that these had not been under Massoud&#x27;s direct command.

Anthony Davis, who studied and observed Massoud&#x27;s forces from 1981 to 2001, reported that during the observed period, there was &quot;no pattern of repeated killings of enemy civilians or military prisoners&quot; by Massoud&#x27;s forces. Edward Girardet, who covered Afghanistan for over three decades, was also in Kabul during the war. He states that while Massoud was able to control most of his commanders well during the anti-Soviet and anti-Taliban resistance, he was not able to control every commander in Kabul. According to this and similar testimonies, this was due to a breakdown of law and order in Kabul and a war on multiple fronts, which they say, Massoud personally had done all in his power to prevent:

==== Further war over Kabul (March–December 1993) ====
In 1993, Massoud created the Cooperative Mohammad Ghazali Culture Foundation (&quot;Bonyad-e Farhangi wa Ta&#x27;wani Mohammad-e Ghazali&quot;) to further humanitarian assistance and politically independent Afghan culture. The Ghazali Foundation provided free medical services during some days of the week to residents of Kabul who were unable to pay for medical treatment. The Ghazali Foundation&#x27;s department for distribution of auxiliary goods was the first partner of the Red Cross. The Ghazali Foundation&#x27;s department of family consultation was a free advisory board, which was accessible seven days a week for the indigent. Although Massoud was responsible for the financing of the foundation, he did not interfere with its cultural work. A council led the foundation and a jury, consisting of impartial university lecturers, decided on the works of artists. The Ghazali foundation enabled Afghan artists to exhibit their works at different places in Kabul, and numerous artists and authors were honoured for their works; some of them neither proponents of Massoud nor the Islamic State government.

In March 1993, Massoud resigned his government position in exchange for peace, as requested by Hekmatyar, who considered him as a personal rival. According to the Islamabad Accord, Burhanuddin Rabbani, belonging to the same party as Massoud, remained president, while Gulbuddin Hekmatyar took the long-offered position of prime minister. Two days after the Islamabad Accord went into effect, his allies in Hezb-e Wahdat renewed rocket attacks in Kabul.

Both the Wahhabi Pashtun Ittehad-i Islami of Abdul Rasul Sayyaf backed by Saudi Arabia and the Shia Hazara Hezb-e Wahdat supported by Iran remained involved in heavy fighting against each other. Hekmatyar was afraid to enter Kabul proper, and chaired only one cabinet meeting. The author Roy Gutman of the United States Institute of Peace wrote in &quot;How We Missed the Story: Osama bin Laden, the Taliban, and the Hijacking of Afghanistan&quot;:

Hekmatyar had become prime minister ... But after chairing one cabinet meeting, Hekmatyar never returned to the capital, fearing, perhaps, a lynching by Kabulis infuriated over his role in destroying their city. Even his close aides were embarrassed. Hekmatyar spokesman Qutbuddin Helal was still setting up shop in the prime minister&#x27;s palace when the city came under Hezb[-i Islami] rocket fire late that month. &quot;We are here in Kabul and he is rocketing us. Now we have to leave. We can&#x27;t do anything,&quot; he told Massoud aides.

Hekmatyar, who was generally opposed to coalition government and struggled for undisputed power, had conflicts with other parties over the selection of cabinet members. His forces started major attacks against Kabul for one month. The President, Burhanuddin Rabbani, was attacked when he attempted to meet Hekmatyar. Massoud resumed his responsibilities as minister of defense.

In May 1993, a new effort was made to reinstate the Islamabad Accord. In August, Massoud reached out to Hekmatyar in an attempt to broaden the government. By the end of 1993, Hekmatyar and the former communist general and militia leader, Abdul Rashid Dostum, were involved in secret negotiations encouraged by Pakistan&#x27;s secret Inter-Services Intelligence, Iran&#x27;s intelligence service, and Uzbekistan&#x27;s Karimov administration. They planned a coup to oust the Rabbani administration and to attack Massoud in his northern areas.

==== War in Kabul, Taliban arise in the south (1994) ====
In January 1994, Hekmatyar and Dostum mounted a bombardment campaign against the capital and attacked Massoud&#x27;s core areas in the northeast. Amin Saikal writes, Hekmatyar had the following objectives in all his operations:

The first was to make sure that Rabbani and Massoud were not allowed to consolidate power, build a credible administration, or expand their territorial control, so that the country would remain divided into small fiefdoms, run by various Muajhideen leaders and local warlords or a council of such elements, with only some of them allied to Kabul. The second was to ensure the Rabbani government acquired no capacity to dispense patronage, and to dissuade the Kabul population from giving more than limited support to the government. The third was to make Kabul an unsafe city for representatives of the international community and to prevent the Rabbani government from attracting the international support needed to begin the post-war reconstruction of Afghanistan and generate a level of economic activity which would enhance its credibility and popularity.

By mid-1994, Hekmatyar and Dostum were on the defensive in Kabul against Islamic State forces led by Massoud. Southern Afghanistan had been neither under the control of foreign-backed militias nor of the government in Kabul, but was ruled by local Pashtun leaders, such as Gul Agha Sherzai, and their militias. In 1994, the Taliban (a movement originating from Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-run religious schools for Afghan refugees in Pakistan) also developed in Afghanistan as a politico-religious force, reportedly in opposition to the tyranny of the local governor. When the Taliban took control of Kandahar in 1994, they forced the surrender of dozens of local Pashtun leaders who had presided over a situation of complete lawlessness and atrocities. In 1994, the Taliban took power in several provinces in southern and central Afghanistan.

====Taliban siege of Kabul (1995–1996)====
Hizb-i Islami had bombarded Kabul from January 1994 until February 1995 when the Taliban expelled Hizb from its Charasiab headquarters, after which the Taliban relaunched the bombardment of Kabul and started to besiege the town.

By early 1995, Massoud initiated a nationwide political process with the goal of national consolidation and democratic elections. He arranged a conference in three parts uniting political and cultural personalities, governors, commanders, clergymen and representatives, in order to reach a lasting agreement. Massoud&#x27;s favourite for candidacy to the presidency was Dr. Mohammad Yusuf, the first democratic prime minister under Zahir Shah, the former king. In the first meeting representatives from 15 different Afghan provinces met, in the second meeting there were already 25 provinces participating.

Massoud also invited the Taliban to join the peace process wanting them to be a partner in providing stability to Afghanistan during such a process. But the Taliban, which had emerged over the course of 1994 in southern Afghanistan, were already at the doors of the capital city. Against the advice of his security personnel, Massoud went to talk to some Taliban leaders in Maidan Shar, Taliban territory. The Taliban declined to join the peace process leading toward general elections. When Massoud returned to Kabul unharmed, the Taliban leader who had received him as his guest paid with his life: he was killed by other senior Taliban for failing to assassinate Massoud while the possibility had presented itself. The Taliban, placing Kabul under a two-year siege and bombardment campaign from early 1995 onward, in later years committed massacres against civilians, compared by United Nations observers to those that happened during the War in Bosnia.

Neighboring Pakistan exerted strong influence over the Taliban. A publication with the George Washington University describes: &quot;Initially, the Pakistanis supported ... Gulbuddin Hekmatyar ... When Hekmatyar failed to deliver for Pakistan, the administration began to support a new movement of religious students known as the Taliban.&quot; Many analysts like Amin Saikal describe the Taliban as developing into a proxy force for Pakistan&#x27;s regional interests. The Taliban started shelling Kabul in early 1995 but were defeated by forces of the Islamic State government under Ahmad Shah Massoud. Amnesty International, referring to the Taliban offensive, wrote in a 1995 report:

The Taliban&#x27;s early victories in 1994 were followed by a series of defeats that resulted in heavy losses. The Taliban&#x27;s first major offensive against the important western city of Herat, under the rule of Islamic state ally Ismail Khan, in February 1995 was defeated when Massoud airlifted 2,000 of his own core forces from Kabul to help defend Herat. Ahmed Rashid writes: &quot;The Taliban had now been decisively pushed back on two fronts by the government and their political and military leadership was in disarray. Their image as potential peacemakers was badly dented, for in the eyes of many Afghans they had become nothing more than just another warlord party.&quot; International observers already speculated that the Taliban as a country-wide organization might have &quot;run its course&quot;.

Mullah Omar consolidated his control of the Taliban and with foreign help rebuilt and re-equipped his forces. Pakistan increased its support to the Taliban. Its military advisers oversaw the restructuring of Taliban forces. The country provided armored pick-up trucks and other military equipment. Saudi Arabia provided the funding. Furthermore, there was a massive influx of 25,000 new Taliban fighters, many of them recruited in Pakistan. This enabled the Taliban to capture Herat to the west of Kabul in a surprise attack against the forces of Ismail Khan in September 1995. A nearly one-year siege and bombardment campaign against Kabul was again defeated by Massoud&#x27;s forces.

Massoud and Rabbani meanwhile kept working on an internal Afghan peace process – successfully. By February 1996, all of Afghanistan&#x27;s armed factions – except for the Taliban – had agreed to take part in the peace process and to set up a peace council to elect a new interim president. Many Pashtun areas under Taliban control had representatives also advocating for a peace agreement with the Islamic State government. But Taliban leader Mullah Omar and the Kandaharis surrounding him wanted to expand the war. At that point the Taliban leadership and their foreign supporters decided they needed to act quickly before the government could consolidate the new understanding between the parties. The Taliban moved against Jalalabad, under the control of the Pashtun Jalalabad Shura, to the east of Kabul. Part of the Jalalabad Shura was bribed with millions of dollars by the Taliban&#x27;s foreign sponsors, especially Saudi Arabia, to vacate their positions. The Taliban&#x27;s battle for Jalalabad was directed by Pakistani military advisers. Hundreds of Taliban crossed the Afghan-Pakistani border moving on Jalalabad from Pakistan and thereby suddenly placed to the east of Kabul. This left the capital city Kabul &quot;wide open&quot; to many sides as Ismail Khan had been defeated to the west, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar had vacated his positions to the south and the fall and surrender of Jalalabad had suddenly opened a new front to the east.
At that point Massoud decided to conduct a strategic retreat through a northern corridor, according to Ahmed Rashid, &quot;knowing he could not defend [Kabul] from attacks coming from all four points of the compass. Nor did he want to lose the support of Kabul&#x27;s population by fighting for the city and causing more bloodshed.&quot; On September 26, 1996, as the Taliban with military support by Pakistan and financial support by Saudi Arabia prepared for another major offensive, Massoud ordered a full retreat from Kabul. The Taliban marched into Kabul on September 27, 1996, and established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. Massoud and his troops retreated to the northeast of Afghanistan which became the base for the still internationally recognized Islamic State of Afghanistan.

===Resistance against the Taliban (1996–2001)===

====United Front against the Taliban====
Ahmad Shah Massoud created the United Front (Northern Alliance) against the Taliban advance. The United Front included forces and leaders from different political backgrounds as well as from all ethnicities of Afghanistan. From the Taliban conquest in 1996 until November 2001, the United Front controlled territory in which roughly 30% of Afghanistan&#x27;s population was living, in provinces such as Badakhshan, Kapisa, Takhar and parts of Parwan, Kunar, Nuristan, Laghman, Samangan, Kunduz, Ghōr and Bamyan.

Meanwhile, the Taliban imposed their repressive regime in the parts of Afghanistan under their control. Hundreds of thousands of people fled to Northern Alliance territory, Pakistan and Iran. Massoud&#x27;s soldiers held some 1,200 Taliban prisoners in the Panjshir Valley, 122 of them foreign Muslims who had come to Afghanistan to fight a jihad. In 1998, after the defeat of Abdul Rashid Dostum&#x27;s faction in Mazar-i-Sharif, Ahmad Shah Massoud remained the only main leader of the United Front in Afghanistan and the only leader who was able to defend vast parts of his area against the Taliban. Most major leaders including the Islamic State&#x27;s President Burhanuddin Rabbani, Abdul Rashid Dostum, and others, were living in exile. During this time, commentators remarked that &quot;The only thing standing in the way of future Taliban massacres is Ahmad Shah Massoud.&quot;

Massoud stated that the Taliban repeatedly offered him a position of power to make him stop his resistance. He declined, declaring the differences between their ideology and his own pro-democratic outlook on society to be insurmountable.

Massoud wanted to convince the Taliban to join a political process leading toward democratic elections in a foreseeable future. He also predicted that without assistance from Pakistan and external extremist groups, the Taliban would lose their hold on power.

In early 2001, the United Front employed a new strategy of local military pressure and global political appeals. Resentment was increasingly gathering against Taliban rule from the bottom of Afghan society including the Pashtun areas. At the same time, Massoud was very wary not to revive the failed Kabul government of the early 1990s. Already in 1999 the United Front leadership ordered the training of police forces specifically to keep order and protect the civilian population in case the United Front would be successful.

====Cross-factional negotiations====
From 1999 onward, a renewed process was set into motion by the Tajik Ahmad Shah Massoud and the Pashtun Abdul Haq to unite all the ethnicities of Afghanistan. Massoud united the Tajiks, Hazara and Uzbeks as well as several Pashtun commanders under his United Front. Besides meeting with Pashtun tribal leaders and acting as a point of reference, Abdul Haq received increasing numbers of Pashtun Taliban themselves who were secretly approaching him. Some commanders who had worked for the Taliban military apparatus agreed to the plan to topple the Taliban regime as the Taliban lost support even among the Pashtuns. Senior diplomat and Afghanistan expert Peter Tomsen wrote that &quot;[t]he &#x27;Lion of Kabul&#x27; [Abdul Haq] and the &#x27;Lion of Panjshir&#x27; [Ahmad Shah Massoud] would make a formidable anti-Taliban team if they combined forces. Haq, Massoud, and Karzai, Afghanistan&#x27;s three leading moderates, could transcend the Pashtun – non-Pashtun, north-south divide.&quot; Steve Coll referred to this plan as a &quot;grand Pashtun-Tajik alliance&quot;. The senior Hazara and Uzbek leaders took part in the process just like later Afghan president Hamid Karzai. They agreed to work under the banner of the exiled Afghan king Zahir Shah in Rome.

In November 2000, leaders from all ethnic groups were brought together in Massoud&#x27;s headquarters in northern Afghanistan, travelling from other parts of Afghanistan, Europe, the United States, Pakistan and India to discuss a Loya Jirga for a settlement of Afghanistan&#x27;s problems and to discuss the establishment of a post-Taliban government. In September 2001, an international official who met with representatives of the alliance remarked, &quot;&quot;It&#x27;s crazy that you have this today ... Pashtuns, Tajiks, Uzbeks, Hazara ... They were all ready to buy in to the process&quot;.&quot;

In early 2001, Ahmad Shah Massoud with leaders from all ethnicities of Afghanistan addressed the European Parliament in Brussels, asking the international community to provide humanitarian aid to the people of Afghanistan. He stated that the Taliban and al-Qaeda had introduced &quot;a very wrong perception of Islam&quot; and that without the support of Pakistan and Bin Laden the Taliban would not be able to sustain their military campaign for up to a year. On that visit to Europe, he also warned the U.S. about Bin Laden.

====The areas of Massoud====
Life in the areas under direct control of Massoud was different from the life in the areas under Taliban or Dostum&#x27;s control. In contrast to the time of chaos in which all structures had collapsed in Kabul, Massoud was able to control most of the troops under his direct command well during the period starting in late 1996. Massoud always controlled the Panjshir, Takhar, parts of Parwan and Badakhshan during the war. Some other provinces (notably Kunduz, Baghlan, Nuristan and the north of Kabul) were captured by his forces from the Taliban and lost again from time to time as the frontlines varied.

Massoud created democratic institutions which were structured into several committees: political, health, education and economic. Still, many people came to him personally when they had a dispute or problem and asked him to solve their problems.

In September 2000, Massoud signed the Declaration of the Essential Rights of Afghan Women drafted by Afghan women. The declaration established gender equality in front of the law and the right of women to political participation, education, work, freedom of movement and speech. In the areas of Massoud, women and girls did not have to wear the Afghan burqa by law. They were allowed to work and to go to school. Although it was a time of war, girls&#x27; schools were operating in some districts. In at least two known instances, Massoud personally intervened against cases of forced marriage in favour of the women to make their own choice.

While it was Massoud&#x27;s stated personal conviction that men and women are equal and should enjoy the same rights, he also had to deal with Afghan traditions which he said would need a generation or more to overcome. In his opinion, that could only be achieved through education. Author Pepe Escobar wrote in &quot;Asia Times&quot;:
Humayun Tandar, who took part as an Afghan diplomat in the 2001 International Conference on Afghanistan in Bonn, said that &quot;strictures of language, ethnicity, region were [also] stifling for Massoud. That is why ... he wanted to create a unity which could surpass the situation in which we found ourselves and still find ourselves to this day.&quot; This applied also to strictures of religion. Jean-José Puig describes how Massoud often led prayers before a meal or at times asked his fellow Muslims to lead the prayer but also did not hesitate to ask the Jewish Princeton Professor Michael Barry or his Christian friend Jean-José Puig: &quot;Jean-José, we believe in the same God. Please, tell us the prayer before lunch or dinner in your own language.&quot;

====International relations====
U.S. policy regarding Massoud, the Taliban and Afghanistan remained ambiguous and differed between the various U.S. government agencies.

In 1997, U.S. State Department&#x27;s Robin Raphel suggested to Massoud he should surrender to the Taliban. He soundly rejected the proposal.

At one point in the war, in 1997, two top foreign policy officials in the Clinton administration flew to northern Afghanistan in an attempt to convince Massoud not to take advantage of a strategic opportunity to make crucial gains against the Taliban.

In 1998, a U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency analyst, Julie Sirrs, visited Massoud&#x27;s territories privately, having previously been denied official permission to do so by her agency. She reported that Massoud had conveyed warnings about strengthened ties between the Taliban and foreign Islamist terrorists. Returning home, she was sacked from her agency for insubordination, because at that time the U.S. administration had no trust in Massoud.

In the meantime, the only collaboration between Massoud and another U.S. intelligence service, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), consisted of an effort to trace Osama bin Laden following the 1998 embassy bombings. The U.S. and the European Union provided no support to Massoud for the fight against the Taliban.

A change of policy, lobbied for by CIA officers on the ground who had visited the area of Massoud, regarding support to Massoud, was underway in the course of 2001. According to Steve Coll&#x27;s book &quot;Ghost Wars&quot; (who won the 2005 Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction):

U.S. Congressman Dana Rohrabacher also recalled:

[B]etween Bush&#x27;s inauguration and 9/11, I met with the new national security staff on 3 occasions, including one meeting with Condoleezza Rice to discuss Afghanistan. There were, in fact, signs noted in an overview story in The Washington Post about a month ago that some steps were being made to break away from the previous administration&#x27;s Afghan policy.

CIA lawyers, working with officers in the Near East Division and Counterterrorist Center, began to draft a formal, legal presidential finding for Bush&#x27;s signature authorizing a new covert action program in Afghanistan, the first in a decade that sought to influence the course of the Afghan war in favour of Massoud. This change in policy was finalized in August 2001 when it was too late.

After Pakistan had funded, directed and supported the Taliban&#x27;s rise to power in Afghanistan, Massoud and the United Front received some assistance from India. The assistance provided by India was extensive, including uniforms, ordnance, mortars, small armaments, refurbished Kalashnikovs, combat and winter clothes, as well as funds. India was particularly concerned about Pakistan&#x27;s Taliban strategy and the Islamic militancy in its neighborhood; it provided U.S.$70 million in aid including two Mi-17 helicopters, three additional helicopters in 2000 and US$8 million worth of high-altitude equipment in 2001. Also In the 1990s, India had run a field hospital at Farkor on the Tajik-Afghan border to treat wounded fighters from the then Northern Alliance that was battling the Taliban regime in Afghanistan.
It was at the very same hospital that the Northern Alliance leader Ahmed Shah Masood was pronounced dead after being assassinated just two days before the 9/11 terror strikes in 2001. Furthermore, the alliance supposedly also received minor aid from Tajikistan, Russia and Iran because of their opposition to the Taliban and the Pakistani control over the Taliban&#x27;s Emirate. Their support remained limited to the most needed things. Meanwhile, Pakistan engaged up to 28,000 Pakistani nationals and regular Pakistani army troops to fight alongside the Taliban and Al Qaeda forces against Massoud.

In April 2001, the president of the European Parliament, Nicole Fontaine (who called Massoud the &quot;pole of liberty in Afghanistan&quot;), invited Massoud with the support of French and Belgian politicians to address the European Parliament in Brussels, Belgium. In his speech, he asked for humanitarian aid for the people of Afghanistan. Massoud further went on to warn that his intelligence agents had gained limited knowledge about a large-scale terrorist attack on U.S. soil being imminent.

==Assassination==


Massoud, then aged 48, was the target of an assassination plot in Khwājah Bahā ud Dīn (Khvājeh Bahāuḏḏīn), Takhar Province in northeastern Afghanistan on September 9, 2001. The attackers&#x27; names were alternately given as Dahmane Abd al-Sattar, husband of Malika El Aroud, and Bouraoui el-Ouaer; or 34-year-old Karim Touzani and 26-year-old Kacem Bakkali.

The attackers claimed to be Belgians originally from Morocco. According to &quot;Le Monde&quot; they transited through the municipality of Molenbeek. Their passports turned out to be stolen and their nationality was later determined to be Tunisian. Waiting for almost three weeks (during which they also interviewed Burhanuddin Rabbani and Abdul Rasul Sayyaf) for an interview opportunity, on September 8, 2001, an aide to Massoud recalls the would-be suicide attackers &quot;were so worried&quot; and threatened to leave if the interview did not happen in the next 24 hours (until September 10, 2001). They were finally granted an interview. During the interview, they set off a bomb composed of explosives hidden in the camera and in a battery-pack belt. Massoud died in a helicopter that was taking him to an Indian military field hospital at Farkhor in nearby Tajikistan. The explosion also killed Mohammed Asim Suhail, a United Front official, while Mohammad Fahim Dashty and Massoud Khalili were injured. One of the suicide attackers, Bouraoui, was killed by the explosion, while Dahmane Abd al-Sattar was captured and shot while trying to escape.

Despite initial denials by the United Front, news of Massoud&#x27;s death was reported almost immediately, appearing on the BBC, and in European and North American newspapers on September 10, 2001. On September 16, the United Front officially announced that Massoud had died of injuries in the suicide attack. Massoud was buried in his home village of Bazarak in the Panjshir Valley. The funeral, although in a remote rural area, was attended by hundreds of thousands of people.

Massoud had survived assassination attempts over a period of 26 years, including attempts made by al-Qaeda, the Taliban, the Pakistani ISI and before them the Soviet KGB, the Afghan communist KHAD and Hekmatyar. The first attempt on Massoud&#x27;s life was carried out by Hekmatyar and two Pakistani ISI agents in 1975 when Massoud was 22 years old. In early 2001, al-Qaeda would-be assassins were captured by Massoud&#x27;s forces while trying to enter his territory.

===Connection to September 11, 2001===
The assassination of Massoud is considered to have a strong connection to the September 11 attacks in 2001 on U.S. soil, which killed nearly 3,000 people. It appeared to have been the major terrorist attack which Massoud had warned against in his speech to the European Parliament several months earlier. Al-Qaeda&#x27;s motive for the assassination is believed to have been to secure the Taliban&#x27;s support of Osama bin Laden after the planned attacks. By eliminating Massoud, it was expected that the remaining anti-Taliban forces in Afghanistan would collapse, allowing the Taliban to solidify their control over the country. Bin Laden thought that this, in turn, would make the Taliban indebted to him, and he believed their support would be crucial for his planned war against the United States.

In late 2001, a computer was seized that was stolen from an office used by al-Qaeda immediately after the fall of Kabul in November. This computer was mainly used by Aiman al-Zawahri and contained the letter with the interview request for Massoud. The two assassins had completed military training in training camps in Afghanistan at the end of 2000 and were selected for the suicide mission in the spring or early summer of the following year. The Afghan publicist Waheed Muzhda, who worked for the Taliban in the Foreign Ministry, confirmed the two assassins met with al-Qaeda officials in Kandahar and bin Laden and al-Zawahri saw them off when they left. Following the assassination, bin Laden had an emissary deliver Dahmane Abd al-Sattar&#x27;s widow a letter with $500 in an envelope to settle a debt. An al-Qaeda magazine in Saudi Arabia later published a biography of Youssef al-Aayyiri, who headed al-Qaeda&#x27;s operations in Saudi Arabia from 2002, which described al-Qaeda&#x27;s involvement in Massoud&#x27;s assassination. Osama bin Laden commissioned the assassination attempt to appease the Taliban because of the imminent terrorist attacks in the US, which would cause serious problems for the Taliban.

The Taliban denied any involvement in Massoud&#x27;s assassination, and it is very unlikely that they were privy to the assassination plans. There were a few minor attacks by the Taliban after the attack, but no major offensive.

===Investigative commission===

In April 2003, the Karzai administration created a commission to investigate the assassination of Massoud. In 2003, French investigators and the FBI were able to trace the provenance of the camera used in the assassination, which had been stolen in France some time earlier.

==Legacy==

===National Hero of Afghanistan===

Massoud was the only chief Afghan leader who never left Afghanistan in the fight against the Soviet Union and later in the fight against the Taliban Emirate. In the areas under his direct control, such as Panjshir, some parts of Parwan and Takhar, Massoud established democratic institutions. One refugee who cramped his family of 27 into an old jeep to flee from the Taliban to the area of Massoud described Massoud&#x27;s territory in 1997 as &quot;the last tolerant corner of Afghanistan&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;Journeyman Picture/ABC Australia&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
* In 2001, the Afghan interim government under president Hamid Karzai officially awarded Massoud the title of &quot;Hero of the Afghan Nation&quot;. One analyst in 2004 said:

One man holds a greater political punch than all 18 living [Afghan] presidential candidates combined. Though already dead for three years... Since his death on September 9, 2001 at the hands of two al Qaeda-linked Islamic radicals, Massoud has been transformed from mujahedin to national heroif not saint. Pictures of Massoud, the Afghan mujahedin who battled the Soviets, other warlords, and the Taliban for more than 20 years, vastly outnumber those of any other Afghan including those of Karzai.

Today Panjshir, the home of Massoud,

is arguably the most peaceful place in the entire country. A small US military reconstruction team is based here, but there are none of the signs of foreign occupation that exist elsewhere. Even Afghan soldiers are few and far between. Instead, the people like to boast about how they keep their own security.
* The Massoud Foundation was established in 2003 to provide humanitarian assistance to Afghans through economic and social programs that include business development, reconstruction and infrastructure improvements, and education programs. It promotes justice, gender equality, fair government, and human rights.
* A major road in Kabul was named Great Massoud Road.
* A monument to Massoud was installed outside the US Embassy.
* A street in New Delhi, India, is named after Ahmad Shah Massoud. It is the first time that such an honour has been extended to a leader from that country as part of close ties between Afghanistan and India.
* Magpul Massoud was a 7.62 NATO rifle produced by Magpul which was named after himself.

The road near the Afghanistan Embassy is a &quot;symbol of ties&quot; that binds the two nations that have always &quot;enjoyed excellent relations&quot;.

His friend Abdullah Abdullah said that Massoud was different from the other guerilla leaders. &quot;He is a hero who led a clear struggle for the values of the people&quot;.

In a 2001 mourning ceremony at Moscow to honour the memory of Ahmad Shah Massoud, one-time foe Colonel Abdul Qadir stated: &quot;Though Massoud and I used to be enemies, I am sure he deserves great respect as an outstanding military leader and, first of all, as a patriot of his country&quot;.

===Lion of Panjshir===
Massoud&#x27;s byname, &quot;Lion of Panjshir&quot; (, &quot;Shir-e-Panjshir&quot;), earned for his role during the Soviet occupation, is a rhyming play on words in Persian, as the name of the valley means &quot;five lions&quot;.

&quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; referred to Massoud as &quot;The Afghan Who Won the Cold War&quot;, referring to the global significance of the Soviet defeat in Afghanistan for the subsequent collapse of the Eastern Bloc.

===Honors outside Afghanistan===
In 2007, the government of India decided to name a road in New Delhi&#x27;s Chanakyapuri district after Massoud.

In February 2021, the Council of Paris in France honored Massoud by installing a plaque in the 8th arrondissement of Paris. The decision reflected Massoud&#x27;s unique connections with France. In March 2021, the Mayor of Paris named a pathway in the Champs-Élysées gardens after Massoud. The ceremony was attended by Massoud&#x27;s son and former president Hamid Karzai.

;Civilian orders
* Tajikistan: Order of Ismoili Somoni – posthumously awarded on September 2, 2021.

===Views on Pakistan and potential al-Qaeda attacks===

Although Pakistan were supporting the mujahideen groups during the Soviet-Afghan War, Ahmad Shah Massoud increasingly distrusted the Pakistanis and eventually kept his distance from them. In a 1999 interview, Massoud says &quot;They [Pakistan] are trying to turn us into a colony. Without them there would be no war&quot;.

In the spring 2001, Ahmad Shah Massoud addressed the European Parliament in Brussels, saying that Pakistan was behind the situation in Afghanistan. He also said that he believed that, without the support of Pakistan, Osama bin Laden, and Saudi Arabia, the Taliban would not be able to sustain their military campaign for up to a year. He said the Afghan population was ready to rise against them. Addressing the United States specifically, he warned that should the U.S. not work for peace in Afghanistan and put pressure on Pakistan to cease their support to the Taliban, the problems of Afghanistan would soon become the problems of the U.S. and the world.

Declassified Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) documents from November 2001 show that Massoud had gained &quot;limited knowledge... regarding the intentions of al-Qaeda to perform a terrorist act against the U.S. on a scale larger than the 1998 bombing of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.&quot; They noted that he warned about such attacks.

=== Succession and resistance to Taliban by his son ===
In September 2019, his son Ahmad Massoud was declared as his successor. Following the 2021 Taliban offensive and the Fall of Kabul, Massoud allied with self-proclaimed acting president Amrullah Saleh and established the National Resistance Front of Afghanistan to the Taliban in the Panjshir Valley. Massoud called for West&#x27;s support to resist the Taliban.

==Personal life==

Massoud was married to Sediqa Massoud. They had one son, Ahmad Massoud (born in 1989) and five daughters (Fatima born in 1992, Mariam born in 1993, Ayesha born in 1995, Zohra born in 1996 and Nasrine born in 1998). In 2005 Sediqa Massoud published a personal account on her life with Massoud (co-authored by two women&#x27;s rights activists and friends of Sediqa Massoud, Chékéba Hachemi and ) called &quot;Pour l&#x27;amour de Massoud&quot; (For the love of Massoud), in which she describes a decent and loving husband.

Massoud liked reading and had a library of 3,000 books at his home in Panjshir. He used to read the works of revolutionaries Mao Zedong and Che Guevara, and was a great admirer of Charles de Gaulle, founder of the French Fifth Republic. Massoud said his favorite author was Victor Hugo and he was also a fan of classical Persian poetry, including the works of Bidel and Hafez. He was keen at playing football and chess.

Massoud&#x27;s reputation for fearlessness is illustrated by a story about him told in Afghanistan, which cannot be confirmed. Once, while inspecting the front lines with a deputy, Massoud&#x27;s driver had become lost and driven into the middle of a Taliban encampment. In tremendous peril, since he was recognized immediately, Massoud demanded to see the Taliban commander, making polite conversation for just long enough to bluff that he had arrived intentionally and not accidentally. The confused Taliban allowed him to leave.

Massoud&#x27;s family since his death have had a great deal of prestige in the politics of Afghanistan. One of his six brothers, Ahmad Zia Massoud, was the Vice President of Afghanistan from 2004 until 2009 under the first democratically elected government of Afghanistan. Unsuccessful attempts have been made on the life of Ahmad Zia Massoud in 2004 and late 2009. The Associated Press reported that eight Afghans died in the attempt on Ahmad Zia Massoud&#x27;s life. Ahmad Zia Massoud leads the National Front of Afghanistan (a United Front group). Another brother, Ahmad Wali Massoud, was Afghanistan&#x27;s Ambassador to the United Kingdom from 2002 to 2006. He was a member of Abdullah Abdullah&#x27;s National Coalition of Afghanistan (another United Front group).

==In literature==
===Essay===
* Sebastian Junger, one of the last Western journalists to interview Massoud in depth, featured him in an essay in his 2002 collection, &quot;Fire&quot;.

===Fiction===
* Massoud is the subject of Ken Follett&#x27;s 1986 novel &quot;Lie Down With Lions&quot;, about the Soviet-Afghan War.
* He also is featured as a historical figure in James McGee&#x27;s 1989 thriller, &quot;Crow&#x27;s War&quot;.
* Massoud is the subject of Olivier Weber&#x27;s novel &quot;Massoud&#x27;s Confession&quot;, about the Islam of Enlightenment and the need to reform religious practices.
* Massoud is played by Mido Hamada in the 2006 miniseries &quot;The Path to 9/11&quot;.

==Notes==


==References==
==Further reading==
* Sandy Gall (2021): &quot;Afghan Napoleon: The Life of Ahmad Shah Massoud.&quot; London: Haus Publishing. ISBN 978-1-913368-22-7.
* Marcela Grad (2009): &quot;Massoud: An Intimate Portrait of the Legendary Afghan Leader&quot;; Webster University Press, 310pp
* Sediqa Massoud with Chékéba Hachemi and Marie-Francoise Colombani (2005): &quot;Pour l&#x27;amour de Massoud&quot;; Document XO Editions, 265pp (in French)
* Amin Saikal (2006): &quot;Modern Afghanistan: A History of Struggle and Survival&quot;; I. B. Tauris, 352pp (&quot;One of the &quot;Five Best&quot; Books on Afghanistan&quot; – &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;)
* Roy Gutman (2008): &quot;How We Missed the Story: Osama Bin Laden, the Taliban and the Hijacking of Afghanistan&quot;; United States Institute of Peace Press, 304pp
* Coll, Steve (2004): &quot;Ghost Wars: The Secret History of the CIA, Afghanistan and Bin Laden, from the Soviet Invasion to September 9, 2001&quot;; Penguin Press, 695pp, . (won the 2005 Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction)
* Stephen Tanner: &quot;Afghanistan: A Military History from Alexander the Great to the Fall of the Taliban&quot;
* Christophe de Ponfilly (2001): &quot;Massoud l&#x27;Afghan&quot;; Gallimard, 437pp (in French)
* Gary W. Bowersox (2004): &quot;The Gem Hunter-True Adventures of an American in Afghanistan&quot;; Geovision, Inc. (January 22, 2004), .
* Olivier Weber (2001): &quot;Le Faucon afghan&quot;; Robert Laffont
* Olivier Weber (2001, with Reza): &quot;Afghan eternities&quot;; Le Chene/ UNESCO
* Gary C. Schroen (2005):&quot; &#x27;First In&#x27; An Insiders Account of How The CIA Spearheaded the War on Terror in Afghanistan&quot;; New York: Presidio Press/Ballantine Books, .
* Peter Bergen:&quot; Holy War, Inc.&quot;
* Ahmed Rashid: &quot;TALIBAN – The Story of the Afghan Warlords&quot;; .
* A. R. Rowan: &quot;On The Trail Of A Lion: Ahmed Shah Massoud, Oil Politics and Terror&quot;
* MaryAnn T. Beverly (2007):&quot; From That Flame&quot;; Kallisti Publishing
* Roger Plunk: &quot;The Wandering Peacemaker&quot;
* References to Massoud appear in the book &quot;A Thousand Splendid Suns&quot; by Khaled Hosseini.
* References to Massoud appear in the book &quot;Sulla rotta dei ribelli&quot; by Emilio Lonardo; .
* &quot;Kara Kush&quot;, London: William Collins Sons and Co., Ltd., 1986. The novel &quot;Kara Kush&quot; by Idries Shah is rumored to be loosely based on the exploits of Massoud during the Afghan-Soviet War
* Olivier Weber (2013): &quot;Massoud&#x27;s Confession&quot;; Flammarion.

==External links==

===Interviews===
* The Last Interview with Ahmad Shah Massoud Piotr Balcerowicz, early August 2001

===Obituaries and articles===
* Remembering Massoud, a fighter for peace, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, September 10, 2002
* 60 Years of Asian Heroes: Ahmad Shah Massoud &quot;Time&quot;, 2006
* Profile: Afghanistan&#x27;s &#x27;Lion Of Panjshir&#x27; &quot;Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty&quot;, September 5, 2006
* Afghan Commander Massoud, Killed on Eve of 9/11 Attacks, is a National Hero by &quot;The LA Times&quot;, September 22, 2010

===Documentaries/Panegyrics===
* An 18-minute video, &#x27;Starving to Death&#x27;, about Massoud defending Kabul against the Taliban siege in March 1996. With horrifying pictures of civilian war victims. By Journeyman Pictures/Journeyman.tv. Retrieved on YouTube, June 27, 2018.
* Reza and Olivier Weber on Massoud, National Geographic
* &#x27;Afghanistan Revealed&#x27; (2000) | SnagFilms . A portrait of Massoud by National Geographic photographer Reza Deghati, cinematographer Stephen Cocklin, and writer Sebastian Junger
* A Film Screening and Panel Discussion Focusing on the Middle East and Afghanistan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="0" end="18" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="20" end="24" title="Dari" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="121" end="130" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="204" end="221" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="353" end="360" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="476" end="481" title="Tajik people" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="485" end="490" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="491" end="497" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="516" end="531" title="Panjshir Valley" label="Panjshir Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358317" start="590" end="623" title="Polytechnical University of Kabul" label="Polytechnical University of Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="683" end="692" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="710" end="729" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="741" end="749" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="796" end="815" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan" label="Mohammed Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261999" start="866" end="881" title="Jamiat-e Islami" label="Jamiat-e Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="958" end="975" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="1081" end="1084" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="1120" end="1147" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171365" start="1248" end="1263" title="Peshawar Accord" label="Peshawar Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415585" start="1324" end="1352" title="Islamic State of Afghanistan" label="Islamic State of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982461" start="1375" end="1394" title="Ministry of Defense (Afghanistan)" label="Minister of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="1482" end="1487" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="1512" end="1531" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="1607" end="1614" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q132043" start="1926" end="1931" title="Kulab, Tajikistan" label="Kulob"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="1933" end="1943" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917594" start="1974" end="1987" title="Salang Tunnel" label="Salang Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q309368" start="2057" end="2110" title="United Islamic Front for the Salvation of Afghanistan" label="United Islamic Front for the Salvation of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="2240" end="2259" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="2280" end="2288" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="2477" end="2492" title="suicide bombing" label="suicide bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="2500" end="2508" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="2562" end="2577" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="2686" end="2706" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2766" end="2800" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="2808" end="2816" title="US invasion of Afghanistan" label="invading"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="3094" end="3109" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="3111" end="3122" title="Ho Chi Minh" label="Ho Chi Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="3127" end="3138" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="3223" end="3235" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q107461898" start="3403" end="3419" title="2021 Taliban offensive" label="Taliban takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="3565" end="3574" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="3642" end="3648" title="Commemorative plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q16683303" start="3710" end="3737" title="Order of Ismoili Somoni" label="highest honor of Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982148" start="3816" end="3833" title="Bazarak" label="Jangalak, Bazarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="3841" end="3856" title="Panjshir Valley" label="Panjshir Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="3947" end="3962" title="Panjshir Valley" label="Panjshir Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="4026" end="4050" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="King Ahamad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="4083" end="4103" title="Afghanistan" label="state of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="4158" end="4171" title="Pseudonym" label="nom de guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="4247" end="4257" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan" label="Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="4303" end="4310" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="4594" end="4608" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="4612" end="4623" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="4639" end="4652" title="Herat" label="city of Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="4689" end="4694" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4727" end="4733" title="France" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="4734" end="4740" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269192" start="4741" end="4755" title="Centre d&amp;#x27;Enseignement Français en Afghanistan" label="Lycée Esteqlal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191837" start="4757" end="4760" title="Literal translation" label="lit"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4825" end="4831" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269192" start="4862" end="4867" title="Centre d&amp;#x27;Enseignement Français en Afghanistan" label="Lycée"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269192" start="4958" end="4963" title="Centre d&amp;#x27;Enseignement Français en Afghanistan" label="Lycée"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5028" end="5034" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q849964" start="5067" end="5073" title="jacket" label="jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q44416" start="5076" end="5083" title="necktie" label="necktie"/>
<link wikidata="Q39908" start="5086" end="5094" title="trousers" label="trousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160801" start="5096" end="5101" title="skirt" label="skirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191022" start="5104" end="5111" title="Scarf" label="scarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q193017" start="5117" end="5125" title="stocking" label="stocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="5158" end="5173" title="French language" label="French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="5219" end="5229" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="5235" end="5245" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="5254" end="5266" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="5267" end="5275" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="5294" end="5313" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="5318" end="5329" title="Taliban" label="the Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5396" end="5404" title="Parisian (person)" label="Parisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="5443" end="5458" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269192" start="5474" end="5479" title="Centre d&amp;#x27;Enseignement Français en Afghanistan" label="Lycée"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="5627" end="5633" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="5635" end="5643" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q928801" start="5645" end="5662" title="Universal jurisdiction" label="universal justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q240126" start="5795" end="5802" title="Bullying" label="bullies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="5890" end="5906" title="Six-Day War" label="1967 Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="5937" end="5941" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="5955" end="5973" title="President of Egypt" label="Egyptian President"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="5974" end="5992" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="6060" end="6063" title="Six-Day War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="6092" end="6099" title="soldier" label="soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q430032" start="6130" end="6142" title="Pan-Islamism" label="Pan-Islamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075753" start="6177" end="6186" title="Jordanian Armed Forces" label="Jordanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075553" start="6188" end="6196" title="Egyptian Armed Forces" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q849180" start="6202" end="6208" title="Syrian Armed Forces" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822437" start="6388" end="6422" title="National Military Academy of Afghanistan" label="the nation&amp;#x27;s military academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="6426" end="6431" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358317" start="6499" end="6526" title="Kabul Polytechnic University" label="Kabul Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354097" start="6533" end="6549" title="Kabul University" label="Kabul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6633" end="6645" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="6663" end="6674" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="6679" end="6691" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="6721" end="6728" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="6757" end="6765" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30970737" start="6767" end="6782" title="political Islam" label="political Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="6788" end="6802" title="anti-Communism" label="anti-Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="6856" end="6865" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="6996" end="7003" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="7008" end="7013" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342867" start="7087" end="7109" title="Palestinian political violence" label="Palestinian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="7129" end="7132" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="PLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="7198" end="7217" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan" label="Mohammed Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30070166" start="7244" end="7260" title="1973 Afghan coup" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="7275" end="7320" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415128" start="7330" end="7353" title="Republic of Afghanistan (1973—1978)" label="Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="7406" end="7414" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="7450" end="7459" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354097" start="7535" end="7551" title="Kabul University" label="Kabul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766183" start="7586" end="7598" title="Muslim Youth" label="Muslim Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261999" start="7656" end="7671" title="Jamiat-e Islami" label="Jamiat-e Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="7729" end="7748" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354097" start="7750" end="7766" title="Kabul University" label="Kabul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="7868" end="7877" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="7888" end="7895" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="8035" end="8040" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="8119" end="8127" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310017" start="8168" end="8177" title="Pakistanis" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="8178" end="8211" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="8213" end="8232" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbaddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="8280" end="8285" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan" label="Daoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q181235" start="8319" end="8327" title="Panjshir Province" label="Panjshir"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="8402" end="8424" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Pakistani intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q120882883" start="8434" end="8449" title="1975 Panjshir Valley uprising" label="first rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="8536" end="8544" title="Panjshir Valley" label="Panjshir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596646" start="8603" end="8608" title="Rokha District" label="Rokha"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="8689" end="8699" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan" label="Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="8740" end="8748" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="8814" end="8826" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="8827" end="8830" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="ISI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695863" start="8850" end="8856" title="Cherat" label="Cherat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="8912" end="8920" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192386" start="8960" end="8976" title="Military science" label="military studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="8991" end="9003" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Tse-tung"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="9027" end="9037" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="9042" end="9053" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="9084" end="9101" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="General de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179910" start="9103" end="9125" title="Võ Nguyên Giáp" label="General Võ Nguyên Giáp"/>
<link wikidata="Q37151" start="9127" end="9134" title="Sun Tzu" label="Sun Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8251" start="9142" end="9152" title="The Art of War" label="Art of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="9181" end="9197" title="counterterrorism" label="counterterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995293" start="9489" end="9496" title="Mohammad Rabbani" label="Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261999" start="9510" end="9525" title="Jamiat-e Islami" label="Jamiat-i Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="9574" end="9593" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q948574" start="9611" end="9624" title="Hezb-i Islami" label="Hezb-i Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="9665" end="9674" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="9823" end="9842" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan" label="Mohammed Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="9877" end="9922" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="10133" end="10137" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="PDPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="10176" end="10186" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan" label="Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="10278" end="10283" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="10302" end="10336" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="10338" end="10341" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="DRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="10544" end="10548" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="PDPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="10571" end="10587" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="11301" end="11306" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="11363" end="11371" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181235" start="11414" end="11422" title="Panjshir Province" label="Panjshir"/>
<link wikidata="Q804133" start="11485" end="11491" title="Bajaur District" label="Bajaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="11517" end="11524" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtun"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="11561" end="11576" title="Panjshir Valley" label="Panjshir Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="11658" end="11664" title="Panjshir Valley" label="Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488058" start="11678" end="11691" title="Shomali Plain" label="Shomali Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617262" start="11703" end="11711" title="Gulbahar, Afghanistan" label="Gulbahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917594" start="11729" end="11743" title="Salang Tunnel" label="Salang Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="11775" end="11780" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="11789" end="11795" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="11825" end="11830" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="11835" end="11841" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="12201" end="12214" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="12571" end="12591" title="1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="1979 Soviet invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="12920" end="12938" title="asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="13253" end="13263" title="mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194223" start="13371" end="13382" title="Salang Pass" label="Salang Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382760" start="13443" end="13463" title="Panjshir offensives" label="series of offensives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482666" start="14330" end="14343" title="Shura-e Nazar" label="Shura-e Nazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="14804" end="14812" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="15054" end="15061" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q216798" start="15067" end="15079" title="lapis lazuli" label="lapis lazuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="15270" end="15273" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q115828416" start="15380" end="15401" title="United Kingdom in the Soviet-Afghan War" label="became their key ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="16112" end="16131" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="16185" end="16188" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="16339" end="16355" title="State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339665" start="16363" end="16380" title="Edmund McWilliams" label="Edmund McWilliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177349" start="16385" end="16397" title="Peter Tomsen" label="Peter Tomsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="16471" end="16490" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196059" start="16516" end="16529" title="Michael Johns (policy analyst)" label="Michael Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q599227" start="16655" end="16670" title="Reagan Doctrine" label="Reagan Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528049" start="17115" end="17130" title="public defender" label="public defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="17344" end="17356" title="Humanitarian aid" label="humanitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="17357" end="17386" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q403949" start="17397" end="17425" title="Aide médicale internationale" label="Aide médicale internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824211" start="17515" end="17520" title="En cadre" label="cadre"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="17612" end="17625" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q220798" start="17780" end="17784" title="GCHQ" label="GCHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918453" start="18207" end="18214" title="Farkhar District" label="Farkhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186395" start="18218" end="18233" title="Takhar Province" label="Takhar Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q170309" start="18341" end="18357" title="Baghlan Province" label="Baghlan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="18979" end="18982" title="Special Air Service" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="19050" end="19054" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="19092" end="19110" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088231" start="19377" end="19384" title="Military reserve" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="19517" end="19525" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759522" start="19590" end="19601" title="Hit-and-run tactics" label="hit-and-run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512190" start="19911" end="19916" title="pakul" label="pakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="20180" end="20190" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="20195" end="20206" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="20595" end="20612" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q509561" start="20867" end="20893" title="Soviet troop withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="departure of Soviet troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="20907" end="20952" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207728" start="20976" end="20995" title="Mohammad Najibullah" label="Mohammad Najibullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109068" start="21352" end="21372" title="Supreme Soviet of the Tajik SSR" label="Tajik Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803211" start="21546" end="21558" title="Asad Durrani" label="Asad Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221390" start="21644" end="21657" title="Garam Chashma" label="Garam Chashma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="21907" end="21912" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="21917" end="21924" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665563" start="22653" end="22664" title="Abdul Momim" label="Abdul Momim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364500" start="22683" end="22691" title="Hairatan" label="Hairatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="22774" end="22781" title="Pashtun people" label="Pashtun"/>
<link wikidata="Q130469" start="22800" end="22814" title="Mazar-i-Sharif" label="Mazar-i-Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="22910" end="22929" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="22940" end="22952" title="General Officer" label="general rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q183036" start="22968" end="22975" title="Jowzjan" label="Jowzjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="23141" end="23148" title="Ismaili" label="Ismaili"/>
<link wikidata="Q800126" start="23455" end="23479" title="Bagram Air Base" label="air force base at Bagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q744802" start="23731" end="23744" title="Kabul Airport" label="Kabul Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="24388" end="24396" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="26766" end="26781" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171365" start="27308" end="27323" title="Peshawar Accord" label="Peshawar Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415585" start="27357" end="27385" title="Islamic State of Afghanistan" label="Islamic State of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="27601" end="27639" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="General Assembly of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q30747910" start="27783" end="27814" title="Islamic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Islamic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="27864" end="27876" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q948574" start="28387" end="28400" title="Hezb-e Islami" label="Hezb-e Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="28594" end="28602" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="28667" end="28697" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746323" start="28699" end="28710" title="Amin Saikal" label="Amin Saikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="29053" end="29065" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="29278" end="29282" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="29301" end="29313" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="29343" end="29351" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135114" start="29450" end="29463" title="Hezb-i Wahdat" label="Hezb-i Wahdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q138123" start="29467" end="29483" title="Abdul Ali Mazari" label="Abdul Ali Mazari"/>
<link wikidata="Q840809" start="29525" end="29541" title="Ittihad-i Islami" label="Ittihad-i Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q545955" start="29545" end="29563" title="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf" label="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189989" start="30156" end="30171" title="Junbish-i Milli" label="Junbish-i Milli"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="30200" end="30219" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="30235" end="30245" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57558" start="30263" end="30276" title="Islam Karimov" label="Islam Karimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q138123" start="31239" end="31255" title="Abdul Ali Mazari" label="Abdul Ali Mazari"/>
<link wikidata="Q545955" start="31283" end="31301" title="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf" label="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="31407" end="31426" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690377" start="31620" end="31645" title="Afshar Operation" label="Afshar military operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690377" start="31887" end="31905" title="Afshar operation" label="military operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="32214" end="32232" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372875" start="32574" end="32584" title="Roy Gutman" label="Roy Gutman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082055" start="34819" end="34835" title="Islamabad Accord" label="Islamabad Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="34837" end="34856" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135114" start="35062" end="35075" title="Hezb-e Wahdat" label="Hezb-e Wahdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q840809" start="35135" end="35151" title="Ittehad-i Islami" label="Ittehad-i Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q545955" start="35155" end="35173" title="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf" label="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372875" start="35398" end="35408" title="Roy Gutman" label="Roy Gutman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484897" start="35416" end="35448" title="United States Institute of Peace" label="United States Institute of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="35701" end="35709" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="36355" end="36374" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="36726" end="36745" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="36821" end="36848" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q57558" start="36906" end="36913" title="Islam Karimov" label="Karimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746323" start="37235" end="37246" title="Amin Saikal" label="Amin Saikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q903527" start="38452" end="38468" title="Gul Agha Sherzai" label="Gul Agha Sherzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="38503" end="38510" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133587" start="38540" end="38560" title="Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam" label="Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="38709" end="38716" title="tyranny" label="tyranny"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="39141" end="39148" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534219" start="39336" end="39353" title="political process" label="political process"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255876" start="39380" end="39393" title="Democratic consolidation" label="consolidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="39398" end="39417" title="democratic election" label="democratic election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397264" start="39664" end="39678" title="Mohammad Yusuf (prime minister)" label="Mohammad Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="39722" end="39732" title="Zahir Shah" label="Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="39923" end="39930" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="40620" end="40627" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199915" start="40740" end="40749" title="massacres" label="massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="40781" end="40795" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="40840" end="40853" title="War in Bosnia" label="War in Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746323" start="41220" end="41231" title="Amin Saikal" label="Amin Saikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="41274" end="41279" title="proxy war" label="proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="41461" end="41482" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="41735" end="41740" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q283648" start="41779" end="41790" title="Ismail Khan" label="Ismail Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q351280" start="41907" end="41919" title="Ahmed Rashid" label="Ahmed Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193968" start="42361" end="42372" title="Mullah Omar" label="Mullah Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="42471" end="42479" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q427941" start="45100" end="45130" title="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (1996–2001)" label="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309368" start="45413" end="45425" title="United Islamic Front for the Salvation of Afghanistan" label="United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q165376" start="45785" end="45795" title="Badakhshan Province" label="Badakhshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173816" start="45797" end="45803" title="Kapisa Province" label="Kapisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q186395" start="45805" end="45811" title="Takhar Province" label="Takhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188157" start="45825" end="45831" title="Parwan Province" label="Parwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188147" start="45833" end="45838" title="Kunar Province" label="Kunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="45840" end="45848" title="Nuristan Province" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185442" start="45850" end="45857" title="Laghman Province" label="Laghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q183015" start="45859" end="45867" title="Samangan Province" label="Samangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186418" start="45869" end="45875" title="Kunduz Province" label="Kunduz"/>
<link wikidata="Q186392" start="45877" end="45881" title="Ghōr Province" label="Ghōr"/>
<link wikidata="Q171382" start="45886" end="45892" title="Bamyan Province" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="46561" end="46580" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="46582" end="46601" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q634160" start="47950" end="47959" title="Abdul Haq (Afghan leader)" label="Abdul Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177349" start="48501" end="48513" title="Peter Tomsen" label="Peter Tomsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128771" start="48839" end="48849" title="Steve Coll" label="Steve Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="49013" end="49025" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="49090" end="49100" title="Zahir Shah" label="Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192317" start="49341" end="49351" title="Loya Jirga" label="Loya Jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="49813" end="49832" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="49836" end="49844" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="49970" end="49978" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="50027" end="50032" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q181235" start="50633" end="50641" title="Panjshir Province" label="Panjshir"/>
<link wikidata="Q186395" start="50643" end="50649" title="Takhar Province" label="Takhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188157" start="50660" end="50666" title="Parwan" label="Parwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32056" start="50671" end="50681" title="Badakhshan" label="Badakhshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108155" start="50728" end="50734" title="Kunduz" label="Kunduz"/>
<link wikidata="Q732879" start="50736" end="50743" title="Baghlan" label="Baghlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="50745" end="50753" title="Nuristan" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="50771" end="50776" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186223" start="52064" end="52076" title="Pepe Escobar" label="Pepe Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q727162" start="52092" end="52102" title="Asia Times" label="Asia Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q383141" start="52174" end="52213" title="International Conference on Afghanistan" label="International Conference on Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="52679" end="52688" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352736" start="53085" end="53097" title="Robin Raphel" label="Robin Raphel"/>
<link wikidata="Q612276" start="53459" end="53486" title="Defense Intelligence Agency" label="Defense Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="54059" end="54074" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q876206" start="54089" end="54110" title="1998 United States embassy bombings" label="1998 embassy bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q784589" start="54453" end="54490" title="Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction" label="Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q317288" start="55817" end="55822" title="Mil Mi-17" label="Mi-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="56380" end="56390" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="56403" end="56407" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="56768" end="56787" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q255023" start="56789" end="56804" title="Nicole Fontaine" label="Nicole Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="56979" end="56987" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="57295" end="57308" title="assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918372" start="57317" end="57336" title="Khwaja Bahauddin District" label="Khwājah Bahā ud Dīn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186395" start="57358" end="57373" title="Takhar Province" label="Takhar Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q521338" start="57510" end="57525" title="Malika El Aroud" label="Malika El Aroud"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="57639" end="57647" title="Belgium" label="Belgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="57664" end="57671" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="57692" end="57700" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q180775" start="57750" end="57759" title="Molenbeek" label="Molenbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="57850" end="57857" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="57927" end="57946" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q545955" start="57951" end="57969" title="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf" label="Abdul Rasul Sayyaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435390" start="58423" end="58453" title="Farkhor Air Base" label="Indian military field hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376803" start="58457" end="58464" title="Farkhor" label="Farkhor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6891938" start="58566" end="58587" title="Mohammad Fahim Dashty" label="Mohammad Fahim Dashty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784827" start="58592" end="58607" title="Massoud Khalili" label="Massoud Khalili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982148" start="59118" end="59125" title="Bazarak, Panjshir" label="Bazarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="59833" end="59853" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="60060" end="60068" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="60170" end="60185" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q186316" start="60727" end="60743" title="Aiman al-Zawahri" label="Aiman al-Zawahri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733080" start="61027" end="61040" title="Waheed Muzhda" label="Waheed Muzhda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241098" start="62065" end="62086" title="Karzai administration" label="Karzai administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="62191" end="62194" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="62998" end="63010" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64604" end="64618" title="Magpul Industries#Magpul Massoud" label="Magpul Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q259210" start="64625" end="64634" title="7.62×51mm NATO" label="7.62 NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277383" start="64653" end="64659" title="Magpul Industries" label="Magpul"/>
<link wikidata="Q317556" start="64859" end="64876" title="Abdullah Abdullah" label="Abdullah Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282006" start="65118" end="65137" title="Abdul Qadir (Afghan communist)" label="Colonel Abdul Qadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="65506" end="65513" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="65578" end="65601" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="65660" end="65668" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="65784" end="65796" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="65891" end="65900" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12426223" start="65908" end="65920" title="Chanakyapuri" label="Chanakyapuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q775994" start="65968" end="65984" title="Council of Paris" label="Council of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="66027" end="66033" title="Commemorative plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q270230" start="66041" end="66068" title="8th arrondissement of Paris" label="8th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="66197" end="66211" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="66338" end="66348" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16683303" start="66350" end="66373" title="Order of Ismoili Somoni" label="Order of Ismoili Somoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="66853" end="66872" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q612276" start="67473" end="67500" title="Defense Intelligence Agency" label="Defense Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="67620" end="67628" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q26689638" start="67894" end="67907" title="Ahmad Massoud" label="Ahmad Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q107461898" start="67953" end="67975" title="2021 Taliban offensive" label="2021 Taliban offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q108102583" start="67984" end="67997" title="Fall of Kabul (2021)" label="Fall of Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q477828" start="68052" end="68066" title="Amrullah Saleh" label="Amrullah Saleh"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127745" start="68087" end="68127" title="National Resistance Front of Afghanistan" label="National Resistance Front of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26689638" start="68306" end="68319" title="Ahmad Massoud" label="Ahmad Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972025" start="68622" end="68637" title="Chékéba Hachemi" label="Chékéba Hachemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="68897" end="68907" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="68912" end="68923" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="68952" end="68969" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="68986" end="69007" title="French Fifth Republic" label="French Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="69046" end="69057" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q365585" start="69093" end="69107" title="Persian poetry" label="Persian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355593" start="69132" end="69137" title="Abdul-Qādir Bedil" label="Bidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240" start="69142" end="69147" title="Hafez" label="Hafez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="69172" end="69180" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="69185" end="69190" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q218863" start="69855" end="69872" title="Ahmad Zia Massoud" label="Ahmad Zia Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="70096" end="70112" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972814" start="70223" end="70252" title="National Front of Afghanistan" label="National Front of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695495" start="70294" end="70312" title="Ahmad Wali Massoud" label="Ahmad Wali Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q317556" start="70408" end="70425" title="Abdullah Abdullah" label="Abdullah Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971563" start="70433" end="70466" title="National Coalition of Afghanistan" label="National Coalition of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q969298" start="70530" end="70546" title="Sebastian Junger" label="Sebastian Junger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70664" end="70680" title="Sebastian Junger#Fire" label="&amp;quot;Fire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q210669" start="70725" end="70736" title="Ken Follett" label="Ken Follett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680792" start="70865" end="70876" title="James McGee (author)" label="James McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q316765" start="70956" end="70969" title="Olivier Weber" label="Olivier Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q96316" start="71122" end="71133" title="Mido Hamada" label="Mido Hamada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140309" start="71163" end="71179" title="The Path to 9/11" label="The Path to 9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417254" start="71237" end="71247" title="Sandy Gall" label="Sandy Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q128771" start="72038" end="72049" title="Steve Coll" label="Coll, Steve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557220" start="72064" end="72179" title="Ghost Wars" label="Ghost Wars: The Secret History of the CIA, Afghanistan and Bin Laden, from the Soviet Invasion to September 9, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q316765" start="72617" end="72630" title="Olivier Weber" label="Olivier Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q316765" start="72686" end="72699" title="Olivier Weber" label="Olivier Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q351280" start="72997" end="73009" title="Ahmed Rashid" label="Ahmed Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193116" start="73377" end="73392" title="Khaled Hosseini" label="Khaled Hosseini"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746846" start="73502" end="73511" title="Kara Kush" label="Kara Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q316765" start="73705" end="73718" title="Olivier Weber" label="Olivier Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="73979" end="73997" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="74303" end="74315" title="The LA Times" label="The LA Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147259" start="74625" end="74629" title="Reza" label="Reza"/>
<link wikidata="Q316765" start="74634" end="74647" title="Olivier Weber" label="Olivier Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852833" start="74794" end="74806" title="Reza Deghati" label="Reza Deghati"/>
<link wikidata="Q969298" start="74852" end="74868" title="Sebastian Junger" label="Sebastian Junger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2178" wikidata="Q25373" url="?curid=2178" title="Atlantis">
<text>Atlantis () is a fictional island mentioned in Plato&#x27;s works &quot;Timaeus&quot; and &quot;Critias&quot; as part of an allegory on the hubris of nations. In the story, Atlantis is described as a naval empire that ruled all Western parts of the known world, making it the literary counter-image of the Achaemenid Empire. After an ill-fated attempt to conquer &quot;Ancient Athens,&quot; Atlantis falls out of favor with the deities and submerges into the Atlantic Ocean. Since Plato describes Athens as resembling his ideal state in the &quot;Republic&quot;, the Atlantis story is meant to bear witness to the superiority of his concept of a state.

Despite its minor importance in Plato&#x27;s work, the Atlantis story has had a considerable impact on literature. The allegorical aspect of Atlantis was taken up in utopian works of several Renaissance writers, such as Francis Bacon&#x27;s &quot;New Atlantis&quot; and Thomas More&#x27;s &quot;Utopia&quot;. On the other hand, nineteenth-century amateur scholars misinterpreted Plato&#x27;s narrative as historical tradition, most famously Ignatius L. Donnelly in his &quot;&quot;. Plato&#x27;s vague indications of the time of the events (more than 9,000 years before his time) and the alleged location of Atlantis (&quot;beyond the Pillars of Hercules&quot;) gave rise to much pseudoscientific speculation. As a consequence, Atlantis has become a byword for any and all supposed advanced prehistoric lost civilizations and continues to inspire contemporary fiction, from comic books to films.

While present-day philologists and classicists agree on the story&#x27;s fictional nature, there is still debate on what served as its inspiration. Plato is known to have freely borrowed some of his allegories and metaphors from older traditions, as he did with the story of Gyges. This led a number of scholars to suggest possible inspiration of Atlantis from Egyptian records of the Thera eruption, the Sea Peoples invasion, or the Trojan War. Others have rejected this chain of tradition as implausible and insist that Plato created an entirely fictional account, drawing loose inspiration from contemporary events such as the failed Athenian invasion of Sicily in 415–413 BC or the destruction of Helike in 373 BC.

==Plato&#x27;s dialogues==
===&quot;Timaeus&quot;===


The only primary sources for Atlantis are Plato&#x27;s dialogues &quot;Timaeus&quot; and &quot;Critias&quot;; all other mentions of the island are based on them. The dialogues claim to quote Solon, who visited Egypt between 590 and 580 BC; they state that he translated Egyptian records of Atlantis. Plato introduced Atlantis in &quot;Timaeus&quot;, written in 360 BC:

The four people appearing in those two dialogues are the politicians Critias and Hermocrates as well as the philosophers Socrates and Timaeus of Locri, although only Critias speaks of Atlantis. In his works Plato makes extensive use of the Socratic method in order to discuss contrary positions within the context of a supposition.

The &quot;Timaeus&quot; begins with an introduction, followed by an account of the creations and structure of the universe and ancient civilizations. In the introduction, Socrates muses about the perfect society, described in Plato&#x27;s &quot;Republic&quot; (), and wonders if he and his guests might recollect a story which exemplifies such a society. Critias mentions a tale he considered to be historical, that would make the perfect example, and he then follows by describing Atlantis as is recorded in the &quot;Critias&quot;. In his account, ancient Athens seems to represent the &quot;perfect society&quot; and Atlantis its opponent, representing the very antithesis of the &quot;perfect&quot; traits described in the &quot;Republic&quot;.

===&quot;Critias&quot;===
According to Critias, the Hellenic deities of old divided the land so that each deity might have their own lot; Poseidon was appropriately, and to his liking, bequeathed the island of Atlantis. The island was larger than Ancient Libya and Asia Minor combined, but it was later sunk by an earthquake and became an impassable mud shoal, inhibiting travel to any part of the ocean. Plato asserted that the Egyptians described Atlantis as an island consisting mostly of mountains in the northern portions and along the shore and encompassing a great plain in an oblong shape in the south &quot;extending in one direction three thousand &quot;stadia&quot; [about 555 km; 345 mi], but across the center inland it was two thousand stadia [about 370 km; 230 mi].&quot; Fifty stadia [9 km; 6 mi] from the coast was a mountain that was low on all sides ... broke it off all round about ... the central island itself was five stades in diameter [about 0.92 km; 0.57 mi].

In Plato&#x27;s metaphorical tale, Poseidon fell in love with Cleito, the daughter of Evenor and Leucippe, who bore him five pairs of male twins. The eldest of these, Atlas, was made rightful king of the entire island and the ocean (called the Atlantic Ocean in his honor), and was given the mountain of his birth and the surrounding area as his fiefdom. Atlas&#x27;s twin Gadeirus, or Eumelus in Greek, was given the extremity of the island toward the pillars of Hercules. The other four pairs of twins—Ampheres and Evaemon, Mneseus and Autochthon, Elasippus and Mestor, and Azaes and Diaprepes—were also given &quot;rule over many men, and a large territory.&quot;

Poseidon carved the mountain where his love dwelt into a palace and enclosed it with three circular moats of increasing width, varying from one to three stadia and separated by rings of land proportional in size. The Atlanteans then built bridges northward from the mountain, making a route to the rest of the island. They dug a great canal to the sea, and alongside the bridges carved tunnels into the rings of rock so that ships could pass into the city around the mountain; they carved docks from the rock walls of the moats. Every passage to the city was guarded by gates and towers, and a wall surrounded each ring of the city. The walls were constructed of red, white, and black rock, quarried from the moats, and were covered with brass, tin, and the precious metal orichalcum, respectively.

According to Critias, 9,000 years before his lifetime a war took place between those outside the Pillars of Hercules at the Strait of Gibraltar and those who dwelt within them. The Atlanteans had conquered the parts of Libya within the Pillars of Hercules, as far as Egypt, and the European continent as far as Tyrrhenia, and had subjected its people to slavery. The Athenians led an alliance of resistors against the Atlantean empire, and as the alliance disintegrated, prevailed alone against the empire, liberating the occupied lands.

The logographer Hellanicus of Lesbos wrote an earlier work entitled &quot;Atlantis&quot;, of which only a few fragments survive. Hellanicus&#x27; work appears to have been a genealogical one concerning the daughters of Atlas (Ἀτλαντὶς in Greek means &quot;of Atlas&quot;), but some authors have suggested a possible connection with Plato&#x27;s island. John V. Luce notes that when Plato writes about the genealogy of Atlantis&#x27;s kings, he writes in the same style as Hellanicus, suggesting a similarity between a fragment of Hellanicus&#x27;s work and an account in the &quot;Critias&quot;. Rodney Castleden suggests that Plato may have borrowed his title from Hellanicus, who may have based his work on an earlier work about Atlantis.

Castleden has pointed out that Plato wrote of Atlantis in 359 BC, when he returned to Athens from Sicily. He notes a number of parallels between the physical organisation and fortifications of Syracuse and Plato&#x27;s description of Atlantis. Gunnar Rudberg was the first who elaborated upon the idea that Plato&#x27;s attempt to realize his political ideas in the city of Syracuse could have heavily inspired the Atlantis account.

==Interpretations==
===Ancient===

Some ancient writers viewed Atlantis as fictional or metaphorical myth; others believed it to be real. Aristotle believed that Plato, his teacher, had invented the island to teach philosophy. The philosopher Crantor, a student of Plato&#x27;s student Xenocrates, is cited often as an example of a writer who thought the story to be historical fact. His work, a commentary on &quot;Timaeus&quot;, is lost, but Proclus, a Neoplatonist of the fifth century AD, reports on it. The passage in question has been represented in the modern literature either as claiming that Crantor visited Egypt, had conversations with priests, and saw hieroglyphs confirming the story, or, as claiming that he learned about them from other visitors to Egypt. Proclus wrote:

The next sentence is often translated &quot;Crantor adds, that this is testified by the prophets of the Egyptians, who assert that these particulars [which are narrated by Plato] are written on pillars which are still preserved.&quot; But in the original, the sentence starts not with the name Crantor but with the ambiguous &quot;He&quot;; whether this referred to Crantor or to Plato is the subject of considerable debate. Proponents of both Atlantis as a metaphorical myth and Atlantis as history have argued that the pronoun refers to Crantor.

Alan Cameron argues that the pronoun should be interpreted as referring to Plato, and that, when Proclus writes that &quot;we must bear in mind concerning this whole feat of the Athenians, that it is neither a mere myth nor unadorned history, although some take it as history and others as myth&quot;, he is treating &quot;Crantor&#x27;s view as mere personal opinion, nothing more; in fact he first quotes and then dismisses it as representing one of the two unacceptable extremes&quot;.

Cameron also points out that whether &quot;he&quot; refers to Plato or to Crantor, the statement does not support conclusions such as Otto Muck&#x27;s &quot;Crantor came to Sais and saw there in the temple of Neith the column, completely covered with hieroglyphs, on which the history of Atlantis was recorded. Scholars translated it for him, and he testified that their account fully agreed with Plato&#x27;s account of Atlantis&quot; or J. V. Luce&#x27;s suggestion that Crantor sent &quot;a special enquiry to Egypt&quot; and that he may simply be referring to Plato&#x27;s own claims.

Another passage from the commentary by Proclus on the &quot;Timaeus&quot; gives a description of the geography of Atlantis: 

Marcellus remains unidentified.

Other ancient historians and philosophers who believed in the existence of Atlantis were Strabo and Posidonius. Some have theorized that, before the sixth century BC, the &quot;Pillars of Hercules&quot; may have applied to mountains on either side of the Gulf of Laconia, and also may have been part of the pillar cult of the Aegean. The mountains stood at either side of the southernmost gulf in Greece, the largest in the Peloponnese, and it opens onto the Mediterranean Sea. This would have placed Atlantis in the Mediterranean, lending credence to many details in Plato&#x27;s discussion.

The fourth-century historian Ammianus Marcellinus, relying on a lost work by Timagenes, a historian writing in the first century BC, writes that the Druids of Gaul said that part of the inhabitants of Gaul had migrated there from distant islands. Some have understood Ammianus&#x27;s testimony as a claim that at the time of Atlantis&#x27;s sinking into the sea, its inhabitants fled to western Europe; but Ammianus, in fact, says that &quot;the Drasidae (Druids) recall that a part of the population is indigenous but others also migrated in from islands and lands beyond the Rhine&quot; (&quot;Res Gestae&quot; 15.9), an indication that the immigrants came to Gaul from the north (Britain, the Netherlands, or Germany), not from a theorized location in the Atlantic Ocean to the south-west. Instead, the Celts who dwelled along the ocean were reported to venerate twin gods, (Dioscori), who appeared to them coming from that ocean.

===Jewish and Christian===
During the early first century, the Hellenistic Jewish philosopher Philo wrote about the destruction of Atlantis in his &quot;On the Eternity of the World&quot;, xxvi. 141, in a longer passage allegedly citing Aristotle&#x27;s successor Theophrastus:

The theologian Joseph Barber Lightfoot (&quot;Apostolic Fathers&quot;, 1885, II, p. 84) noted on this passage: &quot;Clement may possibly be referring to some known, but hardly accessible land, lying without the pillars of Hercules. But more probably he contemplated some unknown land in the far west beyond the ocean, like the fabled Atlantis of Plato ...&quot;

Other early Christian writers wrote about Atlantis, although they had mixed views on whether it once existed or was an untrustworthy myth of pagan origin. Tertullian believed Atlantis was once real and wrote that in the Atlantic Ocean once existed &quot;[the isle] that was equal in size to Libya or Asia&quot; referring to Plato&#x27;s geographical description of Atlantis. The early Christian apologist writer Arnobius also believed Atlantis once existed, but blamed its destruction on pagans.

Cosmas Indicopleustes in the sixth century wrote of Atlantis in his &quot;Christian Topography&quot; in an attempt to prove his theory that the world was flat and surrounded by water:

===Modern===
Aside from Plato&#x27;s original account, modern interpretations regarding Atlantis are an amalgamation of diverse, speculative movements that began in the sixteenth century, when scholars began to identify Atlantis with the New World. Francisco Lopez de Gomara was the first to state that Plato was referring to America, as did Francis Bacon and Alexander von Humboldt; Janus Joannes Bircherod said in 1663 &quot;orbe novo non-novo&quot; (&quot;the New World is not new&quot;). Athanasius Kircher accepted Plato&#x27;s account as literally true, describing Atlantis as a small continent in the Atlantic Ocean.

Contemporary perceptions of Atlantis share roots with Mayanism, which can be traced to the beginning of the Modern Age, when European imaginations were fueled by their initial encounters with the indigenous peoples of the Americas. From this era sprang apocalyptic and utopian visions that would inspire many subsequent generations of theorists.

Most of these interpretations are considered pseudohistory, pseudoscience, or pseudoarchaeology, as they have presented their works as academic or scientific, but lack the standards or criteria.

The Flemish cartographer and geographer Abraham Ortelius is believed to have been the first person to imagine that the continents were joined before drifting to their present positions. In the 1596 edition of his &quot;Thesaurus Geographicus&quot; he wrote: &quot;Unless it be a fable, the island of Gadir or Gades will be the remaining part of the island of Atlantis or America, which was not sunk (as Plato reports in the &quot;Timaeus&quot;) so much as torn away from Europe and Africa by earthquakes and flood... The traces of the ruptures are shown by the projections of Europe and Africa and the indentations of America in the parts of the coasts of these three said lands that face each other to anyone who, using a map of the world, carefully considered them. So that anyone may say with Strabo in Book 2, that what Plato says of the island of Atlantis on the authority of Solon is not a figment.&quot;

====Early influential literature====
The term &quot;utopia&quot; (from &quot;no place&quot;) was coined by Sir Thomas More in his sixteenth-century work of fiction &quot;Utopia&quot;. Inspired by Plato&#x27;s Atlantis and travelers&#x27; accounts of the Americas, More described an imaginary land set in the New World. His idealistic vision established a connection between the Americas and utopian societies, a theme that Bacon discussed in &quot;The New Atlantis&quot; (). A character in the narrative gives a history of Atlantis that is similar to Plato&#x27;s and places Atlantis in America. People had begun believing that the Mayan and Aztec ruins could possibly be the remnants of Atlantis.

====Impact of Mayanism====
Much speculation began as to the origins of the Maya, which led to a variety of narratives and publications that tried to rationalize the discoveries within the context of the Bible and that had undertones of racism in their connections between the Old and New World. The Europeans believed the indigenous people to be inferior and incapable of building that which was now in ruins and by sharing a common history, they insinuated that another race must have been responsible.

In the middle and late nineteenth century, several renowned Mesoamerican scholars, starting with Charles Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg, and including Edward Herbert Thompson and Augustus Le Plongeon, formally proposed that Atlantis was somehow related to Mayan and Aztec culture.

The French scholar Brasseur de Bourbourg traveled extensively through Mesoamerica in the mid-1800s, and was renowned for his translations of Mayan texts, most notably the sacred book Popol Vuh, as well as a comprehensive history of the region. Soon after these publications, however, Brasseur de Bourbourg lost his academic credibility, due to his claim that the Maya peoples had descended from the Toltecs, people he believed were the surviving population of the racially superior civilization of Atlantis. His work combined with the skillful, romantic illustrations of Jean Frederic Waldeck, which visually alluded to Egypt and other aspects of the Old World, created an authoritative fantasy that excited much interest in the connections between worlds.

Inspired by Brasseur de Bourbourg&#x27;s diffusion theories, the pseudoarchaeologist Augustus Le Plongeon traveled to Mesoamerica and performed some of the first excavations of many famous Mayan ruins. Le Plongeon invented narratives, such as the kingdom of Mu saga, which romantically drew connections to him, his wife Alice, and Egyptian deities Osiris and Isis, as well as to Heinrich Schliemann, who had just discovered the ancient city of Troy from Homer&#x27;s epic poetry (that had been described as merely mythical). He also believed that he had found connections between the Greek and Mayan languages, which produced a narrative of the destruction of Atlantis.

====Ignatius Donnelly====
The 1882 publication of &quot;&quot; by Ignatius L. Donnelly stimulated much popular interest in Atlantis. He was greatly inspired by early works in Mayanism, and like them, attempted to establish that all known ancient civilizations were descended from Atlantis, which he saw as a technologically sophisticated, more advanced culture. Donnelly drew parallels between creation stories in the Old and New Worlds, attributing the connections to Atlantis, where he believed the Biblical Garden of Eden existed. As implied by the title of his book, he also believed that Atlantis was destroyed by the Great Flood mentioned in the Bible.

Donnelly is credited as the &quot;father of the nineteenth century Atlantis revival&quot; and is the reason the myth endures today. He unintentionally promoted an alternative method of inquiry to history and science, and the idea that myths contain hidden information that opens them to &quot;ingenious&quot; interpretation by people who believe they have new or special insight.

====Madame Blavatsky and the Theosophists====

Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, the founder of the Theosophists, took up Donnelly&#x27;s interpretations when she wrote &quot;The Secret Doctrine&quot; (1888), which she claimed was originally dictated in Atlantis. She maintained that the Atlanteans were cultural heroes (contrary to Plato, who describes them mainly as a military threat). She believed in a form of racial evolution (as opposed to primate evolution). In her process of evolution the Atlanteans were the fourth &quot;root race&quot;, which were succeeded by the fifth, the &quot;Aryan race&quot;, which she identified with the modern human race.

In her book, Blavatsky reported that the civilization of Atlantis reached its peak between 1,000,000 and 900,000 years ago, but destroyed itself through internal warfare brought about by the dangerous use of psychic and supernatural powers of the inhabitants. Rudolf Steiner, the founder of anthroposophy and Waldorf Schools, along with other well known Theosophists, such as Annie Besant, also wrote of cultural evolution in much the same vein. Other occultists followed the same lead, at least to the point of tracing the lineage of occult practices back to Atlantis. Among the most famous is Dion Fortune in her &quot;Esoteric Orders and Their Work&quot;.

Drawing on the ideas of Rudolf Steiner and Hanns Hörbiger, Egon Friedell started his book &quot;&quot;, and thus his historical analysis of antiquity, with the ancient culture of Atlantis. The book was published in 1940.

====Nazism and occultism====
Blavatsky was also inspired by the work of the 18th-century astronomer Jean-Sylvain Bailly, who had &quot;Orientalized&quot; the Atlantis myth in his mythical continent of Hyperborea, a reference to Greek myths featuring a Northern European region of the same name, home to a giant, godlike race. Dan Edelstein claims that her reshaping of this theory in &quot;The Secret Doctrine&quot; provided the Nazis with a mythological precedent and a pretext for their ideological platform and their subsequent genocide. However, Blavatsky&#x27;s writings mention that the Atlantean were in fact olive-skinned peoples with Mongoloid traits who were the ancestors of modern Native Americans, Mongolians, and Malayans.

The idea that the Atlanteans were Hyperborean, Nordic supermen who originated in the Northern Atlantic or even in the far North, was popular in the German ariosophic movement around 1900, propagated by Guido von List and others. It gave its name to the &quot;Thule Gesellschaft&quot;, an antisemite Münich lodge, which preceded the German Nazi Party (see Thule). The scholars (1920) and Herman Wirth (1928) were the first to speak of a &quot;Nordic-Atlantean&quot; or &quot;Aryan-Nordic&quot; master race that spread from Atlantis over the Northern Hemisphere and beyond. The Hyperboreans were contrasted with the Jewish people. Party ideologist Alfred Rosenberg (in &quot;The Myth of the Twentieth Century&quot;, 1930) and SS-leader Heinrich Himmler made it part of the official doctrine. The idea was followed up by the adherents of Esoteric Nazism such as Julius Evola (1934) and, more recently, Miguel Serrano (1978).

The idea of Atlantis as the homeland of the Caucasian race would contradict the beliefs of older Esoteric and Theosophic groups, which taught that the Atlanteans were non-Caucasian brown-skinned peoples. Modern Esoteric groups, including the Theosophic Society, do not consider Atlantean society to have been superior or Utopian—they rather consider it a lower stage of evolution.

====Edgar Cayce====
The clairvoyant Edgar Cayce spoke frequently of Atlantis. During his &quot;life readings&quot;, he claimed that many of his subjects were reincarnations of people who had lived there. By tapping into their collective consciousness, the &quot;Akashic Records&quot; (a term borrowed from Theosophy), Cayce declared that he was able to give detailed descriptions of the lost continent. He also asserted that Atlantis would &quot;rise&quot; again in the 1960s (sparking much popularity of the myth in that decade) and that there is a &quot;Hall of Records&quot; beneath the Egyptian Sphinx which holds the historical texts of Atlantis.

====Recent times====
As continental drift became widely accepted during the 1960s, and the increased understanding of plate tectonics demonstrated the impossibility of a lost continent in the geologically recent past, most &quot;Lost Continent&quot; theories of Atlantis began to wane in popularity.

Plato scholar Julia Annas, Regents Professor of Philosophy at the University of Arizona, had this to say on the matter:

One of the proposed explanations for the historical context of the Atlantis story is that it serves as Plato&#x27;s warning to his fellow citizens against their striving for naval power.

Kenneth Feder points out that Critias&#x27;s story in the &quot;Timaeus&quot; provides a major clue. In the dialogue, Critias says, referring to Socrates&#x27; hypothetical society:

Feder quotes A. E. Taylor, who wrote, &quot;We could not be told much more plainly that the whole narrative of Solon&#x27;s conversation with the priests and his intention of writing the poem about Atlantis are an invention of Plato&#x27;s fancy.&quot;

==Location hypotheses==

Since Donnelly&#x27;s day, there have been dozens of locations proposed for Atlantis, to the point where the name has become a generic concept, divorced from the specifics of Plato&#x27;s account. This is reflected in the fact that many proposed sites are not within the Atlantic at all. Few today are scholarly or archaeological hypotheses, while others have been made by psychic (e.g., Edgar Cayce) or other pseudoscientific means. (The Atlantis researchers Jacques Collina-Girard and Georgeos Díaz-Montexano, for instance, each claim the other&#x27;s hypothesis is pseudoscience.) Many of the proposed sites share some of the characteristics of the Atlantis story (water, catastrophic end, relevant time period), but none has been demonstrated to be a true historical Atlantis.

===In or near the Mediterranean Sea===

Most of the historically proposed locations are in or near the Mediterranean Sea: islands such as Sardinia, Crete, Santorini (Thera), Sicily, Cyprus, and Malta; land-based cities or states such as Troy, Tartessos, and Tantalis (in the province of Manisa, Turkey); Israel-Sinai or Canaan; and northwestern Africa, including the Richat Structure in Mauritania.

The Thera eruption, dated to the seventeenth or sixteenth century BC, caused a large tsunami that some experts hypothesize devastated the Minoan civilization on the nearby island of Crete, further leading some to believe that this may have been the catastrophe that inspired the story. In the area of the Black Sea the following locations have been proposed: Bosporus and Ancomah (a legendary place near Trabzon).

Others have noted that, before the sixth century BC, the mountains on either side of the Laconian Gulf were called the &quot;Pillars of Hercules&quot;, and they could be the geographical location being described in ancient reports upon which Plato was basing his story. The mountains stood at either side of the southernmost gulf in Greece, the largest in the Peloponnese, and that gulf opens onto the Mediterranean Sea.

If from the beginning of discussions, misinterpretation of Gibraltar as the location rather than being at the Gulf of Laconia, would lend itself to many erroneous concepts regarding the location of Atlantis. Plato may have not been aware of the difference. The Laconian pillars open to the south toward Crete and beyond which is Egypt. The Thera eruption and the Late Bronze Age collapse affected that area and might have been the devastation to which the sources used by Plato referred. Significant events such as these would have been likely material for tales passed from one generation to another for almost a thousand years.

===In the Atlantic Ocean===

The location of Atlantis in the Atlantic Ocean has a certain appeal given the closely related names. Popular culture often places Atlantis there, perpetuating the original Platonic setting as they understand it. The Canary Islands and Madeira Islands have been identified as a possible location, west of the Straits of Gibraltar, but in relative proximity to the Mediterranean Sea. Detailed studies of their geomorphology and geology have demonstrated, however, that they have been steadily uplifted, without any significant periods of subsidence, over the last four million years, by geologic processes such as erosional unloading, gravitational unloading, lithospheric flexure induced by adjacent islands, and volcanic underplating.

Various islands or island groups in the Atlantic were also identified as possible locations, notably the Azores. Similarly, cores of sediment covering the ocean bottom surrounding the Azores and other evidence demonstrate that it has been an undersea plateau for millions of years. The area is known for its volcanism however, which is associated with rifting along the Azores triple junction. The spread of the crust along the existing faults and fractures has produced many volcanic and seismic events.

The area is supported by a buoyant upwelling in the deeper mantle, which some associate with an Azores hotspot. Most of the volcanic activity has occurred primarily along the Terceira Rift. From the beginning of the islands&#x27; settlement, around the 15th century, there have been about 30 volcanic eruptions (terrestrial and submarine) as well as numerous, powerful earthquakes. The island of São Miguel in the Azores is the site of the Sete Cidades volcano and caldera, which are the byproducts of historical volcanic activity in the Azores.

The submerged island of Spartel near the Strait of Gibraltar has also been suggested.

===In Europe===

Several hypotheses place the sunken island in northern Europe, including Doggerland in the North Sea, and Sweden (by Olof Rudbeck in &quot;Atland&quot;, 1672–1702). Doggerland, as well as Viking Bergen Island, is thought to have been flooded by a megatsunami following the Storegga Slide of c. 6100 BC. Some have proposed the Celtic Shelf as a possible location, and that there is a link to Ireland. In 2004, Swedish physiographist Ulf Erlingsson proposed that the legend of Atlantis was based on Stone Age Ireland. He later stated that he does not believe that Atlantis ever existed but maintained that his hypothesis that its description matches Ireland&#x27;s geography has a 99.8% probability. The director of the National Museum of Ireland commented that there was no archaeology supporting this.

In 2011, a team, working on a documentary for the National Geographic Channel, led by Professor Richard Freund from the University of Hartford, claimed to have found possible evidence of Atlantis in southwestern Andalusia. The team identified its possible location within the marshlands of the Doñana National Park, in the area that once was the Lacus Ligustinus, between the Huelva, Cádiz, and Seville provinces, and they speculated that Atlantis had been destroyed by a tsunami, extrapolating results from a previous study by Spanish researchers, published four years earlier.

Spanish scientists have dismissed Freund&#x27;s speculations, claiming that he sensationalised their work. The anthropologist Juan Villarías-Robles, who works with the Spanish National Research Council, said, &quot;Richard Freund was a newcomer to our project and appeared to be involved in his own very controversial issue concerning King Solomon&#x27;s search for ivory and gold in Tartessos, the well documented settlement in the Doñana area established in the first millennium BC&quot;, and described Freund&#x27;s claims as &quot;fanciful&quot;.

A similar theory had previously been put forward by a German researcher, Rainer W. Kühne, that is based only on satellite imagery and places Atlantis in the Marismas de Hinojos, north of the city of Cádiz. Before that, the historian Adolf Schulten had stated in the 1920s that Plato had used Tartessos as the basis for his Atlantis myth.

===Other locations===
Several writers, such as Flavio Barbiero as early as 1974, have speculated that Antarctica is the site of Atlantis. A number of claims involve the Caribbean, such as an alleged underwater formation off the Guanahacabibes Peninsula in Cuba. The adjacent Bahamas or the folkloric Bermuda Triangle have been proposed as well. Areas in the Pacific and Indian Oceans have also been proposed, including Indonesia (i.e. Sundaland). The stories of a lost continent off the coast of India, named &quot;Kumari Kandam&quot;, have inspired some to draw parallels to Atlantis.

==Literary interpretations==

===Ancient versions===

In order to give his account of Atlantis verisimilitude, Plato mentions that the story was heard by Solon in Egypt, and transmitted orally over several generations through the family of Dropides, until it reached Critias, a dialogue speaker in &quot;Timaeus&quot; and &quot;Critias&quot;. Solon had supposedly tried to adapt the Atlantis oral tradition into a poem (that if published, was to be greater than the works of Hesiod and Homer). While it was never completed, Solon passed on the story to Dropides. Modern classicists deny the existence of Solon&#x27;s Atlantis poem and the story as an oral tradition.

Instead, Plato is thought to be the sole inventor or fabricator.
Hellanicus of Lesbos used the word &quot;Atlantis&quot; as the title for a poem published before Plato, a fragment of which may be Oxyrhynchus Papyrus 11, 1359. This work only describes the Atlantides, the daughters of Atlas, and has no relation to Plato&#x27;s Atlantis account.

In the new era, the third century AD Neoplatonist Zoticus wrote an epic poem based on Plato&#x27;s account of Atlantis. Plato&#x27;s work may already have inspired parodic imitation, however. Writing only a few decades after the &quot;Timaeus&quot; and &quot;Critias&quot;, the historian Theopompus of Chios wrote of a land beyond the ocean known as Meropis. This description was included in Book 8 of his &quot;Philippica&quot;, which contains a dialogue between Silenus and King Midas. Silenus describes the Meropids, a race of men who grow to twice normal size, and inhabit two cities on the island of Meropis: &quot;Eusebes&quot; (, &quot;Pious-town&quot;) and &quot;Machimos&quot; (, &quot;Fighting-town&quot;).

He also reports that an army of ten million soldiers crossed the ocean to conquer Hyperborea, but abandoned this proposal when they realized that the Hyperboreans were the luckiest people on earth. Heinz-Günther Nesselrath has argued that these and other details of Silenus&#x27; story are meant as imitation and exaggeration of the Atlantis story, by parody, for the purpose of exposing Plato&#x27;s ideas to ridicule.

===Utopias and dystopias===

The creation of Utopian and dystopian fictions was renewed after the Renaissance, most notably in Francis Bacon&#x27;s &quot;New Atlantis&quot; (1627), the description of an ideal society that he located off the western coast of America. Thomas Heyrick (1649–1694) followed him with &quot;The New Atlantis&quot; (1687), a satirical poem in three parts. His new continent of uncertain location, perhaps even a floating island either in the sea or the sky, serves as background for his exposure of what he described in a second edition as &quot;A True Character of Popery and Jesuitism&quot;.

The title of &quot;The New Atalantis&quot; by Delarivier Manley (1709), distinguished from the two others by the single letter, is an equally dystopian work but set this time on a fictional Mediterranean island. In it sexual violence and exploitation is made a metaphor for the hypocritical behaviour of politicians in their dealings with the general public. In Manley&#x27;s case, the target of satire was the Whig Party, while in David Maclean Parry&#x27;s &quot;The Scarlet Empire&quot; (1906) it is Socialism as practised in foundered Atlantis. It was followed in Russia by Velimir Khlebnikov&#x27;s poem &quot;The Fall of Atlantis&quot; (&quot;Gibel&#x27; Atlantidy&quot;, 1912), which is set in a future rationalist dystopia that has discovered the secret of immortality and is so dedicated to progress that it has lost touch with the past. When the high priest of this ideology is tempted by a slave girl into an act of irrationality, he murders her and precipitates a second flood, above which her severed head floats vengefully among the stars.

A slightly later work, &quot;The Ancient of Atlantis&quot; (Boston, 1915) by Albert Armstrong Manship, expounds the Atlantean wisdom that is to redeem the earth. Its three parts consist of a verse narrative of the life and training of an Atlantean wise one, followed by his Utopian moral teachings and then a psychic drama set in modern times in which a reincarnated child embodying the lost wisdom is reborn on earth.

In Hispanic eyes, Atlantis had a more intimate interpretation. The land had been a colonial power which, although it had brought civilization to ancient Europe, had also enslaved its peoples. Its tyrannical fall from grace had contributed to the fate that had overtaken it, but now its disappearance had unbalanced the world. This was the point of view of Jacint Verdaguer&#x27;s vast mythological epic &quot;L&#x27;Atlantida&quot; (1877). After the sinking of the former continent, Hercules travels east across the Atlantic to found the city of Barcelona and then departs westward again to the Hesperides. The story is told by a hermit to a shipwrecked mariner, who is inspired to follow in his tracks and so &quot;call the New World into existence to redress the balance of the Old&quot;. This mariner, of course, was Christopher Columbus.

Verdaguer&#x27;s poem was written in Catalan, but was widely translated in both Europe and Hispano-America. One response was the similarly entitled Argentinian &quot;Atlantida&quot; of Olegario Víctor Andrade (1881), which sees in &quot;Enchanted Atlantis that Plato foresaw, a golden promise to the fruitful race&quot; of Latins. The bad example of the colonising world remains, however. José Juan Tablada characterises its threat in his &quot;De Atlántida&quot; (1894) through the beguiling picture of the lost world populated by the underwater creatures of Classical myth, among whom is the Siren of its final stanza with

There is a similar ambivalence in Janus Djurhuus&#x27; six-stanza &quot;Atlantis&quot; (1917), where a celebration of the Faroese linguistic revival grants it an ancient pedigree by linking Greek to Norse legend. In the poem a female figure rising from the sea against a background of Classical palaces is recognised as a priestess of Atlantis. The poet recalls &quot;that the Faroes lie there in the north Atlantic Ocean/ where before lay the poet-dreamt lands,&quot; but also that in Norse belief, such a figure only appears to those about to drown.

===A land lost in the distance===
The fact that Atlantis is a lost land has made of it a metaphor for something no longer attainable. For the American poet Edith Willis Linn Forbes, &quot;The Lost Atlantis&quot; stands for idealisation of the past; the present moment can only be treasured once that is realised. Ella Wheeler Wilcox finds the location of &quot;The Lost Land&quot; (1910) in one&#x27;s carefree youthful past. Similarly, for the Irish poet Eavan Boland in &quot;Atlantis, a lost sonnet&quot; (2007), the idea was defined when &quot;the old fable-makers searched hard for a word/ to convey that what is gone is gone forever&quot;.

For some male poets too, the idea of Atlantis is constructed from what cannot be obtained. Charles Bewley in his Newdigate Prize poem (1910) thinks it grows from dissatisfaction with one&#x27;s condition,

in a dream of Atlantis. Similarly for the Australian Gary Catalano in a 1982 prose poem, it is &quot;a vision that sank under the weight of its own perfection&quot;. W. H. Auden, however, suggests a way out of such frustration through the metaphor of journeying toward Atlantis in his poem of 1941. While travelling, he advises the one setting out, you will meet with many definitions of the goal in view, only realising at the end that the way has all the time led inward.

=== Epic verse narratives ===

A few late-19th century verse narratives complement the genre fiction that was beginning to be written at the same period. Two of them report the disaster that overtook the continent as related by long-lived survivors. In Frederick Tennyson&#x27;s &quot;Atlantis&quot; (1888), an ancient Greek mariner sails west and discovers an inhabited island which is all that remains of the former kingdom. He learns of its end and views the shattered remnant of its former glory, from which a few had escaped to set up the Mediterranean civilisations. In the second, &quot;Mona, Queen of Lost Atlantis: An Idyllic Re-embodiment of Long Forgotten History&quot; (Los Angeles CA 1925) by James Logue Dryden (1840–1925), the story is told in a series of visions. A Seer is taken to Mona&#x27;s burial chamber in the ruins of Atlantis, where she revives and describes the catastrophe. There follows a survey of the lost civilisations of Hyperborea and Lemuria as well as Atlantis, accompanied by much spiritualist lore.

William Walton Hoskins (1856–1919) admits to the readers of his &quot;Atlantis and other poems&quot; (Cleveland OH, 1881), that he is only 24. Its melodramatic plot concerns the poisoning of the descendant of god-born kings. The usurping poisoner is poisoned in his turn, following which the continent is swallowed in the waves. Asian gods people the landscape of &quot;The Lost Island&quot; (Ottawa 1889) by Edward Taylor Fletcher (1816–97). An angel foresees impending catastrophe and that the people will be allowed to escape if their semi-divine rulers will sacrifice themselves. A final example, Edward N. Beecher&#x27;s &quot;The Lost Atlantis or The Great Deluge of All&quot; (Cleveland OH, 1898) is just a doggerel vehicle for its author&#x27;s opinions: that the continent was the location of the Garden of Eden; that Darwin&#x27;s theory of evolution is correct, as are Donnelly&#x27;s views.

Atlantis was to become a theme in Russia following the 1890s, taken up in unfinished poems by Valery Bryusov and Konstantin Balmont, as well as in a drama by the schoolgirl Larissa Reisner. One other long narrative poem was published in New York by George V. Golokhvastoff. His 250-page &quot;The Fall of Atlantis&quot; (1938) records how a high priest, distressed by the prevailing degeneracy of the ruling classes, seeks to create an androgynous being from royal twins as a means to overcome this polarity. When he is unable to control the forces unleashed by his occult ceremony, the continent is destroyed.

==Artistic representations==
===Music===
The Spanish composer Manuel de Falla worked on a dramatic cantata based on Verdaguer&#x27;s &quot;L&#x27;Atlántida&quot;, during the last 20 years of his life. The name has been affixed to symphonies by Jānis Ivanovs (Symphony 4, 1941), Richard Nanes, and Vaclav Buzek (2009). There was also the symphonic celebration of Alan Hovhaness: &quot;Fanfare for the New Atlantis&quot; (Op. 281, 1975).

The Bohemian-American composer and arranger Vincent Frank Safranek wrote &quot;Atlantis (The Lost Continent) Suite in Four Parts&quot;; I. Nocturne and Morning Hymn of Praise, II. A Court Function, III. &quot;I Love Thee&quot; (The Prince and Aana), IV. The Destruction of Atlantis, for military (concert) band in 1913.

The opera &quot;Der Kaiser von Atlantis&quot; (&quot;The Emperor of Atlantis&quot;) was written in 1943 by Viktor Ullmann with a libretto by Petr Kien, while they were both inmates at the Nazi concentration camp of Theresienstadt. The Nazis did not allow it to be performed, assuming the opera&#x27;s reference to an Emperor of Atlantis to be a satire on Hitler. Though Ullmann and Kiel were murdered in Auschwitz, the manuscript survived and was performed for the first time in 1975 in Amsterdam.

===Painting and sculpture===

Paintings of the submersion of Atlantis are comparatively rare. In the seventeenth century there was François de Nomé&#x27;s &quot;The Fall of Atlantis&quot;, which shows a tidal wave surging toward a Baroque city frontage. The style of architecture apart, it is not very different from Nicholas Roerich&#x27;s &quot;The Last of Atlantis&quot; of 1928.

The most dramatic depiction of the catastrophe was Léon Bakst&#x27;s &quot;Ancient Terror&quot; (&quot;Terror Antiquus&quot;, 1908), although it does not name Atlantis directly. It is a mountain-top view of a rocky bay breached by the sea, which is washing inland about the tall structures of an ancient city. A streak of lightning crosses the upper half of the painting, while below it rises the impassive figure of an enigmatic goddess who holds a blue dove between her breasts. Vyacheslav Ivanov identified the subject as Atlantis in a public lecture on the painting given in 1909, the year it was first exhibited, and he has been followed by other commentators in the years since.

Sculptures referencing Atlantis have often been stylized single figures. One of the earliest was Einar Jónsson&#x27;s &quot;The King of Atlantis&quot; (1919–1922), now in the garden of his museum in Reykjavík. It represents a single figure, clad in a belted skirt and wearing a large triangular helmet, who sits on an ornate throne supported between two young bulls. The walking female entitled &quot;Atlantis&quot; (1946) by Ivan Meštrović was from a series inspired by ancient Greek figures with the symbolical meaning of unjustified suffering.

In the case of the Brussels fountain feature known as &quot;The Man of Atlantis&quot; (2003) by the Belgian sculptor , the 4-metre tall figure wearing a diving suit steps from a plinth into the spray. It looks light-hearted but the artist&#x27;s comment on it makes a serious point: &quot;Because habitable land will be scarce, it is no longer improbable that we will return to the water in the long term. As a result, a portion of the population will mutate into fish-like creatures. Global warming and rising water levels are practical problems for the world in general and here in the Netherlands in particular&quot;.
Robert Smithson&#x27;s &quot;Hypothetical Continent – Map of Broken Clear Glass: Atlantis&quot; was first created as a photographical project in Loveladies, New Jersey, in 1969, and then recreated as a gallery installation of broken glass. On this he commented that he liked &quot;landscapes that suggest prehistory&quot;, and this is borne out by the original conceptual drawing of the work that includes an inset map of the continent sited off the coast of Africa and at the straits into the Mediterranean.

==See also==
Mythology:

*Antillia
*Avalon
*Brasil (mythical island)
*Brittia
*Cantre&#x27;r Gwaelod
*Iram of the Pillars
*Lemuria (continent)
*List of mythological places
*Mayda
*Mu (lost continent)
*Numenor
*Saint Brendan&#x27;s Island
*Sandy Island, New Caledonia
*Thule
*Ys
Underwater geography:

*Yonaguni Monument
*Bimini Road
*Early Holocene sea level rise
Other:

*Atlantis in comics
*Doggerland
*&quot;Hidden Worlds&quot;
*Kumari Kandam
*List of lost lands
*Minoan eruption
*Frisland
==Notes==
==Further reading==
*

Ancient sources
*Plato, &quot;Timaeus&quot;, translated by Benjamin Jowett at Project Gutenberg; alternative version with commentary.
*Plato, &quot;Critias&quot;, translated by Benjamin Jowett at Project Gutenberg; alternative version with commentary.

Modern sources
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25373" start="0" end="8" title="Atlantis" label="Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="17" end="24" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="47" end="52" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q371884" start="72" end="79" title="Timaeus (dialogue)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335321" start="96" end="103" title="Critias (dialogue)" label="Critias"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="124" end="132" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="140" end="146" title="hubris" label="hubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q838988" start="249" end="260" title="Ecumene" label="known world"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="306" end="323" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="459" end="473" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="547" end="555" title="Republic (Plato)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="820" end="826" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="845" end="856" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="874" end="887" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233830" start="901" end="913" title="New Atlantis" label="New Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="924" end="935" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q404158" start="949" end="955" title="Utopia (book)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918937" start="1095" end="1115" title="Ignatius L. Donnelly" label="Ignatius L. Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q152854" start="1289" end="1308" title="Pillars of Hercules" label="Pillars of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="1334" end="1350" title="Pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477736" start="1457" end="1475" title="Lost world" label="lost civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="1569" end="1581" title="Philology" label="philologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="1586" end="1597" title="Classics" label="classicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359925" start="1817" end="1831" title="Ring of Gyges" label="story of Gyges"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843683" start="1912" end="1920" title="History of Achaemenid Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144693" start="1936" end="1950" title="Thera eruption" label="Thera eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="1956" end="1967" title="Sea Peoples" label="Sea Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1985" end="1995" title="Trojan War#Historical basis" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q844289" start="2188" end="2215" title="Sicilian Expedition" label="Athenian invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432654" start="2252" end="2258" title="Helike" label="Helike"/>
<link wikidata="Q133337" start="2517" end="2522" title="Solon" label="Solon"/>
<link wikidata="Q294092" start="2765" end="2772" title="Critias" label="Critias"/>
<link wikidata="Q367407" start="2777" end="2788" title="Hermocrates" label="Hermocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="2817" end="2825" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q176287" start="2830" end="2846" title="Timaeus of Locri" label="Timaeus of Locri"/>
<link wikidata="Q839475" start="2936" end="2951" title="Socratic method" label="Socratic method"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="3274" end="3282" title="Republic (Plato)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3831" end="3839" title="Ancient Greece" label="Hellenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="3917" end="3925" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370577" start="4026" end="4039" title="Ancient Libya" label="Ancient Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="4044" end="4054" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="4443" end="4449" title="Stadia (length)" label="stadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42297009" start="4852" end="4858" title="Evenor" label="Evenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="4933" end="4938" title="Atlas of Atlantis" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="5112" end="5119" title="fiefdom" label="fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885930" start="5292" end="5299" title="Mneseus" label="Mneseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="5534" end="5538" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="6172" end="6177" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="6179" end="6182" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q731033" start="6207" end="6217" title="orichalcum" label="orichalcum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="6358" end="6377" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="6545" end="6554" title="Tyrrhenia" label="Tyrrhenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133078" start="6777" end="6788" title="Logographer (history)" label="logographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q504744" start="6789" end="6809" title="Hellanicus of Lesbos" label="Hellanicus of Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701991" start="7126" end="7138" title="John V. Luce" label="John V. Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="7708" end="7716" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="8087" end="8096" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q434773" start="8192" end="8199" title="Crantor" label="Crantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q214121" start="8235" end="8245" title="Xenocrates" label="Xenocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q271809" start="8393" end="8400" title="Proclus" label="Proclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="8404" end="8416" title="Neoplatonist" label="Neoplatonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191815" start="9985" end="9990" title="Neith" label="Neith"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="10614" end="10620" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185770" start="10625" end="10635" title="Posidonius" label="Posidonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q589877" start="10780" end="10795" title="Gulf of Laconia" label="Gulf of Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172198" start="11148" end="11168" title="Ammianus Marcellinus" label="Ammianus Marcellinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036794" start="11196" end="11205" title="Timagenes" label="Timagenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="11268" end="11274" title="Druids" label="Druids"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="11278" end="11282" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="11696" end="11701" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="11997" end="12005" title="Dioscori" label="Dioscori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="12117" end="12135" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Hellenistic Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q189597" start="12148" end="12153" title="Philo" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="12318" end="12330" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706574" start="12348" end="12371" title="Joseph Barber Lightfoot" label="Joseph Barber Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="12852" end="12862" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q342416" start="13109" end="13117" title="Arnobius" label="Arnobius"/>
<link wikidata="Q355633" start="13194" end="13215" title="Cosmas Indicopleustes" label="Cosmas Indicopleustes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216330" start="13268" end="13288" title="Christian Topography" label="Christian Topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="13617" end="13626" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q721423" start="13628" end="13653" title="Francisco Lopez de Gomara" label="Francisco Lopez de Gomara"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="13721" end="13734" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="13739" end="13761" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q76738" start="13871" end="13889" title="Athanasius Kircher" label="Athanasius Kircher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302942" start="14058" end="14066" title="Mayanism" label="Mayanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="14112" end="14122" title="Modern Age" label="Modern Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="14257" end="14268" title="Apocalypticism" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="14273" end="14280" title="utopian" label="utopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146759" start="14396" end="14409" title="pseudohistory" label="pseudohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="14411" end="14424" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345825" start="14429" end="14446" title="pseudoarchaeology" label="pseudoarchaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="14486" end="14494" title="academic" label="academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="14498" end="14508" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q232916" start="14587" end="14603" title="Abraham Ortelius" label="Abraham Ortelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q178605" start="14696" end="14704" title="continental drift" label="drifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="15343" end="15349" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="15511" end="15517" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="15566" end="15581" title="Sir Thomas More" label="Sir Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="15615" end="15622" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q404158" start="15629" end="15635" title="Utopia (book)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="15655" end="15660" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="15713" end="15721" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="15767" end="15776" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233830" start="15907" end="15923" title="New Atlantis" label="The New Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="16091" end="16096" title="Maya civilization" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="16101" end="16106" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="16233" end="16237" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="16361" end="16366" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="16394" end="16400" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="16457" end="16466" title="Europeans" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="16480" end="16497" title="indigenous people" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="16723" end="16734" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066666" start="16760" end="16797" title="Charles Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg" label="Charles Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543106" start="16813" end="16836" title="Edward Herbert Thompson" label="Edward Herbert Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q770508" start="16841" end="16861" title="Augustus Le Plongeon" label="Augustus Le Plongeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="16928" end="16933" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q33738" start="17085" end="17090" title="Mayan languages" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220264" start="17127" end="17136" title="Popol Vuh" label="Popol Vuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="17307" end="17319" title="Maya peoples" label="Maya peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q187897" start="17343" end="17350" title="Toltecs" label="Toltecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q956537" start="17515" end="17536" title="Jean Frederic Waldeck" label="Jean Frederic Waldeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="17564" end="17569" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="17595" end="17604" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="17631" end="17638" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="17864" end="17875" title="excavations" label="excavations"/>
<link wikidata="Q272562" start="17960" end="17962" title="Mu (lost continent)" label="Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q205740" start="18033" end="18041" title="Egyptian mythology" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="18050" end="18056" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="18061" end="18065" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57106" start="18081" end="18100" title="Heinrich Schliemann" label="Heinrich Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="18146" end="18150" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="18156" end="18161" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="18169" end="18180" title="epic poetry" label="epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="18286" end="18291" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q33738" start="18296" end="18311" title="Mayan languages" label="Mayan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="18330" end="18339" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q918937" start="18439" end="18459" title="Ignatius L. Donnelly" label="Ignatius L. Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302942" start="18548" end="18556" title="Mayanism" label="Mayanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="18611" end="18632" title="ancient civilizations" label="ancient civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="18726" end="18733" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="18883" end="18897" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="18996" end="19007" title="Great Flood" label="Great Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="19145" end="19149" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="19461" end="19486" title="Helena Petrovna Blavatsky" label="Helena Petrovna Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="19507" end="19519" title="Theosophists" label="Theosophists"/>
<link wikidata="Q25197428" start="19529" end="19537" title="Donnelly" label="Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047005" start="19582" end="19601" title="The Secret Doctrine" label="The Secret Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="19740" end="19745" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="19829" end="19838" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q951888" start="19939" end="19948" title="root race" label="root race"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="20001" end="20011" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan race"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="20231" end="20238" title="warfare" label="warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917466" start="20277" end="20284" title="psychic" label="psychic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="20289" end="20301" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="20329" end="20343" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q184719" start="20360" end="20373" title="anthroposophy" label="anthroposophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216690" start="20378" end="20393" title="Waldorf Schools" label="Waldorf Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q464318" start="20445" end="20457" title="Annie Besant" label="Annie Besant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="20473" end="20481" title="cultural" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q260670" start="20664" end="20676" title="Dion Fortune" label="Dion Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q78651" start="20772" end="20786" title="Hanns Hörbiger" label="Hanns Hörbiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q112255" start="20788" end="20801" title="Egon Friedell" label="Egon Friedell"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="20980" end="20989" title="Blavatsky" label="Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="21040" end="21050" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685301" start="21051" end="21070" title="Jean-Sylvain Bailly" label="Jean-Sylvain Bailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="21118" end="21122" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="21152" end="21162" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="21179" end="21190" title="Greek myths" label="Greek myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047005" start="21341" end="21360" title="The Secret Doctrine" label="The Secret Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="21380" end="21385" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="21465" end="21490" title="The Holocaust" label="their subsequent genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="21644" end="21660" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="21662" end="21670" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="21678" end="21686" title="Malayans" label="Malayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="21723" end="21734" title="Hyperborean" label="Hyperborean"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="21736" end="21742" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21844" end="21863" title="Ariosophy#The occult roots of Nazism" label="ariosophic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q94040" start="21891" end="21905" title="Guido von List" label="Guido von List"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="22028" end="22038" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q671008" start="22044" end="22049" title="Thule" label="Thule"/>
<link wikidata="Q592023" start="22076" end="22088" title="Herman Wirth" label="Herman Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q75849" start="22335" end="22351" title="Alfred Rosenberg" label="Alfred Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q662930" start="22362" end="22395" title="The Myth of the Twentieth Century" label="The Myth of the Twentieth Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="22423" end="22439" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002560" start="22524" end="22539" title="Esoteric Nazism" label="Esoteric Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q334147" start="22548" end="22560" title="Julius Evola" label="Julius Evola"/>
<link wikidata="Q676455" start="22588" end="22602" title="Miguel Serrano" label="Miguel Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q310920" start="23030" end="23041" title="Edgar Cayce" label="Edgar Cayce"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="23152" end="23166" title="reincarnations" label="reincarnations"/>
<link wikidata="Q430880" start="23220" end="23244" title="collective consciousness" label="collective consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q416171" start="23256" end="23271" title="Akashic Records" label="Akashic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="23300" end="23309" title="Theosophy (Blavatskian)" label="Theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968261" start="23550" end="23565" title="Hall of Records" label="Hall of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q130958" start="23584" end="23599" title="Egyptian Sphinx" label="Egyptian Sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q178605" start="23671" end="23688" title="continental drift" label="continental drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="23765" end="23780" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q437981" start="23962" end="23973" title="Julia Annas" label="Julia Annas"/>
<link wikidata="Q110993687" start="23975" end="23992" title="Regents Professor" label="Regents Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="24014" end="24035" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390092" start="24257" end="24270" title="Kenneth Feder" label="Kenneth Feder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917466" start="25092" end="25099" title="psychic" label="psychic"/>
<link wikidata="Q310920" start="25107" end="25118" title="Edgar Cayce" label="Edgar Cayce"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="25129" end="25145" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="25639" end="25647" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="25649" end="25654" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="25656" end="25665" title="Santorini" label="Santorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="25675" end="25681" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="25683" end="25689" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="25695" end="25700" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="25738" end="25742" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q320416" start="25744" end="25753" title="Tartessos" label="Tartessos"/>
<link wikidata="Q147089" start="25788" end="25794" title="Manisa" label="Manisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="25796" end="25802" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="25805" end="25811" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="25812" end="25817" title="Sinai peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="25821" end="25827" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q744591" start="25868" end="25884" title="Richat Structure" label="Richat Structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="25888" end="25898" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144693" start="25905" end="25919" title="Minoan eruption" label="Thera eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="25986" end="25993" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="26039" end="26058" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="26206" end="26215" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="26260" end="26268" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26273" end="26280" title="Ancomah" label="Ancomah"/>
<link wikidata="Q45301" start="26305" end="26312" title="Trabzon" label="Trabzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q589877" start="26405" end="26418" title="Laconian Gulf" label="Laconian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="26676" end="26687" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144693" start="27078" end="27092" title="Thera eruption" label="Thera eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059758" start="27101" end="27125" title="Late Bronze Age collapse" label="Late Bronze Age collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="27614" end="27628" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="27633" end="27648" title="Madeira Islands" label="Madeira Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="28239" end="28245" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038682" start="28504" end="28526" title="Azores triple junction" label="Azores triple junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q18415078" start="28736" end="28750" title="Azores hotspot" label="Azores hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701667" start="28815" end="28828" title="Terceira Rift" label="Terceira Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q209036" start="29036" end="29046" title="São Miguel Island" label="São Miguel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515751" start="29080" end="29100" title="Sete Cidades Massif" label="Sete Cidades volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881958" start="29211" end="29218" title="Spartel" label="Spartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138308" start="29364" end="29374" title="Doggerland" label="Doggerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="29382" end="29391" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="29397" end="29403" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q350198" start="29408" end="29420" title="Olof Rudbeck" label="Olof Rudbeck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29430" end="29436" title="Olaus Rudbeck#Historical linguistics" label="Atland"/>
<link wikidata="Q583313" start="29538" end="29549" title="megatsunami" label="megatsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288535" start="29564" end="29578" title="Storegga Slide" label="Storegga Slide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29617" end="29629" title="Celtic Sea#Seabed" label="Celtic Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q52107" start="29708" end="29722" title="Physical geography" label="physiographist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672840" start="30009" end="30035" title="National Museum of Ireland" label="National Museum of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="30144" end="30171" title="National Geographic Channel" label="National Geographic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q747053" start="30214" end="30236" title="University of Hartford" label="University of Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="30306" end="30315" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="30370" end="30375" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q463141" start="30388" end="30408" title="Doñana National Park" label="Doñana National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108639" start="30413" end="30421" title="Las Marismas" label="the area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108639" start="30440" end="30456" title="Lacus Ligustinus" label="Lacus Ligustinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q95015" start="30470" end="30476" title="Huelva Province" label="Huelva"/>
<link wikidata="Q81978" start="30478" end="30483" title="Cadiz Province" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q95088" start="30489" end="30505" title="Seville province" label="Seville province"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="30566" end="30573" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024362" start="30842" end="30875" title="Spanish National Research Council" label="Spanish National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q320416" start="31058" end="31067" title="Tartessos" label="Tartessos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765613" start="31383" end="31402" title="Marismas de Hinojos" label="Marismas de Hinojos"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="31425" end="31430" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q64166" start="31459" end="31473" title="Adolf Schulten" label="Adolf Schulten"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="31667" end="31677" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="31734" end="31743" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243625" start="31764" end="31784" title="Cuban underwater formation" label="underwater formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599165" start="31793" end="31817" title="Guanahacabibes Peninsula" label="Guanahacabibes Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="31821" end="31825" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="31840" end="31847" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43708" start="31865" end="31881" title="Bermuda Triangle" label="Bermuda Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="31923" end="31930" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="31984" end="31993" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366175" start="32000" end="32009" title="Sundaland" label="Sundaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="32061" end="32066" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q628900" start="32080" end="32093" title="Kumari Kandam" label="Kumari Kandam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921369" start="32247" end="32261" title="Verisimilitude (fiction)" label="verisimilitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q133337" start="32306" end="32311" title="Solon" label="Solon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="32544" end="32558" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="32627" end="32633" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="32638" end="32643" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q504744" start="32885" end="32905" title="Hellanicus of Lesbos" label="Hellanicus of Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q622640" start="33016" end="33027" title="Oxyrhynchus" label="Oxyrhynchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="33203" end="33215" title="Neoplatonism" label="Neoplatonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="33330" end="33337" title="parody" label="parodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318" start="33454" end="33464" title="Theopompus" label="Theopompus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="33468" end="33473" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q465578" start="33516" end="33523" title="Meropis" label="Meropis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464091" start="33630" end="33637" title="Silenus" label="Silenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q308398" start="33647" end="33652" title="Midas" label="Midas"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="33966" end="33976" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q358998" start="34350" end="34379" title="Utopian and dystopian fiction" label="Utopian and dystopian fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233830" start="34459" end="34471" title="New Atlantis" label="New Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753512" start="34945" end="34962" title="The New Atalantis" label="The New Atalantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q299871" start="34972" end="34989" title="Delarivier Manley" label="Delarivier Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="35337" end="35347" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762419" start="35391" end="35409" title="The Scarlet Empire" label="The Scarlet Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="35429" end="35438" title="Socialism" label="Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35733" start="35504" end="35522" title="Velimir Khlebnikov" label="Velimir Khlebnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="36404" end="36412" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q379290" start="36757" end="36773" title="Jacint Verdaguer" label="Jacint Verdaguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="36947" end="36956" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q165938" start="36996" end="37006" title="Hesperides" label="Hesperides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="37221" end="37241" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="37281" end="37288" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q509974" start="37429" end="37452" title="Olegario Víctor Andrade" label="Olegario Víctor Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501863" start="37633" end="37650" title="José Juan Tablada" label="José Juan Tablada"/>
<link wikidata="Q150986" start="37838" end="37843" title="Siren (mythology)" label="Siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395326" start="37904" end="37918" title="Janus Djurhuus" label="Janus Djurhuus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479192" start="37992" end="38018" title="Faroese language conflict" label="Faroese linguistic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q64704877" start="38579" end="38603" title="Edith Willis Linn Forbes" label="Edith Willis Linn Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q448376" start="38736" end="38755" title="Ella Wheeler Wilcox" label="Ella Wheeler Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331464" start="38879" end="38891" title="Eavan Boland" label="Eavan Boland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075593" start="39161" end="39175" title="Charles Bewley" label="Charles Bewley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217528" start="39183" end="39198" title="Newdigate Prize" label="Newdigate Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524821" start="39329" end="39342" title="Gary Catalano" label="Gary Catalano"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="39442" end="39453" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39838" end="39851" title="Atlantis in popular culture#Fiction" label="genre fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149915" start="40004" end="40022" title="Frederick Tennyson" label="Frederick Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q316374" start="41786" end="41800" title="Valery Bryusov" label="Valery Bryusov"/>
<link wikidata="Q314498" start="41805" end="41823" title="Konstantin Balmont" label="Konstantin Balmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q538379" start="41865" end="41880" title="Larissa Reissner" label="Larissa Reisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193283" start="42366" end="42381" title="Manuel de Falla" label="Manuel de Falla"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="42403" end="42410" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359503" start="42548" end="42561" title="Jānis Ivanovs" label="Jānis Ivanovs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327999" start="42582" end="42595" title="Richard Nanes" label="Richard Nanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q542232" start="42666" end="42680" title="Alan Hovhaness" label="Alan Hovhaness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237814" start="42785" end="42807" title="Vincent Frank Safranek" label="Vincent Frank Safranek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="43066" end="43071" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773235" start="43078" end="43101" title="Der Kaiser von Atlantis" label="Der Kaiser von Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78530" start="43169" end="43183" title="Viktor Ullmann" label="Viktor Ullmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="43191" end="43199" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q481096" start="43203" end="43212" title="Petr Kien" label="Petr Kien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="43250" end="43254" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15111616" start="43277" end="43291" title="Theresienstadt Ghetto" label="Theresienstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="43417" end="43423" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="43466" end="43475" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887392" start="43692" end="43708" title="François de Nomé" label="François de Nomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q208993" start="43878" end="43894" title="Nicholas Roerich" label="Nicholas Roerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q214666" start="43996" end="44006" title="Léon Bakst" label="Léon Bakst"/>
<link wikidata="Q361318" start="44426" end="44443" title="Vyacheslav Ivanov (poet)" label="Vyacheslav Ivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q975818" start="44728" end="44741" title="Einar Jónsson" label="Einar Jónsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="44830" end="44839" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q313828" start="45057" end="45071" title="Ivan Meštrović" label="Ivan Meštrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="45198" end="45206" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q328341" start="45800" end="45815" title="Robert Smithson" label="Robert Smithson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692140" start="45945" end="45967" title="Loveladies, New Jersey" label="Loveladies, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q576922" start="46336" end="46344" title="Antillia" label="Antillia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216901" start="46346" end="46352" title="Avalon" label="Avalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q899371" start="46354" end="46378" title="Brasil (mythical island)" label="Brasil (mythical island)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645112" start="46380" end="46387" title="Brittia" label="Brittia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357276" start="46389" end="46410" title="Cantre&amp;#x27;r Gwaelod" label="Cantre&amp;#x27;r Gwaelod"/>
<link wikidata="Q382136" start="46412" end="46431" title="Iram of the Pillars" label="Iram of the Pillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q470970" start="46433" end="46452" title="Lemuria (continent)" label="Lemuria (continent)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053077" start="46454" end="46481" title="List of mythological places" label="List of mythological places"/>
<link wikidata="Q575049" start="46483" end="46488" title="Mayda" label="Mayda"/>
<link wikidata="Q272562" start="46490" end="46509" title="Mu (lost continent)" label="Mu (lost continent)"/>
<link wikidata="Q211686" start="46511" end="46518" title="Numenor" label="Numenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q929938" start="46520" end="46547" title="Saint Brendan&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Saint Brendan&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q80326" start="46549" end="46576" title="Sandy Island, New Caledonia" label="Sandy Island, New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q671008" start="46578" end="46583" title="Thule" label="Thule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048500" start="46585" end="46587" title="Ys" label="Ys"/>
<link wikidata="Q995511" start="46612" end="46629" title="Yonaguni Monument" label="Yonaguni Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734050" start="46631" end="46642" title="Bimini Road" label="Bimini Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790383" start="46644" end="46673" title="Early Holocene sea level rise" label="Early Holocene sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q86753154" start="46683" end="46701" title="Atlantis in comics" label="Atlantis in comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138308" start="46703" end="46713" title="Doggerland" label="Doggerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752035" start="46721" end="46734" title="Hidden Worlds" label="Hidden Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q628900" start="46742" end="46755" title="Kumari Kandam" label="Kumari Kandam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276230" start="46757" end="46775" title="List of lost lands" label="List of lost lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144693" start="46777" end="46792" title="Minoan eruption" label="Minoan eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q930506" start="46794" end="46802" title="Frisland" label="Frisland"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="46853" end="46858" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q371884" start="46866" end="46873" title="Timaeus (dialogue)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817565" start="46895" end="46910" title="Benjamin Jowett" label="Benjamin Jowett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335321" start="46984" end="46991" title="Critias (dialogue)" label="Critias"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2179" wikidata="Q4184" url="?curid=2179" title="Autobiography">
<text>An autobiography, sometimes informally called an autobio, is a self-written account of one&#x27;s own life, providing a personal narrative that reflects on the author&#x27;s experiences, memories, and insights. This genre allows individuals to share their unique perspectives and stories, offering readers a glimpse into the author&#x27;s personal journey and the historical or cultural context in which they lived.

The term &quot;autobiography&quot; was first used in 1797, but the practice of writing about one&#x27;s life dates back to antiquity. Early examples include Saint Augustine&#x27;s &quot;Confessions&quot; (), which is considered one of the first Western autobiographies. Unlike biographies, which are written by someone else, autobiographies are based on the author&#x27;s memory and personal interpretation of events, making them inherently subjective. This subjectivity can sometimes lead to inaccuracies or embellishments, as the author may recall events differently or choose to present them in a certain light.

Autobiographies can take various forms, including memoirs, spiritual autobiographies, and fictional autobiographies. Memoirs typically focus on specific memories or themes from the author&#x27;s life, rather than providing a comprehensive account. Spiritual autobiographies, such as Augustine&#x27;s &quot;Confessions&quot;, detail the author&#x27;s religious journey and spiritual growth. Fictional autobiographies, on the other hand, are novels written in the first person, presenting a fictional character&#x27;s life as if it were an autobiography.

Throughout history, autobiographies have served different purposes, from self-reflection and justification to historical documentation and personal expression. They have evolved with literary trends and societal changes, reflecting the cultural and historical contexts of their times. Autobiographies remain a popular and accessible form of literature in the 21st century, allowing individuals from all walks of life to share their stories and experiences with a wider audience.

==Definition==
The word &quot;autobiography&quot; was first used deprecatingly by William Taylor in 1797 in the English periodical &quot;The Monthly Review&quot;, when he suggested the word as a hybrid, but condemned it as &quot;pedantic&quot;. However, its next recorded use was in its present sense, by Robert Southey in 1809. Despite only being named early in the nineteenth century, first-person autobiographical writing originates in antiquity. Roy Pascal differentiates autobiography from the periodic self-reflective mode of journal or diary writing by noting that &quot;[autobiography] is a review of a life from a particular moment in time, while the diary, however reflective it may be, moves through a series of moments in time&quot;. Autobiography thus takes stock of the autobiographer&#x27;s life from the moment of composition. While biographers generally rely on a wide variety of documents and viewpoints, autobiography may be based entirely on the writer&#x27;s memory. The memoir form is closely associated with autobiography but it tends, as Pascal claims, to focus less on the self and more on others during the autobiographer&#x27;s review of their own life.

Autobiographical works are by nature subjective. The inability—or unwillingness—of the author to accurately recall memories has in certain cases resulted in misleading or incorrect information. Some sociologists and psychologists have noted that autobiography offers the author the ability to recreate history.

==Related forms==
=== Spiritual autobiography ===
Spiritual autobiography is an account of an author&#x27;s struggle or journey towards God, followed by conversion a religious conversion, often interrupted by moments of regression. The author re-frames their life as a demonstration of divine intention through encounters with the Divine. The earliest example of a spiritual autobiography is Augustine&#x27;s &quot;Confessions&quot; though the tradition has expanded to include other religious traditions in works such as Mohandas Gandhi&#x27;s &quot;An Autobiography&quot; and Black Elk&#x27;s &quot;Black Elk Speaks&quot;. &quot;Deliverance from Error&quot; by Al-Ghazali is another example. The spiritual autobiography often serves as an endorsement of the writer&#x27;s religion.

=== Memoirs ===
A memoir is slightly different in character from an autobiography. While an autobiography typically focuses on the &quot;life and times&quot; of the writer, a memoir has a narrower, more intimate focus on the author&#x27;s memories, feelings and emotions. Memoirs have often been written by politicians or military leaders as a way to record and publish an account of their public exploits. One early example is that of Julius Caesar&#x27;s &quot;Commentarii de Bello Gallico&quot;, also known as &quot;Commentaries on the Gallic Wars&quot;. In the work, Caesar describes the battles that took place during the nine years that he spent fighting local armies in the Gallic Wars. His second memoir, &quot;Commentarii de Bello Civili&quot; (or &quot;Commentaries on the Civil War&quot;) is an account of the events that took place between 49 and 48 BC in the civil war against Gnaeus Pompeius and the Senate.

Leonor López de Córdoba (1362–1420) wrote what is supposed to be the first autobiography in Spanish. The English Civil War (1642–1651) provoked a number of examples of this genre, including works by Sir Edmund Ludlow and Sir John Reresby. French examples from the same period include the memoirs of Cardinal de Retz (1614–1679) and the Duc de Saint-Simon.

=== Fictional autobiography ===
The term &quot;fictional autobiography&quot; signifies novels about a fictional character written as though the character were writing their own autobiography, meaning that the character is the first-person narrator and that the novel addresses both internal and external experiences of the character. Daniel Defoe&#x27;s &quot;Moll Flanders&quot; is an early example. Charles Dickens&#x27; &quot;David Copperfield&quot; is another such classic, and J.D. Salinger&#x27;s &quot;The Catcher in the Rye&quot; is a well-known modern example of fictional autobiography. Charlotte Brontë&#x27;s &quot;Jane Eyre&quot; is yet another example of fictional autobiography, as noted on the front page of the original version. The term may also apply to works of fiction purporting to be autobiographies of real characters, e.g., Robert Nye&#x27;s &quot;Memoirs of Lord Byron&quot;.

== History ==

=== The classical period: Apologia, oration, confession ===
In antiquity such works were typically entitled &quot;apologia&quot;, purporting to be self-justification rather than self-documentation. The title of John Henry Newman&#x27;s 1864 Christian confessional work &quot;Apologia Pro Vita Sua&quot; refers to this tradition.

The historian Flavius Josephus introduces his autobiography &quot;Josephi Vita&quot; () with self-praise, which is followed by a justification of his actions as a Jewish rebel commander of Galilee.

The rhetor Libanius (–394) framed his life memoir &quot;Oration I&quot; (begun in 374) as one of his orations, not of a public kind, but of a literary kind that would not be read aloud in privacy.

Augustine of Hippo (354–430) applied the title &quot;Confessions&quot; to his autobiographical work, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau used the same title in the 18th century, initiating the chain of confessional and sometimes racy and highly self-critical autobiographies of the Romantic era and beyond. Augustine&#x27;s was arguably the first Western autobiography ever written, and became an influential model for Christian writers throughout the Middle Ages. It tells of the hedonistic lifestyle Augustine lived for a time within his youth, associating with young men who boasted of their sexual exploits; his following and leaving of the anti-sex and anti-marriage Manichaeism in attempts to seek sexual morality; and his subsequent return to Christianity due to his embracement of Skepticism and the New Academy movement (developing the view that sex is good, and that virginity is better, comparing the former to silver and the latter to gold; Augustine&#x27;s views subsequently strongly influenced Western theology). &quot;Confessions&quot; is considered one of the great masterpieces of western literature.

Peter Abelard&#x27;s 12th-century &quot;Historia Calamitatum&quot; is in the spirit of Augustine&#x27;s &quot;Confessions&quot;, an outstanding autobiographical document of its period.

=== Early autobiographies ===
In the 15th century, Leonor López de Córdoba, a Spanish noblewoman, wrote her &quot;Memorias&quot;, which may be the first autobiography in Castillian.

Zāhir ud-Dīn Mohammad Bābur, who founded the Mughal dynasty of South Asia kept a journal &quot;Bāburnāma&quot; (Chagatai/; literally: &quot;Book of Babur&quot; or &quot;Letters of Babur&quot;) which was written between 1493 and 1529.

One of the first great autobiographies of the Renaissance is that of the sculptor and goldsmith Benvenuto Cellini (1500–1571), written between 1556 and 1558, and entitled by him simply &quot;Vita&quot; (Italian: &quot;Life&quot;). He declares at the start: &quot;No matter what sort he is, everyone who has to his credit what are or really seem great achievements, if he cares for truth and goodness, ought to write the story of his own life in his own hand; but no one should venture on such a splendid undertaking before he is over forty.&quot; These criteria for autobiography generally persisted until recent times, and most serious autobiographies of the next three hundred years conformed to them.

Another autobiography of the period is &quot;De vita propria&quot;, by the Italian mathematician, physician and astrologer Gerolamo Cardano (1574).

One of the first autobiographies written in an Indian language was &quot;Ardhakathānaka&quot;, written by Banarasidas, who was a Shrimal Jain businessman and poet of Mughal India. The poetic autobiography &quot;Ardhakathānaka&quot; (The Half Story), was composed in Braj Bhasa, an early dialect of Hindi linked with the region around Mathura.In his autobiography, he describes his transition from an unruly youth, to a religious realization by the time the work was composed. The work also is notable for many details of life in Mughal times.

The earliest known autobiography written in English is the &quot;Book of Margery Kempe&quot;, written in 1438. Following in the earlier tradition of a life story told as an act of Christian witness, the book describes Margery Kempe&#x27;s pilgrimages to the Holy Land and Rome, her attempts to negotiate a celibate marriage with her husband, and most of all her religious experiences as a Christian mystic. Extracts from the book were published in the early sixteenth century but the whole text was published for the first time only in 1936.

Possibly the first publicly available autobiography written in English was Captain John Smith&#x27;s autobiography published in 1630 which was regarded by many as not much more than a collection of tall tales told by someone of doubtful veracity. This changed with the publication of Philip Barbour&#x27;s definitive biography in 1964 which, amongst other things, established independent factual bases for many of Smith&#x27;s &quot;tall tales&quot;, many of which could not have been known by Smith at the time of writing unless he was actually present at the events recounted.

Other notable English autobiographies of the 17th century include those of Lord Herbert of Cherbury (1643, published 1764) and John Bunyan (&quot;Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners&quot;, 1666).

Jarena Lee (1783–1864) was the first African American woman to have a published biography in the United States.

=== 18th and 19th centuries ===
Following the trend of Romanticism, which greatly emphasized the role and the nature of the individual, and in the footsteps of Jean-Jacques Rousseau&#x27;s &quot;Confessions&quot;, a more intimate form of autobiography, exploring the subject&#x27;s emotions, came into fashion. Stendhal&#x27;s autobiographical writings of the 1830s, &quot;The Life of Henry Brulard&quot; and &quot;Memoirs of an Egotist&quot;, are both avowedly influenced by Rousseau. An English example is William Hazlitt&#x27;s &quot;Liber Amoris&quot; (1823), a painful examination of the writer&#x27;s love-life.

With the rise of education, cheap newspapers and cheap printing, modern concepts of fame and celebrity began to develop, and the beneficiaries of this were not slow to cash in on this by producing autobiographies. It became the expectation—rather than the exception—that those in the public eye should write about themselves—not only writers such as Charles Dickens (who also incorporated autobiographical elements in his novels) and Anthony Trollope, but also politicians (e.g. Henry Brooks Adams), philosophers (e.g. John Stuart Mill), churchmen such as Cardinal Newman, and entertainers such as P. T. Barnum. Increasingly, in accordance with romantic taste, these accounts also began to deal, amongst other topics, with aspects of childhood and upbringing—far removed from the principles of &quot;Cellinian&quot; autobiography.
=== 20th and 21st centuries ===
From the 17th century onwards, &quot;scandalous memoirs&quot; by supposed libertines, serving a public taste for titillation, have been frequently published. Typically pseudonymous, they were (and are) largely works of fiction written by ghostwriters. So-called &quot;autobiographies&quot; of modern professional athletes and media celebrities—and to a lesser extent about politicians—generally written by a ghostwriter, are routinely published. Some celebrities, such as Naomi Campbell, admit to not having read their &quot;autobiographies&quot;. Some sensationalist autobiographies such as James Frey&#x27;s &quot;A Million Little Pieces&quot; have been publicly exposed as having embellished or fictionalized significant details of the authors&#x27; lives.

Autobiography has become an increasingly popular and widely accessible form. &quot;A Fortunate Life&quot; by Albert Facey (1979) has become an Australian literary classic. With the critical and commercial success in the United States of such memoirs as &quot;Angela’s Ashes&quot; and &quot;The Color of Water&quot;, more and more people have been encouraged to try their hand at this genre. Maggie Nelson&#x27;s book &quot;The Argonauts&quot; is one of the recent autobiographies. Maggie Nelson calls it autotheory—a combination of autobiography and critical theory.

A genre where the &quot;claim for truth&quot; overlaps with fictional elements though the work still purports to be autobiographical is autofiction.

== See also ==

* :Category:Autobiographies
* Alphabiography
* Autobiographical comics
* Autobiographical memory
* Autobiographical novel
* Autofiction
* I-novel
* Letter collection
* List of autobiographies
* Memoir
* Unreliable narrator

==Notes==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==








== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="3" end="16" title="Autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="49" end="56" title="Autobiography" label="autobio"/>
<link wikidata="Q223393" start="216" end="221" title="Literary genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="574" end="589" title="Saint Augustine" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q372941" start="603" end="614" title="Confessions (Saint Augustine)" label="Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="694" end="705" title="biographies" label="biographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="1083" end="1090" title="memoirs" label="memoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578116" start="1092" end="1117" title="spiritual autobiography" label="spiritual autobiographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780478" start="1660" end="1675" title="self-reflection" label="self-reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580729" start="2149" end="2163" title="William Taylor (scholar)" label="William Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2179" end="2186" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002697" start="2187" end="2197" title="Periodical publication" label="periodical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905889" start="2208" end="2222" title="Monthly Review (London)" label="Monthly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="2372" end="2386" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="3059" end="3065" title="memoir" label="memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q372941" start="3976" end="3987" title="Confessions (Augustine)" label="Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="4083" end="4098" title="Mohandas Gandhi" label="Mohandas Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719827" start="4112" end="4128" title="The Story of My Experiments with Truth" label="An Autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q436655" start="4139" end="4148" title="Black Elk" label="Black Elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404825" start="4162" end="4178" title="Black Elk Speaks" label="Black Elk Speaks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4192" end="4214" title="Al-Ghazali#Deliverance from Error" label="Deliverance from Error"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="4224" end="4234" title="Al-Ghazali" label="Al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="4364" end="4370" title="memoir" label="memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="4782" end="4795" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="4809" end="4837" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="Commentarii de Bello Gallico"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="5027" end="5038" title="Gallic Wars" label="Gallic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q544948" start="5065" end="5092" title="Commentarii de Bello Civili" label="Commentarii de Bello Civili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="5214" end="5227" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="the civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="5236" end="5251" title="Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus" label="Gnaeus Pompeius"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="5260" end="5266" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526660" start="5269" end="5292" title="Leonor López de Córdoba" label="Leonor López de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="5374" end="5391" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339650" start="5472" end="5485" title="Edmund Ludlow" label="Edmund Ludlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528018" start="5494" end="5506" title="Sir John Reresby, 2nd Baronet" label="John Reresby"/>
<link wikidata="Q353879" start="5568" end="5584" title="Jean François Paul de Gondi, cardinal de Retz" label="Cardinal de Retz"/>
<link wikidata="Q463728" start="5605" end="5623" title="Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon" label="Duc de Saint-Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="5960" end="5972" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q612523" start="5986" end="5999" title="Moll Flanders" label="Moll Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="6027" end="6042" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q189811" start="6055" end="6072" title="David Copperfield (novel)" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q79904" start="6108" end="6121" title="J.D. Salinger" label="J.D. Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q183883" start="6135" end="6157" title="The Catcher in the Rye" label="The Catcher in the Rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q127332" start="6223" end="6239" title="Charlotte Brontë" label="Charlotte Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q182961" start="6253" end="6262" title="Jane Eyre" label="Jane Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q523086" start="6475" end="6485" title="Robert Nye" label="Robert Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="6510" end="6520" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416320" start="6658" end="6666" title="apologia" label="apologia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="6755" end="6772" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743363" start="6819" end="6840" title="Apologia Pro Vita Sua" label="Apologia Pro Vita Sua"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="6888" end="6904" title="Flavius Josephus" label="Flavius Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="7077" end="7083" title="rhetor" label="rhetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q263892" start="7084" end="7092" title="Libanius" label="Libanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342738" start="7174" end="7182" title="orations" label="orations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="7271" end="7289" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q372941" start="7324" end="7335" title="Confessions (St. Augustine)" label="Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="7376" end="7397" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="7543" end="7555" title="Romantic era" label="Romantic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="7713" end="7724" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="7742" end="7752" title="hedonistic" label="hedonistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="7933" end="7944" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="8011" end="8023" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="8050" end="8060" title="philosophical scepticism" label="Skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="8069" end="8080" title="New Academy" label="New Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295" start="8381" end="8394" title="Peter Abelard" label="Peter Abelard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960332" start="8421" end="8441" title="Historia Calamitatum" label="Historia Calamitatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526660" start="8618" end="8641" title="Leonor López de Córdoba" label="Leonor López de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="8737" end="8747" title="Spanish language" label="Castillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="8750" end="8777" title="Babur" label="Zāhir ud-Dīn Mohammad Bābur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="8795" end="8809" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="8813" end="8823" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906014" start="8845" end="8854" title="Baburnama" label="Bāburnāma"/>
<link wikidata="Q36831" start="8862" end="8870" title="Chagatai language" label="Chagatai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="9031" end="9042" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q190116" start="9081" end="9098" title="Benvenuto Cellini" label="Benvenuto Cellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="9188" end="9195" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q184530" start="9813" end="9829" title="Gerolamo Cardano" label="Gerolamo Cardano"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="9886" end="9901" title="Languages of India" label="Indian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853935" start="9945" end="9956" title="Banarasidas" label="Banarasidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503987" start="9968" end="9980" title="Shrimal Jain" label="Shrimal Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="10005" end="10017" title="Mughal India" label="Mughal India"/>
<link wikidata="Q35243" start="10105" end="10115" title="Braj Bhasa" label="Braj Bhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="10137" end="10142" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="10173" end="10180" title="Mathura, Uttar Pradesh" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210817" start="10442" end="10475" title="The Book of Margery Kempe" label="&amp;quot;Book of Margery Kempe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q509271" start="10601" end="10614" title="Margery Kempe" label="Margery Kempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="10641" end="10650" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="10655" end="10659" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q713004" start="11581" end="11605" title="Edward Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Cherbury" label="Lord Herbert of Cherbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q108206" start="11633" end="11644" title="John Bunyan" label="John Bunyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316733" start="11652" end="11691" title="Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners" label="Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160129" start="11707" end="11717" title="Jarena Lee" label="Jarena Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="11875" end="11886" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="11980" end="12001" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207595" start="12015" end="12026" title="Confessions (Jean-Jacques Rousseau)" label="Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="12131" end="12139" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557868" start="12193" end="12218" title="The Life of Henry Brulard" label="The Life of Henry Brulard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354649" start="12235" end="12256" title="Memoirs of an Egotist" label="Memoirs of an Egotist"/>
<link wikidata="Q126596" start="12328" end="12343" title="William Hazlitt" label="William Hazlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="12789" end="12804" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q318399" start="12873" end="12889" title="Anthony Trollope" label="Anthony Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q458390" start="12918" end="12936" title="Henry Brooks Adams" label="Henry Brooks Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="12958" end="12974" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="12995" end="13010" title="John Henry Newman" label="Cardinal Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q223766" start="13037" end="13049" title="P. T. Barnum" label="P. T. Barnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q744443" start="13376" end="13385" title="libertine" label="libertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="13470" end="13479" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="13540" end="13551" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q199369" start="13774" end="13788" title="Naomi Campbell" label="Naomi Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295145" start="13918" end="13941" title="A Million Little Pieces" label="A Million Little Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656846" start="14146" end="14162" title="A Fortunate Life" label="A Fortunate Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637872" start="14172" end="14184" title="Albert Facey" label="Albert Facey"/>
<link wikidata="Q892456" start="14322" end="14336" title="Angela’s Ashes" label="Angela’s Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726851" start="14353" end="14371" title="The Color of Water" label="The Color of Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730288" start="14454" end="14467" title="Maggie Nelson" label="Maggie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730288" start="14544" end="14557" title="Maggie Nelson" label="Maggie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123279481" start="14567" end="14577" title="autotheory" label="autotheory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927187" start="14767" end="14778" title="autofiction" label="autofiction"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14799" end="14824" title=":Category:Autobiographies" label=":Category:Autobiographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735223" start="14827" end="14841" title="Alphabiography" label="Alphabiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q181275" start="14844" end="14867" title="Autobiographical comics" label="Autobiographical comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q682304" start="14870" end="14893" title="Autobiographical memory" label="Autobiographical memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056541" start="14896" end="14918" title="Autobiographical novel" label="Autobiographical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927187" start="14921" end="14932" title="Autofiction" label="Autofiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156871" start="14935" end="14942" title="I-novel" label="I-novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085460" start="14945" end="14962" title="Letter collection" label="Letter collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253431" start="14965" end="14988" title="List of autobiographies" label="List of autobiographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="14991" end="14997" title="Memoir" label="Memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q650118" start="15000" end="15019" title="Unreliable narrator" label="Unreliable narrator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2180" wikidata="Q159369" url="?curid=2180" title="Arcadius">
<text>Arcadius ( ; 377 – 1 May 408) was Roman emperor from 383 to his death in 408. He was the eldest son of the &quot;Augustus&quot; Theodosius I () and his first wife Aelia Flaccilla, and the brother of Honorius (). Arcadius ruled the eastern half of the empire from 395, when their father died, while Honorius ruled the west. In his time, he was seen as a weak ruler dominated by a series of powerful ministers and by his wife, Aelia Eudoxia.

== Early life ==

Arcadius was born in 377 in Hispania, the eldest son of Theodosius I and Aelia Flaccilla, and brother of Honorius. On 19 January 383, his father declared the five-year-old Arcadius an Augustus and co-ruler for the eastern half of the Empire. Ten years later a corresponding declaration made Honorius the Augustus of the western half. Arcadius passed his early years under the tutelage of the rhetorician Themistius and Arsenius Zonaras, a monk.

== Reign ==

=== Early reign ===

Both of Theodosius&#x27;s sons were young and inexperienced, susceptible to being dominated by ambitious subordinates. In 394 Arcadius briefly exercised independent power with the help of his advisors in Constantinople, when his father Theodosius went west to fight Arbogastes and Eugenius. Theodosius died on 17 January 395, and Arcadius, still aged only 17, fell under the influence of the praetorian prefect of the East, Rufinus. Honorius, aged 10, was consigned to the guardianship of the &quot;magister militum&quot; Stilicho. Rufinus ambitiously sought to marry his daughter to Arcadius and thereby gain the prestige of being the emperor&#x27;s father-in-law. However, when the prefect was called away to business in Antioch (where according to Zosimus, Rufinus had Lucianus, the &quot;comes orientis&quot;, flogged to death with whips loaded with lead), Arcadius was shown a painting of Aelia Eudoxia, the daughter of the deceased Frankish &quot;magister militum per orientem&quot;, Bauto. Seeing the young emperor&#x27;s interest in Eudoxia, Eutropius, the eunuch &quot;praepositus sacri cubiculi&quot;, arranged for the two to meet. Arcadius fell in love and a marriage was quickly arranged, with the ceremony performed on 27 April 395. According to Zosimus, Rufinus assumed that his daughter was still to be the bride, only discovering otherwise when the nuptial procession went to Eudoxia&#x27;s residence rather than his own. The rise of Eudoxia, facilitated by a general who was a rival of Rufinus, demonstrates the shifting of the centres of power in the eastern court. Such jostling for influence over the malleable emperor would be a recurring feature of Arcadius&#x27;s reign.
The first crisis facing the young Arcadius was the Gothic revolt in 395, under the command of Alaric I (), who sought to take advantage of the accession of two inexperienced Roman emperors. As Alaric marched towards Constantinople, plundering Macedonia and Thrace, the eastern court could offer no response, as the majority of its army had gone to Italy with Theodosius and was now in the hands of Stilicho. Perhaps sensing an opportunity to exercise power in the eastern half of the empire as well, Stilicho declared that Theodosius had made him guardian over both his sons. He traveled eastward, ostensibly to face Alaric, leading both his own forces and the Gothic mercenaries whom Theodosius had taken west in the civil war with Eugenius. Arcadius and Rufinus felt more threatened by Stilicho than by Alaric; upon landing in Thessaly Stilicho received an imperial order to send along the eastern regiments, but himself to proceed no further. Stilicho complied, falling back to Salona while Gainas led the mercenaries to Constantinople. Arcadius and his entourage received Gainas in the Campus Martius, a parade ground adjacent to the city, on 27 November 395. There Rufinus was suddenly assassinated by the Goths, on the orders of Stilicho and possibly with the support of Eutropius. The murder certainly created an opportunity for Eutropius and for Arcadius&#x27;s wife, Eudoxia, who took Rufinus&#x27;s place as advisors and guardians of the emperor.

While Eutropius consolidated his hold on power in the capital, the distracted government still failed to react to the presence of Alaric in Greece. At first Eutropius may have coordinated with Stilicho around the defence of Illyricum; by 397, when Stilicho personally led a blockade that compelled Alaric to retreat into Epirus, the atmosphere of the eastern court had changed. As neither Arcadius nor Eutropius was keen to have Stilicho intervening in the affairs of the eastern empire, they provided no further military aid to Stilicho, who then abandoned the blockade of the Visigoths. At Eutropius&#x27;s urging, Arcadius declared Stilicho to be a &quot;hostis publicus&quot;, and came to an arrangement with Alaric, making him &quot;magister militum per Illyricum&quot;. At around the same time, the eastern court persuaded Gildo, the &quot;magister utriusque militiae per Africam&quot;, to transfer his allegiance from Honorius to Arcadius, causing relations between the two imperial courts to deteriorate further.

Eutropius&#x27;s influence lasted four years, during which time he sought to marginalise the military and promote the civilian offices within the bureaucracy. He brought to trial two prominent military officers, Timasius and Abundantius. He also had Arcadius introduce two administrative innovations: the running of the &quot;cursus publicus&quot; (office of postmaster general) and the office in charge of manufacturing military equipment was transferred from the praetorian prefects to the &quot;magister officiorum&quot; (master of offices). Secondly, the role that Eutropius held, the &quot;praepositus sacri cubiculi&quot; (grand chamberlain) was given the rank of &quot;illustris&quot;, and therefore equal in rank to the praetorian prefects. In the autumn of 397 he issued a law in Arcadius&#x27;s name, targeting the Roman military, where any conspiracy involving soldiers or the barbarian regiments against persons holding the rank of &quot;illustris&quot; was considered to be treason, with the conspirators to be sentenced to death, and their descendants to be deprived of citizenship.

In 398, Eutropius led a successful campaign against the Huns in Roman Armenia. The following year he convinced Arcadius to grant him the consulship, triggering protests across the empire. For traditionalists, the granting of the consulship to a eunuch and former slave was an insult to the Roman system and other contemporary Romans, and the western court refused to recognize him as consul. The crisis escalated when the Ostrogoths who had been settled in Asia Minor by Theodosius I revolted, demanding the removal of Eutropius.
The emperor sent two forces against Tribigild, the rebel leader; the first, under an officer named Leo, was defeated. The second force was commanded by Gainas, rival of Eutropius in the Eastern court. He returned to Arcadius and argued that the Ostrogoths could not be defeated, and that it would be sensible to accede to their demand. Arcadius viewed this proposal with displeasure, but was convinced to support it by Eudoxia, who wished to take Eutropius&#x27;s place as the main influence upon the emperor. Arcadius therefore dismissed Eutropius and sent him into exile (17 August 399), before recalling him to face trial and execution during the autumn of 399. The imperial edict issued by Arcadius detailing Eutropius&#x27;s banishment survives:

The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius, Augusti, to Aurelian, Praetorian Prefect. We have added to our treasury all the property of Eutropius, who was formerly the &quot;Praepositus sacri cubiculi&quot;, having stripped him of his splendour, and delivered the consulate from the foul stain of his tenure, and from the recollection of his name and the base filth thereof =; so that, all his acts having been repealed, all time may be dumb concerning him; and that the blot of our age may not appear by the mention of him; and that those who by their valour and wounds extend the Roman borders or guard the same by equity in the maintenance of law, may not groan over the fact that the divine reward of consulship has been befouled and defiled by a filthy monster. Let him learn that he has been deprived of the rank of the patriciate and all lower dignities that he stained with the perversity of his character. That all the statues, all the images—whether of bronze or marble, or painted in colours, or of any other material used in art—we command to be abolished in all cities, towns, private and public places, that they may not, as a brand of infamy on our age, pollute the gaze of beholders. Accordingly under the conduct of faithful guards let him be taken to the island of Cyprus, whither let your sublimity know that he has been banished; so that therein guarded with most watchful diligence he may be unable to work confusion with his mad designs.

=== Later reign ===

With Eutropius&#x27;s fall from power, Gainas sought to take advantage of Arcadius&#x27;s current predicament. He joined the rebel Ostrogoths, and, in a face to face meeting with Arcadius, forced the emperor to make him &quot;magister militum praesentalis&quot; and Consul designate for 401. Arcadius also acquiesced when Gainas asked for the dismissal of further officials, such as the urban prefect Aurelianus, as well as a place for settlement for his troops in Thrace. However, Arcadius refused to agree to Gainas&#x27;s demand for an Arian church in Constantinople for his Gothic mercenaries, following the advice of John Chrysostom, the Archbishop of Constantinople.

By July 400, the actions of Gainas had irritated a significant portion of the population of Constantinople to the point that a general riot broke out in the capital. Although Gainas had stationed his troops outside of the capital walls, he was either unable or unwilling to bring them into the capital when many Goths in the city were hunted down and attacked. As many as 7,000 Goths were killed in the rioting; those who took refuge in a church were stoned and burned to death, after they received the emperor&#x27;s permission, nor was it condemned by the Archbishop of Constantinople, John Chrysostom.

Although initially staying his hand (probably through the intervention of the new Praetorian Prefect of the East Caesarius), Gainas eventually withdrew with his Gothic mercenaries into Thrace and rebelled against Arcadius. He attempted to take his forces across the Hellespont into Asia, but was intercepted and defeated by Fravitta, another Goth who held the position of &quot;magister militum praesentalis&quot;. Following his defeat, Gainas fled to the Danube with his remaining followers, but was ultimately defeated and killed by Uldin the Hun in Thrace.

With the fall of Gainas, the next conflict emerged between Eudoxia and John Chrysostom. The Archbishop was a stern, ascetic individual, who was a vocal critic of all displays of extravagant wealth. But his ire tended to focus especially on wealthy women, and their use of clothing, jewellery and makeup as being vain and frivolous. Eudoxia assumed that Chrysostom&#x27;s denunciations of extravagance in feminine dress were aimed at her. As the tensions between the two escalated, Chrysostom, who felt that Eudoxia had used her imperial connections to obtain the possessions of the wife of a condemned senator, preached a sermon in 401 in which Eudoxia was openly called Jezebel, the infamous wife of the Israelite king Ahab. Eudoxia retaliated by supporting Bishop Severian of Gabala in his conflict with Chrysostom. As Chrysostom was very popular in the capital, riots erupted in favour of the Archbishop, forcing Arcadius and Eudoxia to publicly back down and beg Chrysostom to revoke Severian&#x27;s excommunication.

Then in 403, Eudoxia saw another chance to strike against the Archbishop, when she threw her support behind Theophilus of Alexandria who presided over a synod in 403 (the Synod of the Oak) to charge Chrysostom with heresy. Although Arcadius originally supported Chrysostom, the Archbishop&#x27;s decision not to participate caused Arcadius to change his mind and support Theophilus, resulting in Chrysostom&#x27;s deposition and banishment. He was called back by Arcadius almost immediately, as the people started rioting over his departure, even threatening to burn the imperial palace. There was an earthquake the night of his arrest, which Eudoxia took for a sign of God&#x27;s anger, prompting her to ask Arcadius for John&#x27;s reinstatement.

Peace was short-lived. In September 403 a silver statue of Eudoxia was erected in the Augustaion, near the &quot;Magna Ecclesia&quot; church. Chrysostom, who was conducting a mass at the time, denounced the noisy dedication ceremonies as pagan and spoke against the Empress in harsh terms: &quot;Again Herodias raves; again she is troubled; she dances again; and again desires to receive John&#x27;s head in a charger&quot;, an allusion to the events surrounding the death of John the Baptist. This time Arcadius was unwilling to overlook the insult to his wife; a new synod was called in early 404 where Chrysostom was condemned. Arcadius hesitated until Easter to enforce the sentence, but Chrysostom refused to go, even after Arcadius sent in a squad of soldiers to escort him into exile. Arcadius procrastinated, but by 20 June 404, the emperor finally managed to get the Archbishop to submit, and he was taken away to his place of banishment, this time to Abkhazia in the Caucasus. Eudoxia did not get to enjoy her victory for long, dying later that year.

== Death ==
In his later reign, Arcadius delegated a large amount of the responsibilities to Anthemius, the Praetorian Prefect. Anthemius attempted to heal the divisions of the past decade by trying to make peace with Stilicho in the West. Stilicho, however, had lost patience with the eastern court, and in 407 encouraged Alaric and the Visigoths to seize the Praetorian prefecture of Illyricum and hand it over to the western empire. Stilicho&#x27;s plan failed, and soon after, on 1 May 408, Arcadius died. He was succeeded by his young son, Theodosius.

Like Constantine the Great and several of his successors, he was buried in the Church of the Holy Apostles, in a porphyry sarcophagus that was described in the 10th century by Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus in the &quot;De Ceremoniis&quot;.

==Character and achievements==
In noting the character of Arcadius, the historian J. B. Bury described him and his abilities thus: He was of short stature, of dark complexion, thin and inactive, and the dullness of his wit was betrayed by his speech and by his sleepy, drooping eyes. His mental deficiency and the weakness of his character made it inevitable that he should be governed by the strong personalities of his court.

Traditional interpretations of the reign of Arcadius have revolved around his weakness as an Emperor, and the formulation of policy by prominent individuals (and the court parties that formed and regrouped round them) towards curtailing the increasing influence of barbarians in the military, which in Constantinople at this period meant the Goths. Scholars such as the historian J. B. Bury spoke of a group in Arcadius&#x27;s court with Germanic interests and, opposed to them, a Roman faction. So, the revolt of Gainas, and the massacre of the Goths in Constantinople in 400, have traditionally been interpreted by scholars (such as Otto Seeck) as violent anti-barbarian reactions that prevented the rise of all-powerful Romanised barbarian military leaders—such as Stilicho was, in the West—in what has been termed the victory of anti-Germanism in the eastern empire.

The main source of this interpretation has been the works Synesius of Cyrene, specifically &quot;Aegyptus sive de providentia&quot; and &quot;De regno&quot;. Both works have traditionally been interpreted to support the thesis that there were anti-barbarian and pro-barbarian groups, with the Praetorian Prefect Aurelianus being the leader of the anti-barbarian faction. Recent scholarly research has revised this interpretation, and has instead favoured the interaction of personal ambition and enmities among the principal participants as being the leading cause for the court intrigue throughout Arcadius&#x27;s reign. The gradual decline of the use of Gothic mercenaries in the eastern empire&#x27;s armies that began in the reign of Arcadius was driven by recruitment issues, as the regions beyond the Danube were made inaccessible by the Huns, forcing the empire to seek recruitment in Asia Minor. The current consensus can be summarised by the historian Thomas S. Burns: &quot;Despite much civilian distrust and outright hatred of the army and the barbarians in it, there were no anti-barbarian or pro-barbarian parties at the court.&quot;

With respect to Arcadius himself, as emperor was more concerned with appearing to be a pious Christian than he was with political or military matters. Not being a military leader, he began to promote a new type of imperial victory through images, not via the traditional military achievements, but focusing on his piety. Arcadius&#x27;s reign saw the growing push towards the outright abolishment of paganism. On 13 July 399, Arcadius issued an edict ordering that all remaining non-Christian temples should be immediately demolished.

In terms of buildings and monuments, a new forum was built in the name of Arcadius, on the seventh hill of Constantinople, the &quot;Xērolophos&quot;, in which a column was begun to commemorate his &#x27;victory&#x27; over Gainas (although the column was only completed after Arcadius&#x27;s death by Theodosius II). The Pentelic marble portrait head of Arcadius (now in the Istanbul Archaeology Museum) was discovered in Istanbul close to the Forum Tauri, in June 1949, in excavating foundations for new buildings of the university at Beyazit. The neck was designed to be inserted in a torso, but no statue, base or inscription was found. The diadem is a fillet with rows of pearls along its edges and a rectangular stone set about with pearls over the young Emperor&#x27;s forehead.

A more nuanced assessment of Arcadius&#x27;s reign was provided by Warren Treadgold: By failing to reign, Arcadius had allowed a good deal of maladministration. But by continuing to reign—so harmlessly that nobody had taken the trouble to depose him—he had maintained legal continuity during a troubled time.

Arcadius had four children with Eudoxia: three daughters, Pulcheria, Arcadia and Marina; and one son, Theodosius, the future Emperor Theodosius II.

==Notes==
==Sources==
===Primary sources===
* Zosimus, &quot;Historia Nova&quot;, Book 5

===Secondary sources===

* McEvoy, Meaghan, An imperial jellyfish? The emperor Arcadius and imperial leadership in the late fourth century A.D.&#x27;, in Erika Manders, Daniëlle Slootjes (eds), &quot;Leadership, ideology and crowds in the Roman empire of the fourth century AD&quot;. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag (2020).
*Nicholson, O. ed. (2018). &quot;Arcadius, Flavius&quot;&quot;. The Oxford Dictionary of Late Antiquity&quot;.
* Lee, A. D. (2013). &quot;From Rome to Byzantium AD 363 to 565&quot;, Edinburgh University Press. 
* Liebeschuetz, J. H. W. G. (2011). &quot;Ambrose and John Chrysostom: Clerics Between Desert and Empire.&quot; Oxford University Press. 
* Goldsworthy, Adrian (2010). &quot;The Fall of the West: The Death of the Roman Superpower&quot;. Phoenix.
* Long, Jacqueline (1996). &quot;Claudian&#x27;s In Eutropium, Or, How, When, and why to Slander a Eunuch&quot;. University of North Carolina Press. 
*
* Kazhdan, Alexander ed. (1991). Arkadios. &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium&quot;, pp. 173–174.
* Bury, J. B. (1889). &quot;A History of the Later Roman Empire from Arcadius to Irene&quot; I.
*Gibbon, Edward (1932) [1789]. &quot;The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire&quot;. New York: The Modern Library.
==External links==

*Laws of Arcadius, extracted from Justinian&#x27;s &quot;Corpus Juris Civilis&quot;
*Watts, Edward, &quot;the motifs of Imperial authority in the bust of Arcadius&quot;
* This list of Roman laws of the fourth century shows laws passed by Arcadius relating to Christianity.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159369" start="0" end="8" title="Arcadius" label="Arcadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="34" end="47" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="113" end="121" title="Augustus (title)" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="128" end="140" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q235603" start="163" end="178" title="Aelia Flaccilla" label="Aelia Flaccilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="199" end="207" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q232981" start="425" end="438" title="Aelia Eudoxia" label="Aelia Eudoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="487" end="495" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="515" end="527" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q235603" start="532" end="547" title="Aelia Flaccilla" label="Aelia Flaccilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="564" end="572" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="643" end="651" title="Augustus (honorific)" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="779" end="791" title="Western Roman emperor" label="western half"/>
<link wikidata="Q365183" start="863" end="873" title="Themistius" label="Themistius"/>
<link wikidata="Q530065" start="878" end="894" title="Arsenius the Great" label="Arsenius Zonaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1143" end="1157" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q380065" start="1205" end="1215" title="Arbogastes" label="Arbogastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q313058" start="1220" end="1228" title="Eugenius" label="Eugenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230348" start="1331" end="1361" title="praetorian prefect of the East" label="praetorian prefect of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q363482" start="1363" end="1370" title="Rufinus (consul 392)" label="Rufinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="1438" end="1454" title="magister militum" label="magister militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q203636" start="1461" end="1469" title="Stilicho" label="Stilicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="1662" end="1669" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="1690" end="1697" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228622" start="1731" end="1745" title="comes orientis" label="comes orientis"/>
<link wikidata="Q232981" start="1833" end="1846" title="Aelia Eudoxia" label="Aelia Eudoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="1877" end="1885" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="1892" end="1921" title="magister militum per orientem" label="magister militum per orientem"/>
<link wikidata="Q519483" start="1929" end="1934" title="Bauto" label="Bauto"/>
<link wikidata="Q371999" start="1989" end="1998" title="Eutropius (consul 399)" label="Eutropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170011" start="2017" end="2043" title="praepositus sacri cubiculi" label="praepositus sacri cubiculi"/>
<link wikidata="Q64005407" start="2684" end="2697" title="Revolt of Alaric I" label="Gothic revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q102371" start="2727" end="2735" title="Alaric I" label="Alaric I"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="2876" end="2885" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q635058" start="2890" end="2896" title="Thracia" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="3462" end="3470" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258998" start="3614" end="3620" title="Salona" label="Salona"/>
<link wikidata="Q531278" start="3627" end="3633" title="Gainas" label="Gainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q204772" start="4231" end="4237" title="Achaea (Roman province)" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="4412" end="4418" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304634" start="4749" end="4764" title="public enemy" label="hostis publicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="4829" end="4859" title="magister militum per Illyricum" label="magister militum per Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q548516" start="4920" end="4925" title="Gildo" label="Gildo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084275" start="5325" end="5333" title="Timasius" label="Timasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q335990" start="5338" end="5349" title="Abundantius (consul)" label="Abundantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144977" start="5439" end="5454" title="cursus publicus" label="cursus publicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258027" start="5611" end="5630" title="magister officiorum" label="magister officiorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170011" start="5708" end="5734" title="praepositus sacri cubiculi" label="praepositus sacri cubiculi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171696" start="5789" end="5798" title="Vir illustris" label="illustris"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="6197" end="6208" title="Roman Citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="6267" end="6271" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254480" start="6275" end="6288" title="Roman Armenia" label="Roman Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="6348" end="6358" title="Roman consul" label="consulship"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="6633" end="6643" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="6668" end="6678" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282461" start="6777" end="6786" title="Tribigild" label="Tribigild"/>
<link wikidata="Q531278" start="9006" end="9012" title="Gainas" label="Gainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q544015" start="9354" end="9367" title="Praefectus urbi" label="urban prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131436" start="9368" end="9378" title="Aurelianus (consul 400)" label="Aurelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="9506" end="9511" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="9589" end="9604" title="John Chrysostom" label="John Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="9610" end="9638" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Archbishop of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158209" start="10360" end="10369" title="Caesarius (consul)" label="Caesarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q717405" start="10571" end="10579" title="Fravitta" label="Fravitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="10703" end="10709" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q353054" start="10782" end="10787" title="Uldin" label="Uldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="10792" end="10795" title="Hun" label="Hun"/>
<link wikidata="Q721295" start="11479" end="11486" title="Jezebel" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q235901" start="11528" end="11532" title="Ahab" label="Ahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q722953" start="11574" end="11592" title="Severian of Gabala" label="Severian of Gabala"/>
<link wikidata="Q365941" start="11938" end="11962" title="Theophilus I of Alexandria" label="Theophilus of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="11983" end="11988" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260419" start="12001" end="12017" title="Synod of the Oak" label="Synod of the Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="12500" end="12503" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187380" start="12666" end="12676" title="Augustaion" label="Augustaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="12693" end="12707" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Magna Ecclesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230091" start="12882" end="12890" title="Herodias" label="Herodias"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="13056" end="13072" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="13541" end="13549" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="13557" end="13565" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q515350" start="13735" end="13744" title="Anthemius (praetorian prefect)" label="Anthemius"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="13750" end="13768" title="Praetorian prefect" label="Praetorian Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q42173" start="14003" end="14037" title="Praetorian prefecture of Illyricum" label="Praetorian prefecture of Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="14187" end="14197" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q586568" start="14279" end="14306" title="Church of the Holy Apostles" label="Church of the Holy Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14313" end="14333" title="Porphyry (geology)#Imperial sarcophagi" label="porphyry sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="14376" end="14407" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336046" start="14421" end="14434" title="De Ceremoniis" label="De Ceremoniis"/>
<link wikidata="Q502912" start="14525" end="14535" title="J. B. Bury" label="J. B. Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="15137" end="15146" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="15214" end="15219" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q65666" start="15507" end="15517" title="Otto Seeck" label="Otto Seeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q357027" start="15802" end="15810" title="Synesius" label="Synesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131436" start="16056" end="16066" title="Aurelianus (consul 400)" label="Aurelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q63247050" start="16705" end="16720" title="Thomas S. Burns" label="Thomas S. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="16985" end="16994" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153525" start="17357" end="17425" title="Religious persecution in the Roman Empire" label="all remaining non-Christian temples should be immediately demolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247271" start="17471" end="17476" title="Forum of Arcadius" label="forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q776353" start="17590" end="17596" title="Column of Arcadius" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="17729" end="17742" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125206" start="17749" end="17764" title="Pentelic marble" label="Pentelic marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q636978" start="17803" end="17830" title="Istanbul Archaeology Museum" label="Istanbul Archaeology Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043077" start="17964" end="17971" title="Beyazıt Square" label="Beyazit"/>
<link wikidata="Q746591" start="18072" end="18078" title="diadem" label="diadem"/>
<link wikidata="Q231919" start="18582" end="18591" title="Pulcheria" label="Pulcheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696588" start="18593" end="18600" title="Arcadia (daughter of Arcadius)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="18657" end="18670" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="18719" end="18726" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q373061" start="19438" end="19457" title="Adrian Goldsworthy" label="Goldsworthy, Adrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q105974549" start="19593" end="19605" title="In Eutropium" label="In Eutropium"/>
<link wikidata="Q942541" start="19698" end="19716" title="Kazhdan, Alexander" label="Kazhdan, Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247426" start="19745" end="19779" title="The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium" label="The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q502912" start="19802" end="19813" title="J. B. Bury" label="Bury, J. B."/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="19897" end="19911" title="Gibbon, Edward" label="Gibbon, Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q313030" start="19933" end="19973" title="The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" label="The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822096" start="19991" end="20009" title="The Modern Library" label="The Modern Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q187719" start="20088" end="20108" title="Corpus Juris Civilis" label="Corpus Juris Civilis"/>
</links>
</doc>
