<doc id="3856" wikidata="Q3137791" url="?curid=3856" title="History of baseball in the United States">
<text>The history of baseball in the United States dates to the 19th century, when boys and amateur enthusiasts played a baseball-like game by their own informal rules using homemade equipment. The popularity of the sport grew and amateur men&#x27;s ball clubs were formed in the 1830–1850s. Semi-professional baseball clubs followed in the 1860s, and the first professional leagues arrived in the post-American Civil War 1870s.

== Early history ==

The earliest known mention of baseball in the United States is either a 1786 diary entry by a Princeton University student who describes playing &quot;baste ball,&quot; or a 1791 Pittsfield, Massachusetts, ordinance that barred the playing of baseball within of the town meeting house and its glass windows. Another early reference reports that &quot;base ball&quot; was regularly played on Saturdays in 1823 on the outskirts of New York City in an area that today is Greenwich Village. The Olympic Base Ball Club of Philadelphia was organized in 1833.

In 1903, the British-born sportswriter Henry Chadwick published an article speculating that baseball was derived from an English game called rounders, which Chadwick had played as a boy in England. Baseball executive Albert Spalding disagreed, asserting that the game was fundamentally American and had hatched on American soil. To settle the matter, the two men appointed a commission, headed by Abraham Mills, the fourth president of the National League of Professional Baseball Clubs. The commission, which also included six other sports executives, labored for three years, finally declaring that Abner Doubleday had invented the national pastime. Doubleday &quot;...never knew that he had invented baseball. But 15 years after his death, he was anointed as the father of the game,&quot; writes baseball historian John Thorn. The myth about Doubleday inventing the game of baseball actually came from a Colorado mining engineer who claimed to have been present at the moment of creation. The miner&#x27;s tale was never corroborated, nonetheless the myth was born and persists to this day. Which does not mean that the Doubleday myth does not continue to be disputed; in fact, it is likely that the parentage of the modern game of baseball will be in some dispute until long after such future time when the game is no longer played.

The first team to play baseball under modern rules is believed to be the New York Knickerbockers. The club was founded on September 23, 1845, as a breakaway from the earlier Gotham Club. The new club&#x27;s by-laws committee, William R. Wheaton and William H. Tucker, formulated the &quot;Knickerbocker Rules&quot;, which, in large part, dealt with organizational matters but which also laid out some new rules of play. One of these prohibited &quot;soaking&quot; or &quot;plugging&quot; the runner; under older rules, a fielder could put a runner out by hitting the runner with the thrown ball, as in the common schoolyard game of kickball. The Knickerbocker Rules required fielders to tag or force the runner. The new rules also introduced base paths, foul lines and foul balls; in &quot;town ball&quot; every batted ball was fair, as in cricket, and the lack of runner&#x27;s lanes led to wild chases around the infield. In the long run, these changes resulted in the focus of baseball being more about the duel between batting and pitching rather than baserunning and fielding.

Initially, Wheaton and Tucker&#x27;s innovations did not serve the Knickerbockers well. In the first known competitive game between two clubs under the new rules, played at Elysian Fields in Hoboken, New Jersey, on June 19, 1846, the &quot;New York nine&quot; (almost certainly the Gotham Club) humbled the Knickerbockers by a score of 23 to 1. Nevertheless, the Knickerbocker Rules were rapidly adopted by teams in the New York area and their version of baseball became known as the &quot;New York Game&quot; (as opposed to the less rule-bound &quot;Massachusetts Game,&quot; played by clubs in New England, and &quot;Philadelphia Town-ball&quot;).

In spite of its rapid growth in popularity, baseball had yet to overtake the British import, cricket. As late as 1855, the New York press was still devoting more space to coverage of cricket than to baseball.

At a 1857 convention of sixteen New York area clubs, including the Knickerbockers, the National Association of Base Ball Players (NABBP) was formed. It was the first official organization to govern the sport and the first to establish a championship. The convention also formalized three key features of the game: 90 feet distance between the bases, 9-man teams, and 9-inning games (under the Knickerbocker Rules, games were played to 21 runs). During the Civil War, soldiers from different parts of the United States played baseball together, leading to a more unified national version of the sport. Membership in the NABBP grew to almost 100 clubs by 1865 and to over 400 by 1867, including clubs from as far away as California. Beginning in 1869, the league permitted professional play, addressing a growing practice that had not been previously permitted under its rules. The first and most prominent professional club of the NABBP era was the Cincinnati Red Stockings in Ohio, which went undefeated in 1869 and half of 1870. After the Cincy club broke up at the end of that season, four key members including player/manager Harry Wright moved to Boston under owner and businessman Ivers Whitney Adams and became the &quot;Boston Red Stockings&quot; and the Boston Base Ball Club.

In 1858, at the Fashion Race Course in the Corona neighborhood of Queens (now part of New York City), the first games of baseball to charge admission were played. The All Stars of Brooklyn, including players from the Atlantic, Excelsior, Putnam and Eckford clubs, took on the All Stars of New York (Manhattan), including players from the Knickerbocker, Gotham, Eagle and Empire clubs. These are commonly believed to the first all-star baseball games.

==Growth==
Before the Civil War, baseball competed for public interest with cricket and regional variants of baseball, notably town ball played in Philadelphia and the Massachusetts Game played in New England. In the 1860s, aided by the Civil War, &quot;New York&quot; style baseball expanded into a national game. Baseball began to overtake cricket in popularity, impelled by its much shorter duration relative to the form of cricket played at the time. William Humber argues that baseball was also able to grow because there was less of a social taboo against it than in England, where it was strongly perceived as a children&#x27;s game, and because Americans preferred a sport where the teams alternated offense and defense more frequently.

As its first governing body, the National Association of Base Ball Players was formed. The NABBP soon expanded into a truly national organization, although most of the strongest clubs remained those based in the country&#x27;s northeastern part. In its 12-year history as an amateur league, the Atlantic Club of Brooklyn won seven championships, establishing themselves as the first true dynasty in the sport. However, Mutual of New York was widely considered one of the best teams of the era. By the end of 1865, almost 100 clubs were members of the NABBP. By 1867, it ballooned to over 400 members, including some clubs from as far away as California. One of these western clubs, Chicago (dubbed the &quot;White Stockings&quot; by the press for their uniform hosiery), won the championship in 1870. Because of this growth, regional and state organizations began to assume a more prominent role in the governance of the amateur sport at the expense of the NABBP. At the same time, the professionals soon sought a new governing body.
==Professionalism==
The NABBP of America was initially established upon principles of amateurism. However, even early in the Association&#x27;s history, some star players such as James Creighton of Excelsior received compensation covertly or indirectly. In 1866, the NABBP investigated Athletic of Philadelphia for paying three players including Lip Pike, but ultimately took no action against either the club or the players. In many cases players, quite openly, received a cut of the gate receipts. Clubs playing challenge series were even accused of agreeing beforehand to split the earlier games to guarantee a decisive (and thus more certain to draw a crowd) &quot;rubber match&quot;. To address this growing practice, and to restore integrity to the game, at its December 1868 meeting the NABBP established a professional category for the 1869 season. Clubs desiring to pay players were now free to declare themselves professional.

The Cincinnati Red Stockings were the first to declare themselves openly professional, and were aggressive in recruiting the best available players. Twelve clubs, including most of the strongest clubs in the NABBP, ultimately declared themselves professional for the 1869 season.

The first attempt at forming a major league produced the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players, which lasted from 1871 to 1875. The now all-professional Chicago &quot;White Stockings&quot; (today the Chicago Cubs), financed by businessman William Hulbert, became a charter member of the league along with a new Red Stockings club (now the Atlanta Braves), formed in Boston with four former Cincinnati players. The Chicagos were close contenders all season, despite the fact that the Great Chicago Fire had destroyed the team&#x27;s home field and most of their equipment. Chicago finished the season in second place, but were ultimately forced to drop out of the league during the city&#x27;s recovery period, finally returning to National Association play in 1874. Over the next couple of seasons, the Boston club dominated the league and hoarded many of the game&#x27;s best players, even those who were under contract with other teams. After Davy Force signed with Chicago, and then breached his contract to play in Boston, Hulbert became discouraged by the &quot;contract jumping&quot; as well as the overall disorganization of the N.A. (for example, weaker teams with losing records or inadequate gate receipts would simply decline to play out the season), and thus spearheaded the movement to form a stronger organization. The result of his efforts was the formation of a much more &quot;ethical&quot; league, which was named the National League of Professional Base Ball Clubs (NL). After a series of rival leagues were organized but failed (most notably the American Base Ball Association (1882–1891), which spawned the clubs which would ultimately become the Cincinnati Reds, Pittsburgh Pirates, St. Louis Cardinals and Brooklyn Dodgers), the current American League (AL), evolving from the minor Western League of 1893, was established in 1901.

==Rise of the major leagues==

In 1870, a developed between professional and amateur ballplayers. The NABBP split into two groups. The National Association of Professional Base Ball Players operated from 1871 through 1875 and is considered by some to have been the first major league. Its amateur counterpart disappeared after only a few years.

William Hulbert&#x27;s National League, which was formed after the National Association proved ineffective, put its emphasis on &quot;clubs&quot; rather than &quot;players&quot;. Clubs now had the ability to enforce player contracts and prevent players from jumping to higher-paying clubs. Clubs in turn were required to play their full schedule of games, rather than forfeiting scheduled games once out of the running for the league championship, a practice that had been common under the National Association. A concerted effort was also made to reduce the amount of gambling on games which was leaving the validity of results in doubt.

Around this time, a gentlemen&#x27;s agreement was struck between the clubs to exclude non-white players from professional baseball, a &quot;de facto&quot; ban that remained in effect until 1947. It is a common misconception that Jackie Robinson was the first African-American major-league ballplayer; he was actually only the first after a long gap (and the first in the modern era). Moses Fleetwood Walker and his brother Weldy Walker were unceremoniously dropped from major and minor-league rosters in the 1880s, as were other African-Americans in baseball. An unknown number of African-Americans played in the major leagues by representing themselves as Indians, or South or Central Americans, and a still larger number played in the minor leagues and on amateur teams. In the majors, however, it was not until the signing of Robinson (in the National League) and Larry Doby (in the American League) that baseball began to relax its ban on African-Americans.
The early years of the National League were tumultuous, with threats from rival leagues and a rebellion by players against the hated &quot;reserve clause&quot;, which restricted the free movement of players between clubs. Competitive leagues formed regularly, and disbanded just as regularly. The most successful of these was the American Association of 1882–1891, sometimes called the &quot;beer and whiskey league&quot; for its tolerance of the sale of alcoholic beverages to spectators. For several years, the National League and American Association champions met in a postseason World&#x27;s Championship Series—the first attempt at a World Series.

The Union Association survived for only one season (1884), as did the Players&#x27; League (1890), which was an attempt to return to the National Association structure of a league controlled by the players themselves. Both leagues are considered major leagues by many baseball researchers because of the perceived high caliber of play and the number of star players featured. However, some researchers have disputed the major league status of the Union Association, pointing out that franchises came and went and contending that the St. Louis club, which was deliberately &quot;stacked&quot; by the league&#x27;s president (who owned that club), was the only club that was anywhere close to major-league caliber.

In fact, there were dozens of leagues, large and small, in the late 19th century. What made the National League &quot;major&quot; was its dominant position in the major cities, particularly the edgy, emotional nerve center of baseball that was New York City. Large, concentrated populations offered baseball teams national media distribution systems and fan bases that could generate sufficient revenues to afford the best players in the country.

A number of the other leagues, including the venerable Eastern League, threatened the dominance of the National League. The Western League, founded in 1893, became particularly aggressive. Its fiery leader Ban Johnson railed against the National League and promised to grab the best players and field the best teams. The Western League began play in April 1894 with teams in Detroit (now the American League Detroit Tigers, the only league team that has not moved since), Grand Rapids, Indianapolis, Kansas City, Milwaukee, Minneapolis, Sioux City and Toledo. Prior to the 1900 season, the league changed its name to the American League and moved several franchises to larger, strategic locations. In 1901 the American League declared its intent to operate as a major league.

The resulting bidding war for players led to widespread contract-breaking and legal disputes. One of the most famous involved star second baseman Napoleon Lajoie, who in 1901 went across town in Philadelphia from the National League Phillies to the American League Athletics. Barred by a court injunction from playing baseball in the state of Pennsylvania the next year, Lajoie was traded to the Cleveland team, where he played and managed for many years.

The war between the American and National leagues caused shock waves across the baseball world. At a meeting in 1901, the other baseball leagues negotiated a plan to maintain their independence. On September 5, 1901, Eastern League president Patrick T. Powers announced the formation of the second National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues, the NABPL (NA).

These leagues did not consider themselves &quot;minor&quot;—a term that did not come into vogue until St. Louis Cardinals general manager Branch Rickey pioneered the farm system in the 1930s. Nevertheless, these financially troubled leagues, by beginning the practice of selling players to the more affluent National and American leagues, embarked on a path that eventually led to the loss of their independent status.

Ban Johnson had other designs for the NA. While the NA continues to this day, he saw it as a tool to end threats from smaller rivals who might some day want to expand in other territories and threaten his league&#x27;s dominance.

After 1902 both leagues and the NABPL signed a new National Agreement which achieved three things:
* First and foremost, it governed player contracts that set up mechanisms to end the cross-league raids on rosters and reinforced the power of the hated reserve clause that kept players virtual slaves to their baseball owner/masters.
* Second, it led to the playing of a &quot;World Series&quot; in 1903 between the two major league champions. The first World Series was won by Boston of the American League.
* Lastly, it established a system of control and dominance for the major leagues over the independents. There would not be another Ban Johnson-like rebellion from the ranks of leagues with smaller cities. Selling off player contracts was rapidly becoming a staple business of the independent leagues. During the rough and tumble years of the American–National struggle, player contracts were violated at the independents as well, as players that a team had developed would sign with the majors without any form of compensation to the indy club.

The new agreement tied independent contracts to the reserve-clause national league contracts. Baseball players were a commodity, like cars. A player&#x27;s skill set had a price of $5,000. It set up a rough classification system for independent leagues that regulated the dollar value of contracts, the forerunner of the system refined by Rickey and used today.

It also gave the NA great power. Many independents walked away from the 1901 meeting. The deal with the NA punished those other indies who had not joined the NA and submitted to the will of the majors. The NA also agreed to the deal so as to prevent more pilfering of players with little or no compensation for the players&#x27; development. Several leagues, seeing the writing on the wall, eventually joined the NA, which grew in size over the next several years.

In the very early part of the 20th century, known as the &quot;dead-ball era&quot;, baseball rules and equipment favored the &quot;inside game&quot; and the game was played more violently and aggressively than it is today. This period ended in the 1920s with several changes that gave advantages to hitters. In the largest parks, the outfield fences were brought closer to the infield. In addition, the strict enforcement of new rules governing the construction and regular replacement of the ball caused it to be easier to hit, and be hit harder.

The first professional black baseball club, the Cuban Giants, was organized in 1885. Subsequent professional black baseball clubs played each other independently, without an official league to organize the sport. Rube Foster, a former ballplayer, founded the Negro National League in 1920. A second league, the Eastern Colored League, was established in 1923. These became known as the Negro leagues, though these leagues never had any formal overall structure comparable to the Major Leagues. The Negro National League did well until 1930, but folded during the Great Depression.

From 1942 to 1948, the Negro World Series was revived. This was the golden era of Negro league baseball, a time when it produced some of its greatest stars. In 1947, Jackie Robinson signed a contract with the Brooklyn Dodgers, breaking the color barrier that had prevented talented African-American players from entering the white-only major leagues. Although the transformation was not instantaneous, baseball has since become fully integrated. While the Dodgers&#x27; signing of Robinson was a key moment in baseball and civil rights history, it prompted the decline of the Negro leagues. The best black players were now recruited for the Major Leagues, and black fans followed. The last Negro league teams folded in the 1960s.

Pitchers dominated the game in the 1960s and early 1970s. In 1973, the designated hitter (DH) rule was adopted by the American League, while in the National League, the DH rule was not adopted until March 2022. The rule had been applied in a variety of ways during the World Series; until the adoption of the DH by the National League, the DH rule applied when Series games were played in an American League stadium, and pitchers would bat during Series games played in National League stadiums. There had been continued disagreement about the future of the DH rule in the World Series until league-wide adoption of the DH rule.

During the late 1960s, the Baseball Players Union became much stronger and conflicts between owners and the players&#x27; union led to major work stoppages in 1972, 1981, and 1994. The 1994 baseball strike led to the cancellation of the World Series, and was not settled until the spring of 1995. In the late 1990s, functions that had been administered separately by the two major leagues&#x27; administrations were united under the rubric of Major League Baseball (MLB).

==The dead-ball era: 1901 to 1919==


The period 1901–1919 is commonly called the &quot;Dead-ball era&quot;, with low-scoring games dominated by pitchers such as Walter Johnson, Cy Young, Christy Mathewson, and Grover Cleveland Alexander. The term also accurately describes the condition of the baseball itself. Baseballs cost three dollars each in 1901, a unit price which would be equal to $ today. In contrast, modern baseballs purchased in bulk as is the case with professional teams cost about seven dollars each as of 2021 and thus make up a negligible portion of a modern MLB team&#x27;s operating budget. Due to the much larger relative cost, club owners in the early 20th century were reluctant to spend much money on new balls if not necessary. It was not unusual for a single baseball to last an entire game, nor for a baseball to be reused for the next game especially if it was still in relatively good condition as would likely be the case for a ball introduced late in the game. By the end of the game, the ball would usually be dark with grass, mud, and tobacco juice, and it would be misshapen and lumpy from contact with the bat. Balls were replaced only if they were hit into the crowd and lost, and many clubs employed security guards expressly for the purpose of retrieving balls hit into the stands — a practice unthinkable today.

As a consequence, home runs were rare, and the &quot;inside game&quot; dominated—singles, bunts, stolen bases, the hit-and-run play, and other tactics dominated the strategies of the time.

Despite this, there were also several superstar hitters, the most famous being Honus Wagner, held to be one of the greatest shortstops to ever play the game, and Detroit&#x27;s Ty Cobb, the &quot;Georgia Peach.&quot; His career batting average of .366 has yet to be bested.

===The Merkle incident===

The 1908 pennant races in both the AL and NL were among the most exciting ever witnessed. The conclusion of the National League season, in particular, involved a bizarre chain of events. On September 23, 1908, the New York Giants and Chicago Cubs played a game in the Polo Grounds. Nineteen-year-old rookie first baseman Fred Merkle, later to become one of the best players at his position in the league, was on first base, with teammate Moose McCormick on third with two outs and the game tied. Giants shortstop Al Bridwell socked a single, scoring McCormick and apparently winning the game. However, Merkle, instead of advancing to second base, ran toward the clubhouse to avoid the spectators mobbing the field, which at that time was a common, acceptable practice. The Cubs&#x27; second baseman, Johnny Evers, noticed this. In the confusion that followed, Evers claimed to have retrieved the ball and touched second base, forcing Merkle out and nullifying the run scored. Evers brought this to the attention of the umpire that day, Hank O&#x27;Day, who after some deliberation called the runner out. Because of the state of the field O&#x27;Day thereby called the game. Despite the arguments by the Giants, the league upheld O&#x27;Day&#x27;s decision and ordered the game replayed at the end of the season, if necessary. It turned out that the Cubs and Giants ended the season tied for first place, so the game was indeed replayed, and the Cubs won the game, the pennant, and subsequently the World Series (the last Cubs Series victory until 2016).

For his part, Merkle was doomed to endless ridicule throughout his career (and to a lesser extent for the rest of his life) for this lapse, which went down in history as &quot;Merkle&#x27;s Boner&quot;. In his defense, some baseball historians have suggested that it was not customary for game-ending hits to be fully &quot;run out&quot;, it was only Evers&#x27;s insistence on following the rules strictly that resulted in this unusual play. In fact, earlier in the 1908 season, the identical situation had been brought to the umpires&#x27; attention by Evers; the umpire that day was the same Hank O&#x27;Day. While the winning run was allowed to stand on that occasion, the dispute raised O&#x27;Day&#x27;s awareness of the rule, and directly set up the Merkle controversy.

===New places to play===
Turn-of-the-century baseball attendances were modest by later standards. The average for the 1,110 games in the 1901 season was 3,247. However, the first 20 years of the 20th century saw an unprecedented rise in the popularity of baseball. Large stadiums dedicated to the game were built for many of the larger clubs or existing grounds enlarged, including Tiger Stadium in Detroit, Shibe Park in Philadelphia, Ebbets Field in Brooklyn, the Polo Grounds in Manhattan, Boston&#x27;s Fenway Park along with Wrigley Field and Comiskey Park in Chicago. Likewise from the Eastern League to the small developing leagues in the West, and the rising Negro leagues professional baseball was being played all across the country. Average major league attendances reached a pre-World War I peak of 5,836 in 1909. Where there weren&#x27;t professional teams, there were semi-professional teams, traveling teams barnstorming, company clubs and amateur men&#x27;s leagues that drew small but fervent crowds.

===The &quot;Black Sox&quot;===
The fix of baseball games by gamblers and players working together had been suspected as early as the 1850s. Hal Chase was particularly notorious for throwing games, but played for a decade after gaining this reputation; he even managed to parlay these accusations into a promotion to manager. Even baseball stars such as Ty Cobb and Tris Speaker have been credibly alleged to have fixed game outcomes. When MLB&#x27;s complacency during this &quot;Golden Age&quot; was eventually exposed after the 1919 World Series, it became known as the Black Sox scandal.

After an excellent regular season (88–52, .629 W%), the Chicago White Sox were heavy favorites to win the 1919 World Series. Arguably the best team in baseball, the White Sox had a deep lineup, a strong pitching staff, and a good defense. Even though the National League champion Cincinnati Reds had a superior regular season record (96–44, .689 W%,) no one, including gamblers and bookmakers, anticipated the Reds having a chance. When the Reds triumphed 5–3, many pundits cried foul.

At the time of the scandal, the White Sox were arguably the most successful franchise in baseball, with excellent gate receipts and record attendance. At the time, most baseball players were not paid especially well and had to work other jobs during the winter to survive. Some elite players on the big-city clubs made very good salaries, but Chicago was a notable exception.

For many years, the White Sox were owned and operated by Charles Comiskey, who paid the lowest player salaries, on average, in the American League. The White Sox players all intensely disliked Comiskey and his penurious ways, but were powerless to do anything, thanks to baseball&#x27;s so-called &quot;reserve clause&quot; that prevented players from switching teams without their team owner&#x27;s consent.

By late 1919, Comiskey&#x27;s tyrannical reign over the Sox had sown deep bitterness among the players, and White Sox first baseman Arnold &quot;Chick&quot; Gandil decided to conspire to throw the 1919 World Series. He persuaded gambler Joseph &quot;Sport&quot; Sullivan, with whom he had had previous dealings, that the fix could be pulled off for $100,000 total (which would be equal to $ today), paid to the players involved. New York gangster Arnold Rothstein supplied the $100,000 that Gandil had requested through his lieutenant Abe Attell, a former featherweight boxing champion.

After the 1919 series, and through the beginning of the 1920 baseball season, rumors swirled that some of the players had conspired to purposefully lose. At last, in 1920, a grand jury was convened to investigate these and other allegations of fixed baseball games. Eight players (Charles &quot;Swede&quot; Risberg, Arnold &quot;Chick&quot; Gandil, &quot;Shoeless&quot; Joe Jackson, Oscar &quot;Happy&quot; Felsch, Eddie Cicotte, George &quot;Buck&quot; Weaver, Fred McMullin, and Claude &quot;Lefty&quot; Williams) were indicted and tried for conspiracy. The players were ultimately acquitted.

However, the damage to the reputation of the sport of baseball led the team owners to appoint Federal judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis to be the first commissioner of baseball. His first act as commissioner was to ban the &quot;Black Sox&quot; from professional baseball for life. The White Sox, meanwhile,
would not return to the World Series until 1959, and it was not until their next appearance in 2005 they won the World Series.

==The Negro leagues==

Until July 5, 1947, baseball had two histories. One fills libraries, while baseball historians are only just beginning to chronicle the other fully: African Americans have played baseball as long as white Americans. Players of color, both African-American and Hispanic, played for white baseball clubs throughout the very early days of the growing amateur sport. Moses Fleetwood Walker is considered the first African American to play at the major league level, in 1884. But soon, and dating through the first half of the 20th century, an unwritten but iron-clad color line fenced African-Americans and other players of color out of the &quot;majors&quot;.

The Negro leagues were American professional baseball leagues comprising predominantly African-American teams. The term may be used broadly to include professional black teams outside the leagues and it may be used narrowly for the seven relatively successful leagues beginning 1920 that are sometimes termed &quot;Negro major leagues&quot;.

The first professional team, established in 1885, achieved great and lasting success as the Cuban Giants, while the first league, the National Colored Base Ball League, failed in 1887 after only two weeks due to low attendance. The Negro American League of 1951 is considered the last major league season and the last professional club, the Indianapolis Clowns, operated amusingly rather than competitively from the mid-1960s to 1980s.

===The first international leagues===
While many of the players that made up the black baseball teams were African Americans, many more were Latin Americans (mostly, but not exclusively, black), from nations that deliver some of the greatest talents that make up the Major League rosters of today. Black players moved freely through the rest of baseball, playing in Canadian Baseball, Mexican Baseball, Caribbean Baseball, and Central America and South America, where more than a few achieved a level of fame that was unavailable in the country of their birth.

==Babe Ruth and the end of the dead-ball era==

It was not the Black Sox scandal which put an end to the dead-ball era, but a rule change and a single player.

Some of the increased offensive output can be explained by the 1920 rule change that outlawed tampering with the ball. Pitchers had developed a number of techniques for producing &quot;spitballs&quot;, &quot;shine balls&quot; and other trick pitches which had &quot;unnatural&quot; flight through the air. Umpires were now required to put new balls into play whenever the current ball became scuffed or discolored. This rule change was enforced all the more stringently following the death of Ray Chapman, who was struck in the temple by a pitched ball from Carl Mays in a game on August 16, 1920; he died the next day. Discolored balls, harder for batters to see and therefore harder for batters to dodge, have been rigorously removed from play ever since. This meant that batters could now see and hit the ball with less difficulty. With the added prohibition on the ball being purposely wetted or scuffed in any way, pitchers had to rely on pure athletic skill—changes in grip, wrist angle, arm angle and throwing dynamics, plus a new and growing appreciation of the aerodynamic effect of the spinning ball&#x27;s seams—to pitch with altered trajectories and hopefully confuse or distract batters.

At the end of the 1919 season Harry Frazee, then owner of the Boston Red Sox, sold a group of his star players to the New York Yankees. Among them was George Herman Ruth, known affectionately as &quot;Babe&quot;. Ruth&#x27;s career mirrors the shift in dominance from pitching to hitting at this time. He started his career as a pitcher in 1914, and by 1916 was considered one of the dominant left-handed pitchers in the game. When Edward Barrow, managing the Red Sox, converted him to an outfielder, ballplayers and sportswriters were shocked. It was apparent, however, that Ruth&#x27;s bat in the lineup every day was far more valuable than Ruth&#x27;s arm on the mound every fourth day. Ruth swatted 29 home runs in his last season in Boston. The next year, as a Yankee, he would hit 54 and in 1921 he hit 59. His 1927 mark of 60 home runs would last until 1961.
Ruth&#x27;s power hitting ability demonstrated a dramatic new way to play the game, one that was extremely popular with fans. Accordingly, ballparks were expanded, sometimes by building outfield &quot;bleacher&quot; seating which shrunk the size of the outfield and made home runs more frequent. In addition to Ruth, hitters such as Rogers Hornsby also took advantage, with Hornsby compiling extraordinary figures for both power and average in the early 1920s. By the late 1920s and 1930s all the good teams had their home-run hitting &quot;sluggers&quot;: the Yankees&#x27; Lou Gehrig, Jimmie Foxx in Philadelphia, Hank Greenberg in Detroit and in Chicago Hack Wilson were the most storied. While the American League championship, and to a lesser extent the World Series, would be dominated by the Yankees, there were many other excellent teams in the inter-war years. The National League&#x27;s St. Louis Cardinals, for example, would win three titles in nine years, the last with a group of players known as the &quot;Gashouse Gang&quot;.

The first radio broadcast of a baseball game was on August 5, 1921, over Westinghouse station KDKA from Forbes Field in Pittsburgh. Harold Arlin announced the Pirates–Phillies game. Attendances in the 1920s were consistently better than they had been before WWI. The interwar peak average attendance was 8,211 in 1930, but baseball was hit hard by the Great Depression and in 1933 the average fell below five thousand for the only time between the wars. At first wary of radio&#x27;s potential to impact ticket sales at the park, owners began to make broadcast deals and by the late 1930s, all teams&#x27; games went out over the air.

1933 also saw the introduction of the yearly All-Star game, a mid-season break in which the greatest players in each league play against one another in a hard-fought but officially meaningless demonstration game. In 1936 the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, New York, was instituted and five players elected: Ty Cobb, Walter Johnson, Christy Mathewson, Babe Ruth and Honus Wagner. The Hall formally opened in 1939 and, of course, remains open to this day.

==The war years==
In 1941, a year which saw the premature death of Lou Gehrig, Boston&#x27;s great left fielder Ted Williams had a batting average over .400—the last time anyone has achieved that feat. During the same season Joe DiMaggio hit successfully in 56 consecutive games, an accomplishment both unprecedented and unequaled.

After the United States entered World War II after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Landis asked Franklin D. Roosevelt whether professional baseball should continue during the war. In the &quot;Green Light Letter&quot;, the US president replied that baseball was important to national morale, and asked for more night games so day workers could attend. Thirty-five Hall of Fame members and more than 500 Major League Baseball players served in the war, but with the exception of D-Day, games continued. Both Williams and DiMaggio would miss playing time in the services, with Williams also flying later in the Korean War. During this period Stan Musial led the St. Louis Cardinals to the 1942, 1944 and 1946 World Series titles. The war years also saw the founding of the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League.

Baseball boomed after World War II. 1945 saw a new attendance record and the following year average crowds leapt nearly 70% to 14,914. Further records followed in 1948 and 1949, when the average reached 16,913. While average attendances slipped to somewhat lower levels through the 1950s, 1960s and the first half of the 1970s, they remained well above pre-war levels, and total seasonal attendance regularly hit new highs from 1962 onward as the number of major league teams—and games—increased.

==Racial integration in baseball==

The post-War years in baseball also witnessed the racial integration of the sport. Participation by African Americans in organized baseball had been precluded since the 1890s by formal and informal agreements, with only a few players being surreptitiously included in lineups on a sporadic basis.

American society as a whole moved toward integration in the post-War years, partially as a result of the distinguished service by African American military units such as the Tuskegee Airmen, 366th Infantry Regiment, and others. During the baseball winter meetings in 1943, noted African-American athlete and actor Paul Robeson campaigned for integration of the sport. After World War II ended, several team managers considered recruiting members of the Negro leagues for entry into organized baseball. In the early 1920s, New York Giants&#x27; manager John McGraw tried to slip a black player, Charlie Grant, into his lineup (reportedly by passing him off to the front office as an Indian), and McGraw&#x27;s wife reported finding names of dozens of black players that McGraw fantasized about signing, after his death. Pittsburgh Pirates owner Bill Bensawanger reportedly signed Josh Gibson to a contract in 1943, and the Washington Senators were also said to be interested in his services. But those efforts (and others) were opposed by Kenesaw Mountain Landis, baseball&#x27;s powerful commissioner and a staunch segregationist. Bill Veeck claimed that Landis blocked his purchase of the Philadelphia Phillies because he planned to integrate the team. While this account is disputed, Landis was in fact opposed to integration, and his death in 1944 (and subsequent replacement as Commissioner by Happy Chandler) removed a major obstacle for black players in the Major Leagues.

The general manager who would be eventually successful in breaking the color barrier was Branch Rickey of the Brooklyn Dodgers. Rickey himself had experienced the issue of segregation. While playing and coaching for his college team at Ohio Wesleyan University, Rickey had a black teammate named Charles Thomas. On a road trip through southern Ohio, his fellow player was refused a room in a hotel. Although Rickey was able to get the player into his room for that night, he was taken aback when he reached his room to find Thomas upset and crying about this injustice. Rickey related this incident as an example of why he wanted a full desegregation of not only baseball, but the entire nation.

In the mid-1940s, Rickey had compiled a list of Negro league ballplayers for possible Major League contracts. Realizing that the first African-American signee would be a magnet for prejudiced sentiment, however, Rickey was intent on finding a player with the distinguished personality and character that would allow him to tolerate the inevitable abuse. Rickey&#x27;s sights eventually settled on Jackie Robinson, a shortstop with the Kansas City Monarchs. Although probably not the best player in the Negro leagues at the time, Robinson was an exceptional talent, was college-educated, and had the marketable distinction of having served as an officer during World War II. Even more importantly, Rickey judged Robinson to possess the inner strength to withstand the inevitable harsh animosity to come. To prepare him for the task, Rickey played Robinson in 1946 for the Dodgers&#x27; minor league team, the Montreal Royals, which proved an arduous emotional challenge, though Robinson enjoyed fervently enthusiastic support from the Montreal fans. On April 15, 1947, Robinson broke the color barrier, which had been tacitly recognized for almost 75 years, with his appearance for the Brooklyn Dodgers at Ebbets Field.

Eleven weeks later, on July 5, 1947, the American League was integrated by the signing of Larry Doby to the Cleveland Indians. Over the next few years, a handful of black baseball players made appearances in the majors, including Roy Campanella (teammate to Robinson in Brooklyn) and Satchel Paige (teammate to Doby in Cleveland). Paige, who had pitched more than 2,400 innings in the Negro leagues, sometimes two and three games a day, was still effective at 42, and still playing at 59. His ERA in the Major Leagues was 3.29.

However, the initial pace of integration was slow. By 1953, only six of the sixteen major league teams had a black player on the roster. The Boston Red Sox became the last major league team to integrate its roster with the addition of Pumpsie Green on July 21, 1959. While limited in numbers, the on-field performance of early black Major League players was outstanding. In the fourteen years from 1947 to 1960, black players won one or more of the Rookie of the Year awards nine times.

While never prohibited in the same fashion as African Americans, Latin American players also benefitted greatly from the integration era. In 1951, two Chicago White Sox, Venezuelan-born Chico Carrasquel and Cuban-born (and black) Minnie Miñoso, became the first Hispanic All-Stars.

According to some baseball historians, Jackie Robinson and the other African-American players helped reestablish the importance of baserunning and similar elements of play that were previously de-emphasized by the predominance of power hitting.

From 1947 to the 1970s, African-American participation in baseball rose steadily. By 1974, 27% of baseball players were African American. As a result of this on-field experience, minorities began to experience long-delayed gains in managerial positions within baseball. In 1975, Frank Robinson (who had been the 1956 Rookie of the Year with the Cincinnati Reds) was named player-manager of the Cleveland Indians, making him the first African-American manager in the major leagues.

Although these front-office gains continued, Major League Baseball saw a lengthy slow decline in the percentage of black players after the mid-1970s. By 2007, African Americans made up less than 9% of Major League players. While this trend is largely attributed to an increased emphasis on recruitment of players from Latin America (with the number of Hispanic players in the major leagues rising to 29% by 2007), other factors have been cited as well. Hall of Fame player Dave Winfield, for instance, has pointed out that urban America provides fewer resources for youth baseball than in the past. Despite this continued prevalence of Hispanic players, the percentage of black players rose again in 2008 to 10.2%.

Arturo Moreno became the first Hispanic owner of an MLB franchise when he purchased the Anaheim Angels in 2004.

In 2005, a Racial and Gender Report Card on Major League Baseball was issued, which generally found positive results on the inclusion of African Americans and Latinos in baseball, and gave Major League Baseball a grade of &quot;A&quot; or better for opportunities for players, managers and coaches as well as for MLB&#x27;s central office. At that time, 37% of major league players were people of color: Latino (26 percent), African American (9 percent) or Asian (2 percent). Also by 2004, 29% of the professional staff in MLB&#x27;s central office were people of color, 11% of team vice presidents were people of color, and seven of the league&#x27;s managers were of color (four African Americans and three Latinos).

==Expansion era==
Baseball had been in the West for almost as long as the National League and the American League had been around. It evolved into the Pacific Coast League (PCL), which included the Hollywood Stars, Los Angeles Angels, Oakland Oaks, Portland Beavers, Sacramento Solons, San Francisco Seals, San Diego Padres, Seattle Rainiers.

The PCL was huge in the West. A member of the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues, it kept losing great players to the National and the American leagues for less than $8,000 a player.

The PCL was far more independent than the other &quot;minor&quot; leagues, and rebelled continuously against their Eastern masters. Clarence Pants Rowland, the President of the PCL, took on baseball commissioners Kenesaw Mountain Landis and Happy Chandler at first to get better equity from the major leagues, then to form a third major league. His efforts were rebuffed by both commissioners. Chandler and several of the owners, who saw the value of the markets in the West, started to plot the extermination of the PCL. They had one thing that Rowland did not: The financial power of the Eastern major league baseball establishment.

No one was going to back a PCL club building a major-league size stadium if the National or the American League was going to build one too, which discouraged investment in PCL ballparks. PCL games and rivalries still drew fans, but the leagues&#x27; days of dominance in the West were numbered.

===1953–1955===

Until the 1950s, major league baseball franchises had been largely confined to the northeastern United States, with the teams and their locations remaining unchanged from 1903 to 1952. The first team to relocate in fifty years was the Boston Braves, who moved in 1953 to Milwaukee, where the club set attendance records. In 1954, the St. Louis Browns moved to Baltimore and were renamed the Baltimore Orioles. These relocations can be seen as a full-circle ending to the classic era, which began with the moves of teams &quot;from&quot; Milwaukee and Baltimore. In 1955, the Philadelphia Athletics moved to Kansas City.

===National League Baseball leaves New York===
In 1958 the New York market ripped apart. The Yankees were becoming the dominant draw, and the cities of the West offered generations of new fans in much more sheltered markets for the other venerable New York clubs, the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants. Placing these storied, powerhouse clubs in the two biggest cities in the West had the specific design of crushing any attempt by the PCL to form a third major league. Eager to bring these big names to the West, Los Angeles gave Walter O&#x27;Malley, owner of the Dodgers, a helicopter tour of the city and asked him to pick his spot. The Giants were given the lease of the PCL San Francisco Seals while Candlestick Park was built for them.

===California===

The logical first candidates for major league &quot;expansion&quot; were the same metropolitan areas that had just attracted the Dodgers and Giants. It is said that the Dodgers and Giants—National League rivals in New York City—chose their new cities because Los Angeles (in southern California) and San Francisco (in northern California) already had a fierce rivalry (geographical, economic, cultural and political), dating back to the state&#x27;s founding. The only California expansion team—and also the first in Major League Baseball in over 70 years—was the Los Angeles Angels (later the California Angels, the Anaheim Angels, Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, before reverting to Los Angeles Angels in 2016), who brought the American League to southern California in 1961. Northern California, however, would later gain its own American League team, in 1968, when the Athletics would move again, settling in Oakland, across San Francisco Bay from the Giants.

===1961–1962===
Along with the Angels, the other 1961 expansion team was the Washington Senators, who joined the American League and took over the nation&#x27;s capital when the previous Senators moved to Minnesota and became the Twins. 1961 is also noted as being the year in which Roger Maris surpassed Babe Ruth&#x27;s single season home run record, hitting 61 for the New York Yankees, albeit in a slightly longer season than Ruth&#x27;s. To keep pace with the American League—which now had ten teams—the National League likewise expanded to ten teams, in 1962, with the addition of the Houston Colt .45s and New York Mets.

===1969===
In 1969, the American League expanded when the Kansas City Royals and Seattle Pilots, the latter in a longtime PCL stronghold, were admitted to the league. The Pilots stayed just one season in Seattle before moving to Milwaukee and becoming today&#x27;s Milwaukee Brewers. The National League also added two teams that year, the Montreal Expos and San Diego Padres. Given the size of the expanded leagues, 12 teams apiece, each split into East and West divisions, with a playoff series to determine the pennant winner and World Series contender—the first post-season baseball instituted since the advent of the World Series itself.

The Padres were the last of the core PCL teams to be absorbed. The Coast League did not die, though. After reforming and moving into new markets, it successfully transformed into a Class AAA league.

===1972–2013===

In 1972, the second Washington Senators moved to the Dallas–Fort Worth area and became the Texas Rangers.

In 1977, the American League expanded to fourteen teams, with the newly formed Seattle Mariners and Toronto Blue Jays. Sixteen years later, in 1993, the National League likewise expanded to fourteen teams, with the newly formed Colorado Rockies and Florida Marlins (now Miami Marlins).

Beginning with the 1994 season, both the AL and the NL were divided into three divisions (East, West, and Central), with the addition of a wild card team (the team with the best record among those finishing in second place) to enable four teams in each league to advance to the preliminary division series. However, due to the 1994–95 Major League Baseball strike  (which canceled the 1994 World Series), the new rules did not go into effect until the 1995 World Series.

In 1998, the AL and the NL each added a fifteenth team, for a total of thirty teams in Major League Baseball. The Arizona Diamondbacks joined the National League, and the Tampa Bay Devil Rays—now called simply the Rays—joined the American League. In order to keep the number of teams in each league at an even number—with 14 in the AL and 16 in the NL—Milwaukee changed leagues and became a member of the National League. Two years later, the NL and AL ended their independent corporate existences and merged into a new legal entity named Major League Baseball; the two leagues remained as playing divisions. In 2001, MLB took over the struggling Montreal Expos franchise and, after the 2004 season, moved it to Washington, DC, which had been clamoring for a team ever since the second Senators&#x27; departure in 1972; the club was renamed the Nationals.

In 2013, in keeping with Commissioner Bud Selig&#x27;s desire for expanded interleague play, the Houston Astros were shifted from the National to the American League; with an odd number (15) in each league, an interleague contest was played somewhere almost every day during the season. At this time the divisions within each league were shuffled to create six equal divisions of five teams.

==Pitching dominance and rules changes==

By the late 1960s, the balance between pitching and hitting had swung back to favor of the pitchers once more. In 1968 Carl Yastrzemski won the American League batting title with an average of just .301, the lowest in history. That same year, Detroit Tigers pitcher Denny McLain won 31 games—making him the last pitcher to win 30 games in a season. St. Louis Cardinals starting pitcher Bob Gibson achieved an equally remarkable feat by allowing an ERA of just 1.12.

In response to these events, major league baseball implemented certain rule changes in 1969 to benefit the batters. The pitcher&#x27;s mound was lowered, and the strike zone was reduced.

In 1973 the American League, which had been suffering from much lower attendance than the National League, made a move to increase scoring even further by initiating the designated hitter rule.

==Players assert themselves==
From the time of the formation of the Major Leagues to the 1960s, the team owners controlled the game. After the so-called &quot;Brotherhood Strike&quot; of 1890 and the failure of the Brotherhood of Professional Base Ball Players and its Players National League, the owners&#x27; control of the game seemed absolute. It lasted over 70 years despite a number of short-lived players organizations. In 1966, however, the players enlisted the help of labor union activist Marvin Miller to form the Major League Baseball Players Association (MLBPA). The same year, Sandy Koufax and Don Drysdale—both Cy Young Award winners for the Los Angeles Dodgers—refused to re-sign their contracts, jointly holding out for better contracts. The era of the reserve clause, which held players to one team, was drawing to an end.

The first legal challenge came in 1970. Backed by the MLBPA, St. Louis Cardinals outfielder Curt Flood took the leagues to court to negate a player trade, citing the 13th Amendment and antitrust legislation. In 1972, he finally lost his case before the United States Supreme Court by a vote of 5 to 3, but gained large-scale public sympathy, and the damage had been done. The reserve clause survived, but it had been irrevocably weakened. In 1975, Andy Messersmith of the Dodgers and Dave McNally of the Montreal Expos played without contracts, and then declared themselves free agents in response to an arbitrator&#x27;s ruling. Handcuffed by concessions made in the Flood case, the owners had no choice but to accept the collective bargaining package offered by the MLBPA, and the reserve clause was effectively ended, to be replaced by the current system of free-agency and arbitration.

While the legal challenges were going on, the game continued. In 1969, the &quot;Miracle Mets&quot;, just seven years after their formation, recorded their first winning season, won the National League East and finally the World Series.

On the field, the 1970s saw some of the longest-standing records fall, along with the rise of two powerhouse dynasties. In Oakland, the Swinging A&#x27;s were overpowering, winning the Series in 1972, 1973 and 1974, and five straight division titles. The strained relationships between teammates, who included Catfish Hunter, Vida Blue and Reggie Jackson, gave the lie to the need for &quot;chemistry&quot; between players. The National League, on the other hand, belonged to the Big Red Machine in Cincinnati, where Sparky Anderson&#x27;s team, which included Pete Rose as well as Hall of Famers Tony Pérez, Johnny Bench and Joe Morgan, succeeded the A&#x27;s run in 1975.

The decade also contained great individual achievements. On April 8, 1974, Hank Aaron of the Atlanta Braves hit his 715th career home run, surpassing Babe Ruth&#x27;s all-time record. He would retire in 1976 with 755, and that was just one of numerous records he achieved, many of which, including total bases, still stand today. There was great pitching too: between 1973 and 1975, Nolan Ryan threw four &quot;no-hit&quot; games. He would add a record-breaking fifth in 1981 and two more before his retirement in 1993, by which time he had also accumulated 5,714 strikeouts, another record, in a 27-year career.

==The marketing and hype era==
From the 1980s onward, the major league game changed dramatically, due to the combined effects of free agency, improvements in the science of sports conditioning, changes in the marketing and television broadcasting of sporting events, and the push by brand-name products for greater visibility. These events lead to greater labor difficulties, fan disaffection, rapidly rising prices, changes in game-play, and problems with the use of performance-enhancing substances like steroids tainting the race for records. In spite of all this, stadium crowds generally grew. Average attendances first broke 20,000 in 1979 and 30,000 in 1993. That year total attendance hit 70 million, but baseball was hit hard by a strike in 1994, and as of 2005 it had marginally improved on those 1993 records. (Update: Between 2009 and 2017, average attendance hovered just over the 30,000 mark, with numbers falling into the 28,000s in &#x27;18 and &#x27;19. The 2019 season saw a million fewer tickets sold than the banner year of 2007, however revenues to major league baseball from media rights fees increased total revenue to $10 billion in 2018, a 70% rise from a decade before.)

===The science of the sport changes the game===
During the 1980s, significant advances were made in the science of physical conditioning. Weight rooms and training equipment were improved. Trainers and doctors developed better diets and regimens to make athletes bigger, healthier, and stronger than they had ever been.

Another major change that had been occurring during this time was the adoption of the pitch count. Starting pitchers who played complete games had not been an unusual thing in baseball&#x27;s history. Now, pitchers were throwing harder than ever and pitching coaches watched to see how many pitches a player had thrown over the game. At anywhere from 100 to 125, pitchers increasingly would be pulled out to preserve their arms. Bullpens began to specialize more, with more pitchers being trained as middle relievers, and a few hurlers, usually possessing high velocity but not much durability, as closers. The science of maximizing effectiveness and career duration, while attempting to minimize injury and downtime, is an ongoing pursuit by coaches and kinesiologists.

Along with the expansion of teams, the addition of more pitchers needed to play a complete game stressed the total number of quality players available in a system that restricted its talent searches at that time to America, Canada, Latin America, and the Caribbean.

===Television===
The arrival of live televised sports in the 1950s increased attention and revenue for all major league clubs at first. The television programming was extremely regional, hurting the non-televised minor and independent leagues most. People stayed home to watch Maury Wills rather than watch unknowns at their local baseball park. Major League Baseball, as it always did, made sure that it controlled rights and fees charged for the broadcasts of all games, just as it had on radio.

The national networks began televising national games of the week, opening the door for a national audience to see particular clubs. While most teams were broadcast in the course of a season, emphasis tended toward the league leaders with famous players and the major market franchises that could draw the largest audience.

===The rise of cable===
In the 1970s the cable revolution began. The Atlanta Braves became a power contender with greater revenues generated by WTBS, Ted Turner&#x27;s Atlanta-based Super-Station, broadcast as &quot;America&#x27;s Team&quot; to cable households nationwide. The roll-out of ESPN, then regional sports networks (now mostly under the umbrella of Fox Sports Net) changed sports news in general and particularly baseball with its relatively huge number of games-per-season. Now under the microscope of news organizations that needed to fill 24 programming hours per day, the amount of attention—and salary—paid to major league players grew exponentially. Players who would have sought off-season jobs to make ends meet just 20 years earlier were now well-paid professionals at least, and multi-millionaires in many cases. This super-star status often rested on careers that were not as compelling as those of the baseball heroes of a less media-intense time.

As player contract values soared, and the number of broadcasters, commentators, columnists, and sports writers also multiplied. The competition for a fresh angle on any story became fierce. Media pundits began questioning the high salaries paid to players when on-field performance was deemed less than deserving. Critical commentary was more of a draw than praise, and coverage began to become intensely negative. Players&#x27; personal lives, which had always been off-limits except under extreme circumstances, became the fodder of editorials, insider stories on TV, and features in magazines. When the use of performance-enhancing drugs became an issue, drawing scornful criticism from fans and pundits, the gap between the sports media and the players whom they covered widened further.

With the development of satellite television and digital cable, Major League Baseball launched channels with season-subscription fees, making it possible for fans to watch virtually every game played, in both major leagues, everywhere, in real time.

====Team networks====
The next refinement of baseball on cable was the creation of single-team cable networks. YES Network &amp; NESN, the New York Yankees &amp; Boston Red Sox cable television networks, respectively, took in millions to broadcast games not only in New York and Boston but around the country. These networks generated as much revenue as, or more than, revenue annually for large-market teams&#x27; baseball operations. By fencing these channels off in separate corporate entities, owners were able to exclude the income from consideration during contract negotiations.

===Merchandise, endorsements and sponsorships===
The first merchandise produced in response to the growing popularity of the game was the baseball trading card. The earliest known player cards were produced in 1868 by a pair of New York baseball-equipment purveyors. Since that time, many enterprises, notably tobacco and candy companies, have used trading cards to promote and sell their products. These cards rarely, if ever, provided any benefit directly to the players, but a growing mania for collecting and trading cards helped personalize baseball, giving some fans a more personal connection to their favorite players and introducing them to new ones. Eventually, older cards became “vintage” and rare cards gained in value until the secondary market for trading cards became a billion-dollar industry in itself, with the rarest individuals bringing mid-six-figures to millions of dollars at auction. The advent of the Internet and websites such as eBay provided huge new venues for buyers, sellers and traders, some of whom have made baseball cards their living.

In recent years baseball cards have disassociated from unrelated products like tobacco and bubble-gum, to become products in their own right. Following the exit of competitor Donruss from the baseball-card industry, former bubble-gum giants Topps and Fleer came to dominate that market through exclusive contracts with players and Major League Baseball. Fleer, in turn, exited the market in 2007, leaving Topps as the only card manufacturer with an MLB contract.

Other genuine baseball memorabilia also trades and sells, often at high prices. Much of what is for sale as &quot;memorabilia&quot; is manufactured strictly for sale and rarely has a direct connection to teams or players beyond the labeling, unless signed in person by a player. Souvenir balls caught by fans during important games, especially significant home run balls, have great rarity value, and balls signed by players have always been treasured, traded and sold. The high value of autographs has created new businessmen whose sole means of making a living was acquiring autographs and memorabilia from the athletes. Memorabilia hounds fought with fans to get signatures worth $20, $60, or even $100 or more in their inventory.
Of great value to individual top players are endorsement contracts wherein the player&#x27;s fame is used to sell anything from sports equipment to automobiles, soda and underwear. Top players can receive as much as a million dollars a year or more directly from the companies.

In deals with players, teams and Major League Baseball, large corporations like NIKE and Champion pay big money to make sure that their logos are seen on the clothing and shoes worn by athletes on the field. This &quot;association branding&quot; has become a significant revenue stream. In the late 1990s and into the 21st century, the dugout, the backstops behind home plate, and anywhere else that might be seen by a camera, became fair game for the insertion of advertising.

===Player wealth===
Beginning with the 1972 &quot;Flood v. Kuhn&quot; Supreme Court case, management&#x27;s grip on players, as embodied in the reserve clause, began to slip. In 1976, the Messersmith/McNally Arbitration, also known as the Seitz Decision effectively destroyed the reserve clause. Players who had been dramatically underpaid for generations came to be replaced by players who were paid extremely well for their services.

====Sports agents====
A new generation of sports agents arose, hawking the talents of free-agent players who knew baseball but didn&#x27;t know the business end of the game. The agents broke down what the teams were generating in revenue off of the players&#x27; performances. They calculated what their player might be worth to energize a television contract, or provide more merchandise revenue, or put more fans into stadium seats. Management pushed back; the dynamic produced a variety of compromises which ideally left all parties unsatisfied.

====Business====
Under the Major League Baseball contract, players must play for minimum salary for six years, at which time they become free agents. With players seeking greener pastures when their six years had passed, fewer players remained career members of one ball club. Large-market clubs like the New York Yankees, the Boston Red Sox, and the Los Angeles Dodgers, given big revenues from their cable television operations, signed more and more of the best—and best-known—players away from mid-sized and smaller-market clubs that could not afford to compete on salaries. Major League Baseball, unlike many other sports, does not impose a salary cap on teams. The League does attempt to level the field, as it were, by imposing a luxury tax on teams with very high payrolls, but management is still free to pay players whatever they can afford to attract talent. Some television reporters, commentators, and print sports writers question the kind of money being paid to these players, but just as many on the other side of the debate feel players should bargain for whatever they can get. Still others complain that minor-league players are not fairly compensated by MLB. The tug-of-war between players and management is complex, ongoing, and of great interest to serious students of the professional game.

===Owners and players feud in the 1980s===
All was not well with major league baseball. The many contractual disputes between players and owners came to a head in 1981. Previous players&#x27; strikes (in 1972, 1973 and 1980) had been held in preseason, with only the 1972 stoppage—over benefits—causing disruption to the regular season from April 1 to April 13. Also, in 1976 the owners had locked the players out of Spring training in a dispute over free agency.

The crux of the 1981 dispute was compensation for the loss of players to free agency. After seeing a top-rank player sign with another team, the aggrieved owner wanted a mid-rank player in return, the so-called &quot;sixteenth player&quot; (each club was allowed to protect 15 players from this rule). Under this arrangement, losing lower-rated free agents would produce correspondingly smaller compensation. While this seemed reasonable and fair to owners, players only recently freed from the bondage of the reserve clause found it unacceptable, and withdrew their labor, striking on June 12. Immediately, the U.S. Government&#x27;s National Labor Relations Board ruled that the owners had not been negotiating in good faith, and installed a federal mediator to reach a solution. Seven weeks and 713 games were lost in the middle of the season, before the owners backed down on July 31, settling for proportionally lower-ranked players as compensation. The damaged season was continued as distinct halves starting August 9, with the playoffs reorganized to reflect this.

Throughout the 1980s then, baseball seemed to prosper. The competitive balance between franchises saw fifteen different teams make the World Series, and produced nine different champions during the decade. Also, every season from 1978 through 1987 saw a different World Series winner, a streak unprecedented in baseball history. Turmoil was, however, just around the corner. In 1986, Pete Rose retired from playing for the Cincinnati Reds, having broken Ty Cobb&#x27;s record by accumulating 4,256 hits during his career. He continued as Reds manager until, in 1989 it was revealed that he was being investigated for sports gambling, including the possibility that he had bet on teams with which he was involved. While Rose admitted a gambling problem, he denied having bet on baseball. Federal prosecutor John Dowd investigated and, on his recommendation, Rose was banned from organised baseball, a move which precluded his possible inclusion in the Hall of Fame. In a meeting with Commissioner Giamatti, and having failed in a legal action to prevent it, Rose accepted his punishment. It was, essentially, the same fate that had befallen the Black Sox seventy years previously. (Rose, however, would continue to deny that he bet on baseball until he finally confessed to it in his 2004 autobiography.)

===1994–95 Major League Baseball strike===

Labor relations were still strained. There had been a two-day strike in 1985 (over the division of television revenue money), and a 32-day spring training lockout in 1990 (again over salary structure and benefits). By far the worst action would come in 1994. The seeds were sown earlier: in 1992 the owners sought to renegotiate salary and free-agency terms, but little progress was made. The standoff continued until early 1994 when the existing agreement expired, with no agreement on what was to replace it. Adding to the conflict was the perception that &quot;small market&quot; teams, such as the struggling Seattle Mariners could not compete with high-spending teams such as those in New York or Los Angeles. Their plan was to institute TV revenue sharing to increase equity among the teams and impose a salary cap to keep expenditures down. Players felt that such a cap would reduce their potential earnings. It wasn&#x27;t until later, in 2003, that MLB instituted a luxury tax on high-spending teams in an attempt to encourage more equitable player outlays.

Meanwhile, back in 1994, players officially went on strike on August 12. In September 1994, Major League Baseball announced the cancellation of the World Series for the first time since 1904.

===Home run mania and the second coming of baseball===

The cancellation of the 1994 World Series was a severe embarrassment for Major League Baseball. Fans were outraged and frustrated, their love of the game shaken to its core. The strike was declared an act of war, and fought back: attendance figures and broadcast ratings were lower in 1995 than before the strike. It would be a decade before baseball recovered from the disruption.

On September 6, 1995, Baltimore Orioles shortstop, Cal Ripken Jr., played his 2,131st consecutive game, breaking Lou Gehrig&#x27;s 56-year-old record. This was the first celebratory moment in baseball after the strike. Ripken continued his streak for another three years, voluntarily ending it at 2,632 consecutive games played on September 20, 1998.

In 1997, the expansion Florida Marlins won the World Series in just their fifth season. This made them the third-youngest team to win the Fall Classic (behind the 1903 Boston Red Sox and later the 2001 Arizona Diamondbacks, who won in their fourth season). Virtually all the key players on the 1997 Marlins team were soon traded or let go to save payroll costs (although the 2003 Marlins did win a second world championship).

In 1998, St. Louis Cardinals first baseman Mark McGwire and Chicago Cubs outfielder Sammy Sosa engaged in a home run race for the ages. With both rapidly approaching Roger Maris&#x27;s record of 61 home runs (set in 1961), the entire nation watched as the two power hitters raced to be the first to break into uncharted territory. McGwire reached 62 first on September 8, 1998, with Sosa right behind. Sosa finished the season with 66 home runs, well behind McGwire&#x27;s unheard-of 70. However, recent steroid allegations have marred the season in the minds of many fans.

That same year, the New York Yankees won a record 125 games, including going 11–2 in the postseason, to win the World Series as what many consider to be one of the greatest teams of all time.

McGwire&#x27;s record of 70 would last a mere three years following the meteoric rise of veteran San Francisco Giants left fielder Barry Bonds in 2001. In 2001 Bonds knocked out 73 home runs, breaking the record set by McGwire by hitting his 71st on October 5, 2001. In addition to the home run record, Bonds also set single-season marks for base on balls with 177 (breaking the previous record of 170, set by Babe Ruth in 1923) and slugging percentage with .863 (breaking the mark of .847 set by Ruth in 1920). Bonds continued his torrid home run hitting in the next few seasons, hitting his 660th career home run on April 12, 2004, tying him with his godfather Willie Mays for third place on the all-time career home runs list. He hit his 661st home run the next day, April 13, to take sole possession of third place. Only three years later Bonds surpassed the great Hank Aaron to become baseball&#x27;s most prolific home run hitter.

However, none of Bonds&#x27;s accomplishments in the 2000s have been without controversy. During his run, journalists questioned McGwire about his use of the steroid-precursor androstenedione, and in March 2005 he was unforthcoming when questioned as part of a Congressional inquiry into steroids. Bonds has also been dogged by allegations of steroid use and his involvement in the BALCO drugs scandal, as his personal trainer Greg Anderson pleaded guilty to supplying steroids (without naming Bonds as a recipient). Neither Bonds nor McGwire has failed a drug test at any time since there was no steroid-testing until 2003 after the new August 7, 2002, agreement between owners and players was reached. McGwire retired after the 2001 season; in 2010, he admitted to having used steroids throughout his MLB career.

The 1990s also saw Major League Baseball expand into new markets as four new teams joined the league. In 1993, the Colorado Rockies and Florida Marlins began play, and in just their fifth year of existence, the Marlins became the first wild card team to win the championship. 

The year 1998 brought two more teams into the mix, the Tampa Bay Devil Rays and the Arizona Diamondbacks, the latter of which become the youngest expansion franchise to win the championship. 

The late 1990s were dominated by the New York Yankees, who won four out of five World Series championships from 1996 to 2000.

==The steroid era==

===Drugs, baseball, and records===

The lure of big money pushed players harder and harder to achieve peak performance, while avoiding injury from over-training. The wearying travel schedule and 162-game season meant that amphetamines, usually in the form of pep pills known as &quot;greenies&quot;, had been widespread in baseball since at least the 1960s. Baseball&#x27;s drug scene was no particular secret, having been discussed in &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; and in Jim Bouton&#x27;s groundbreaking book &quot;Ball Four&quot;, but there was virtually no public backlash. Two decades later, however, some Major League players turned to newer performance-enhancing drugs, including ephedra and improved steroids. The eventual consequences for the game, the players and the fans were substantial.

A memo circulated in 1991 by baseball commissioner Fay Vincent stated that &quot;The possession, sale or use of any illegal drug or controlled substance by Major League players and personnel is strictly prohibited ... [and those players involved] are subject to discipline by the commissioner and risk permanent expulsion from the game... This prohibition applies to all illegal drugs and controlled substances, including steroids…&quot; Some general managers of the time do not remember this memo; it was not emphasized or enforced and, confusingly, Vincent himself has disclaimed any direct responsibility for a ban on steroids, saying, &quot;I didn&#x27;t ban steroids...They were banned by Congress&quot;.

Ephedra, an herb used to cure cold symptoms, and also used in some allergy medications, sped up the heart and was considered by some to be a weight-loss short-cut. In 2003, Baltimore Orioles pitcher Steve Bechler had come to training camp 10 pounds overweight. During a workout on February 16, Bechler complained of dizziness and fatigue. His condition worsened while resting in the clubhouse and he was transported to an ambulance on a stretcher. Bechler spent the night in intensive care and died the following morning at the age of 23. The official cause of death was listed as &quot;multi-organ failure due to heat exhaustion&quot;. The coroner&#x27;s report stated it was likely that Bechler had taken three ephedra capsules on an empty stomach prior to working out. Many in the media linked Bechler&#x27;s death to ephedra, raising concerns over the use of performance-enhancing drugs in baseball. Ephedra was banned, and soon the furor died down.

The 1998 home run race had generated nearly unbroken positive publicity, but Barry Bonds&#x27; run for the all-time home run record provoked a backlash over steroids, which increase a person&#x27;s testosterone level and subsequently enable that person to bodybuild with much more ease. Some athletes have said that the main advantage to steroids is not so much the additional power or endurance that they can provide, but that they can drastically shorten rehab time from injury.

Commissioner Bud Selig was criticized, mostly after-the-fact, for a slow response to the rising tide of steroid use in the 1990s. In the early 2000s, as a safe and effective test for anabolic steroids came online and sanctions for their use began to be strictly enforced, some players adopted the use of harder-to-detect human growth hormone (HGH) to increase stamina and strength. Selig, still acting with some caution, imposed a strict anti-drug policy upon its minor league players, who are not part of the Major League Baseball Players Association (the PA). Random drug testing, education and treatment, and strict penalties for those caught became the rule of law. Anyone on a Major League team&#x27;s forty man roster, including 15 minor leaguers that are on that list, were exempt from that program. Eventually, Selig and MLB had strict rules in place that carried meaningful sanctions against players who &quot;juiced.&quot;

In a &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; cover story in 2002, a year after his retirement, Ken Caminiti admitted that he had used steroids during his National League MVP-winning 1996 season, and for several seasons afterwards. Caminiti died unexpectedly of an apparent heart attack in The Bronx at the age of 41; he was pronounced dead on October 10, 2004, at New York&#x27;s Lincoln Memorial Hospital. On November 1, the New York City Medical Examiners Office announced that Caminiti died from &quot;acute intoxication due to the combined effects of cocaine and opiates&quot;, but possibly-steroid-induced coronary artery disease and cardiac hypertrophy (an enlarged heart) were also contributing factors.

In 2005, Jose Canseco published &quot;&quot;, admitting steroid usage and claiming that it was prevalent throughout major league baseball. When the United States Congress decided to investigate the use of steroids in the sport, some of the game&#x27;s most prominent players came under scrutiny for possibly using steroids. These include Barry Bonds, Jason Giambi, and Mark McGwire. Other players, such as Canseco and Gary Sheffield, have admitted to have either knowingly (in Canseco&#x27;s case) or not (Sheffield&#x27;s) using steroids. In confidential testimony to the BALCO Grand Jury (that was later leaked to the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot;), Giambi also admitted steroid use. He later held a press conference in which he appeared to affirm this admission, without actually saying the words. And after an appearance before Congress where he (unlike McGwire) emphatically denied using steroids, &quot;period&quot;, slugger Rafael Palmeiro became the first major star to be suspended (10 days) on August 1, 2005, for violating Major League Baseball&#x27;s newly strengthened ban on controlled substances, including steroids, adopted on August 7, 2002, starting in the 2003 season. Many lesser players (mostly from the minor leagues) have tested positive for use, as well.

In 2006, Commissioner Selig tasked former United States Senator George J. Mitchell to lead an investigation into the use of performance-enhancing drugs in Major League Baseball (MLB) and on December 13, 2007, the 409-page Mitchell Report was released (&#x27;Report to the Commissioner of Baseball of an Independent Investigation into the Illegal Use of Steroids and Other Performance Enhancing Substances by Players in Major League Baseball&#x27;). The report described the use of anabolic steroids and human growth hormone (HGH) in MLB and assessed the effectiveness of the MLB Joint Drug Prevention and Treatment Program. Mitchell also advanced certain recommendations regarding the handling of past illegal drug use and future prevention practices. The report names 89 MLB players who are alleged to have used steroids or drugs.

Baseball has been taken to task for turning a blind eye to its drug problems. It benefited from these drugs in the ever-increasingly competitive fight for airtime and media attention. For example, Commissioner Selig sent a personal representative to the 2007 game where Barry Bonds broke Hank Aaron&#x27;s career home run record, even though Bonds was widely believed at the time to be a steroid user and had been named in connection with the then-ongoing BALCO scandal; many viewed this as Selig giving wink-and-a-nod tacit approval to the use of PEDs. MLB and its Players Association finally announced tougher measures, but many felt that they did not go far enough. 

In December 2009, Sports Illustrated named Baseball&#x27;s Steroid Scandal as the number one sports story of the decade of the 2000s. In 2013, no player from the first &quot;steroid class&quot; of players eligible for the Baseball Hall of Fame was elected. Bonds and Clemens received less than half the number of votes needed, and some voters stated that they would not vote for any first-time candidate who played during the steroid era—whether accused of using banned substances or not—because of the effect the substances had on baseball.

===The BALCO steroids scandal===
In 2002, a major scandal arose when it was discovered that the company Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative (BALCO), owned by Victor Conte, had been producing so-called &quot;designer steroids&quot;, (specifically &quot;the clear&quot; and &quot;the cream&quot;) which are steroids that could not be detected through drug tests at that time. In addition, the company had connections to several San Francisco Bay Area sports trainers and athletes, including the trainers of Jason Giambi and Barry Bonds. This revelation led to a vast criminal investigation into BALCO&#x27;s connections with athletes from baseball and many other sports. Among the many athletes who have been linked to BALCO are Olympic sprinters Tim Montgomery and Marion Jones, Olympic shot-putter C. J. Hunter, as well as Giambi and Bonds.

Grand jury testimony in December 2003—which was illegally leaked to the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; and published in December 2004 under the bylines of Mark Fainaru-Wada and Lance Williams—revealed that the Bay Area Laboratory Cooperative did not merely manufacture nutritional supplements, but also distributed exotic steroids. Williams and Fairanu-Wada also provided compelling evidence that Barry Bonds, arguably the greatest player of his generation, was one of BALCO&#x27;s steroid clients. The paper reported that these substances were probably designer steroids. Bonds said that Greg Anderson gave him a rubbing balm and a liquid substance that at the time he did not believe them to be steroids and thought they were flaxseed oil and other health supplements. Based on the testimony from many of the athletes, Conte and Anderson accepted plea agreements from the government in 2005, on charges they distributed steroids and laundered money, in order to avoid significant time in jail. Conte received a sentence of four months, Anderson received a sentence of three months. Also that year, James Valente, the vice-president of BALCO, and Remi Korchemny, a track coach affiliated with BALCO, pled guilty to distributing banned substances and received probation.

Various baseball pundits, fans, and even players have taken this as confirmation that Bonds used illegal steroids. Bonds never tested positive in tests performed in 2003, 2004, and 2005, which may be attributable to successful obfuscation of continued use as documented in the 2006 book &quot;Game of Shadows&quot;. Before-and-after photos of Bonds, early in his career and late in his career, have led most fans to conclude that he must have used steroids to achieve such startling changes in his physique.

===The Power Age===

While the introduction of steroids certainly increased the power production of greats, there were other factors that drastically increased the power surge after 1994. The factors cited are: smaller sized ballparks than in the past, the &quot;juiced balls&quot; theory claiming that the balls are wound tighter thus travel further following contact with the bat, and &quot;watered down pitching&quot; implying that lesser quality pitchers are up in the Major Leagues due to too many teams. Albeit these factors did play a large role in increasing home run thus scoring totals during this time, others that directly impact ballplayers have an equally important role. As noted earlier, one of those factors is the use of anabolic steroids for increasing muscle mass, which enables hitters to not only hit &quot;mistake&quot; pitches farther, but it also confers faster bat speed, giving hitters a fraction of a second more to adjust to &quot;good&quot; pitches such as a well-placed fastball, slider, changeup, or curveball. A more innocent, but also meaningful factor is better nutrition, as well as scientific training methods and advanced training facilities/equipment which can work without steroids to produce a more potent ballplayer.

In today&#x27;s baseball age, players routinely reach 40 and 50 home runs in a season, a feat that was rare as recently as the 1980s. On the other hand, since the end of the steroid era, the emphasis on swinging for home runs has been accompanied by hitting in general falling off, with batting averages trending downwards towards 1960s levels and strikeouts reaching all-time highs: &quot;each&quot; of the eleven seasons from 2006 through 2016 broke the preceding MLB-total record for strikeouts.

Many modern baseball theorists believe that a new pitch will swing the balance of power back to the pitcher. A pitching revolution would not be unprecedented—several pitches have changed the game of baseball in the past, including the slider in the 1950s and 1960s and the split-fingered fastball in the 1970s to 1990s. Since the 1990s, the changeup has made a resurgence, being thrown masterfully by pitchers such as Tim Lincecum, Pedro Martínez, Trevor Hoffman, Greg Maddux, Matt Cain, Tom Glavine, Johan Santana, Marco Estrada, Justin Verlander, and Cole Hamels. Every so often, the time-honored knuckleball puts in another appearance to bedevil batters; pitchers like Phil Niekro, Jesse Haines, and Hoyt Wilhelm have made the Hall of Fame throwing knuckleballs.

== Popularity in recent decades ==

Baseball has declined in popularity as other sports have grown with the help of television broadcasting. MLB games ended up being about 30 minutes longer on average since the 1960s. To combat this problem, in 2023, MLB instituted the pitch clock to make games end quicker, which forces pitchers to throw within a given time limit, with 62% of fans expressing support during that year&#x27;s season.

== Summary of modern-era major league teams ==
Note: The team names listed below are those currently in use. Some of the franchises have changed their names in the past, in some cases more than once. In the early years of the 20th century, many teams did not have official names, and were referred to by their league and city, or by nicknames created by sportswriters.
*1876 – National League is established
*1900 – National League &quot;Classic Eight&quot; lineup of teams is established: Chicago Cubs, Boston Braves, Brooklyn Dodgers, New York Giants, Philadelphia Phillies, Pittsburgh Pirates, Cincinnati Reds, and St. Louis Cardinals
*1901 – American League is established with eight teams: Boston Red Sox, Chicago White Sox, Cleveland Guardians, Detroit Tigers, Philadelphia Athletics, Washington Senators, Milwaukee Brewers, and Baltimore Orioles
*1902 – Milwaukee Brewers move to St. Louis and become the Browns
*1903 – Baltimore Orioles move to New York and become the Yankees
*1953 – Boston Braves move to Milwaukee
*1954 – St. Louis Browns move to Baltimore and become the Orioles
*1955 – Philadelphia Athletics move to Kansas City
*1958 – New York Giants move to San Francisco; Brooklyn Dodgers move to Los Angeles
*1961 – Washington Senators move to Minneapolis–Saint Paul and become the Minnesota Twins; new Washington Senators (AL) and Los Angeles Angels (AL) created as expansion teams
*1962 – Houston Astros (NL) and New York Mets (NL) created as expansion teams
*1966 – Milwaukee Braves move to Atlanta
*1968 – Kansas City Athletics move to Oakland
*1969 – San Diego Padres (NL), Montreal Expos (NL), Kansas City Royals (AL), and Seattle Pilots (AL) created as expansion teams
*1970 – Seattle Pilots move to Milwaukee and become the Brewers
*1972 – Washington Senators move to Dallas–Fort Worth and become the Texas Rangers
*1977 – Seattle Mariners (AL) and Toronto Blue Jays (AL) created as expansion teams
*1993 – Colorado Rockies (NL) and Miami Marlins (NL) created as expansion teams
*1998 – Arizona Diamondbacks (NL) and Tampa Bay Rays (AL) created as expansion teams; Milwaukee Brewers switch from AL to NL
*2005 – Montreal Expos move to Washington and become the Nationals
*2013 – Houston Astros switch from NL to AL
*2025 – Oakland Athletics move to Sacramento

==See also==

* Fantography
* Timeline of Major League Baseball
* History of baseball outside the United States
* Variations of baseball#History

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* Pepe, Phil. (2005). &quot;Catfish, Yaz, and Hammerin&#x27; Hank: The Unforgettable Era That Transformed Baseball&quot;. Chicago, Triumph Books. 
* 
* 

==External links==
* A History of How the Game Has Changed
* Library of Congress: Spalding Base Ball Guides, 1889–1939
* Cycleback&#x27;s Online Museum of Early Baseball Memorabilia
* Seth Swirsky&#x27;s Baseball Memorabilia Collection
* &quot;Base Ball: A Journal of the Early Game&quot; (archived 8 July 2017)
* &quot;Baseball Research Journal&quot; Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3137791" start="4" end="44" title="History of baseball in the United States" label="history of baseball in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="115" end="123" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371047" start="286" end="303" title="Semi-professional" label="Semi-professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="397" end="415" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="491" end="504" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="539" end="559" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="624" end="649" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="874" end="887" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="913" end="930" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q864938" start="1038" end="1052" title="Henry Chadwick (writer)" label="Henry Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="1140" end="1148" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272299" start="1216" end="1231" title="A. G. Spalding" label="Albert Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668872" start="1396" end="1409" title="Abraham G. Mills" label="Abraham Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="1439" end="1485" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League of Professional Baseball Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q322555" start="1600" end="1615" title="Abner Doubleday" label="Abner Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300128" start="1833" end="1884" title="Doubleday myth" label="myth about Doubleday inventing the game of baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="1906" end="1914" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134721" start="2410" end="2433" title="Knickerbocker Base Ball Club of New York" label="New York Knickerbockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020252" start="2563" end="2581" title="William R. Wheaton" label="William R. Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791564" start="2586" end="2603" title="William H. Tucker (baseball)" label="William H. Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250301" start="2626" end="2645" title="Knickerbocker Rules" label="Knickerbocker Rules"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2787" end="2794" title="Tag out#History" label="soaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154146" start="2969" end="2977" title="kickball" label="kickball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="3177" end="3184" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368562" start="3593" end="3607" title="Elysian Fields, Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Elysian Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q138578" start="3611" end="3630" title="Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Hoboken, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="4164" end="4171" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="4368" end="4409" title="National Association of Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4737" end="4746" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5000" end="5010" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="5052" end="5064" title="professional" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074399" start="5229" end="5253" title="Cincinnati Red Stockings" label="Cincinnati Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251693" start="5410" end="5422" title="Harry Wright" label="Harry Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6098742" start="5467" end="5486" title="Ivers Whitney Adams" label="Ivers Whitney Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="5543" end="5564" title="Boston Base Ball Club" label="Boston Base Ball Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172108" start="5610" end="5616" title="Corona, Queens" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="5633" end="5639" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5653" end="5666" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="5747" end="5755" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q956715" start="5784" end="5792" title="Brooklyn Atlantics" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310422" start="5794" end="5803" title="Excelsior of Brooklyn" label="Excelsior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264797" start="5816" end="5823" title="Eckford of Brooklyn" label="Eckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="5866" end="5875" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134721" start="5905" end="5918" title="Knickerbocker Base Ball Club of New York" label="Knickerbocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6041" end="6050" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="6095" end="6102" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535960" start="6146" end="6155" title="town ball" label="town ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6166" end="6178" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750559" start="6187" end="6205" title="Massachusetts Game" label="Massachusetts Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="6216" end="6227" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250301" start="6267" end="6293" title="Knickerbocker Rules" label="&amp;quot;New York&amp;quot; style"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="6454" end="6472" title="First-class cricket" label="played at the time"/>
<link wikidata="Q52424243" start="6474" end="6488" title="William Humber" label="William Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="6798" end="6839" title="National Association of Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q956715" start="7060" end="7085" title="Brooklyn Atlantics" label="Atlantic Club of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264147" start="7184" end="7202" title="New York Mutuals" label="Mutual of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554685" start="7273" end="7277" title="1865 in baseball" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q455595" start="7885" end="7895" title="amateurism" label="amateurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250696" start="7978" end="7993" title="Jim Creighton" label="James Creighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310422" start="7997" end="8006" title="Excelsior of Brooklyn" label="Excelsior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313819" start="8056" end="8060" title="1866 in sports" label="1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264750" start="8085" end="8109" title="Athletic of Philadelphia" label="Athletic of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556136" start="8145" end="8153" title="Lip Pike" label="Lip Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783006" start="8576" end="8580" title="1868 in sports" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115062" start="8643" end="8647" title="1869 in sports" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="8722" end="8734" title="professional" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074399" start="8741" end="8765" title="Cincinnati Red Stockings" label="Cincinnati Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115062" start="9004" end="9008" title="1869 in sports" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738356" start="9049" end="9061" title="Major North American professional sports teams" label="major league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="9075" end="9129" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="9235" end="9247" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564512" start="9274" end="9289" title="William Hulbert" label="William Hulbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="9374" end="9388" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q70520" start="9518" end="9536" title="Great Chicago Fire" label="Great Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9838" end="9849" title="Ivers Whitney Adams#Baseball" label="Boston club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242195" start="9980" end="9990" title="Davy Force" label="Davy Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="10471" end="10518" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League of Professional Base Ball Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="10601" end="10631" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Base Ball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="10703" end="10718" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="10720" end="10738" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="10740" end="10759" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="10764" end="10780" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="10795" end="10810" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="11026" end="11080" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046626" start="11897" end="11923" title="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement" label="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="11956" end="11981" title="Baseball color line" label="exclude non-white players"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="12107" end="12122" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252979" start="12262" end="12284" title="Moses Fleetwood Walker" label="Moses Fleetwood Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16023509" start="12301" end="12313" title="Weldy Walker" label="Weldy Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q711825" start="12745" end="12755" title="Larry Doby" label="Larry Doby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="12979" end="12993" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="13170" end="13190" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13424" end="13456" title="List of pre-World Series baseball champions#Champions from 1876 to 1904" label="World&amp;#x27;s Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="13480" end="13492" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276659" start="13499" end="13516" title="Union Association" label="Union Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276641" start="13565" end="13585" title="Players&amp;#x27; League" label="Players&amp;#x27; League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="13632" end="13652" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q766590" start="14863" end="14874" title="Ban Johnson" label="Ban Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="15065" end="15079" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="15129" end="15141" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Grand Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="15143" end="15155" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="15157" end="15168" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="15170" end="15179" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868005" start="15181" end="15192" title="Minneapolis Millers" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="15194" end="15204" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Sioux City"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="15209" end="15215" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="15278" end="15293" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335869" start="15580" end="15595" title="Napoleon Lajoie" label="Napoleon Lajoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208358" start="16108" end="16122" title="Eastern League (1938–2020)" label="Eastern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147709" start="16133" end="16150" title="Patrick T. Powers" label="Patrick T. Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="16189" end="16242" title="Minor League Baseball" label="National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q126019" start="16399" end="16412" title="Branch Rickey" label="Branch Rickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="17164" end="17178" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="17288" end="17300" title="Baseball/World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180894" start="18858" end="18871" title="dead-ball era" label="dead-ball era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544179" start="19557" end="19568" title="Rube Foster" label="Rube Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987609" start="19603" end="19624" title="Negro National League (1920–1931)" label="Negro National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330071" start="19655" end="19677" title="Eastern Colored League" label="Eastern Colored League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="19730" end="19743" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="19907" end="19923" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147465" start="19949" end="19967" title="Negro World Series" label="Negro World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649727" start="20086" end="20090" title="1947 Major League Baseball season" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="20092" end="20107" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="20135" end="20151" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="20166" end="20179" title="Baseball color line" label="color barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="20360" end="20370" title="racial integration" label="integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575602" start="20718" end="20722" title="1973 Major League Baseball season" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="20728" end="20745" title="designated hitter" label="designated hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867557" start="21314" end="21336" title="Major League Baseball Players Association" label="Baseball Players Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="21472" end="21492" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="1994 baseball strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="21730" end="21751" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q722059" start="21922" end="21936" title="Walter Johnson" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="21938" end="21946" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q73086" start="21948" end="21965" title="Christy Mathewson" label="Christy Mathewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972390" start="21971" end="21997" title="Grover Cleveland Alexander" label="Grover Cleveland Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143726" start="23204" end="23209" title="bunt (baseball)" label="bunts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="23211" end="23222" title="stolen base" label="stolen base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316903" start="23383" end="23395" title="Honus Wagner" label="Honus Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143358" start="23428" end="23437" title="shortstop" label="shortstop"/>
<link wikidata="Q552828" start="23481" end="23488" title="Ty Cobb" label="Ty Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="23532" end="23547" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985783" start="23610" end="23628" title="1908 Major League Baseball season" label="1908 pennant races"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558862" start="23820" end="23835" title="1908 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558826" start="23840" end="23852" title="1908 Chicago Cubs season" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="23874" end="23886" title="Polo Grounds III" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562604" start="23927" end="23938" title="Fred Merkle" label="Fred Merkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702321" start="24406" end="24418" title="Johnny Evers" label="Johnny Evers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558903" start="25104" end="25116" title="1908 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018688" start="25337" end="25356" title="Merkle&amp;#x27;s Boner" label="Merkle&amp;#x27;s Boner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049635" start="26076" end="26087" title="1901 Major League Baseball season" label="1901 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750255" start="26321" end="26334" title="Tiger Stadium (Detroit)" label="Tiger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="26338" end="26345" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496044" start="26347" end="26357" title="Shibe Park" label="Shibe Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="26361" end="26373" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278537" start="26375" end="26387" title="Ebbets Field" label="Ebbets Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="26391" end="26399" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="26405" end="26417" title="Polo Grounds III" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="26421" end="26430" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="26432" end="26438" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="26446" end="26457" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052807" start="26469" end="26482" title="Wrigley Field" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114772" start="26487" end="26500" title="Comiskey Park" label="Comiskey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208358" start="26531" end="26545" title="Eastern League (1938–2020)" label="Eastern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="26606" end="26619" title="Negro leagues" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986271" start="26759" end="26763" title="1909 Major League Baseball season" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861985" start="26862" end="26874" title="barnstorm (sports)" label="barnstorming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640726" start="27099" end="27108" title="Hal Chase" label="Hal Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q552828" start="27312" end="27319" title="Ty Cobb" label="Ty Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205542" start="27324" end="27336" title="Tris Speaker" label="Tris Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q846529" start="27489" end="27506" title="1919 World Series" label="1919 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349597" start="27531" end="27548" title="Black Sox scandal" label="Black Sox scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560619" start="27607" end="27624" title="1919 Chicago White Sox season" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560620" start="27831" end="27846" title="1919 Cincinnati Reds season" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="27920" end="27928" title="gamblers" label="gamblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q664702" start="27933" end="27942" title="bookmaker" label="bookmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q597832" start="28472" end="28488" title="Charles Comiskey" label="Charles Comiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096112" start="28957" end="28988" title="Chick Gandil" label="Arnold &amp;quot;Chick&amp;quot; Gandil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284287" start="29062" end="29095" title="Joseph &amp;quot;Sport&amp;quot; Sullivan" label="Joseph &amp;quot;Sport&amp;quot; Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q696052" start="29272" end="29288" title="Arnold Rothstein" label="Arnold Rothstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q318133" start="29360" end="29370" title="Abe Attell" label="Abe Attell"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="29395" end="29401" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560849" start="29469" end="29489" title="1920 Major League Baseball season" label="1920 baseball season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="29587" end="29597" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654269" start="29694" end="29727" title="Swede Risberg" label="Charles &amp;quot;Swede&amp;quot; Risberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096112" start="29729" end="29760" title="Chick Gandil" label="Arnold &amp;quot;Chick&amp;quot; Gandil"/>
<link wikidata="Q955322" start="29762" end="29794" title="Shoeless Joe Jackson" label="&amp;quot;Shoeless&amp;quot; Joe Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652729" start="29796" end="29826" title="Happy Felsch" label="Oscar &amp;quot;Happy&amp;quot; Felsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335930" start="29828" end="29841" title="Eddie Cicotte" label="Eddie Cicotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982964" start="29843" end="29873" title="Buck Weaver" label="George &amp;quot;Buck&amp;quot; Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495921" start="29875" end="29888" title="Fred McMullin" label="Fred McMullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517116" start="29894" end="29927" title="Lefty Williams" label="Claude &amp;quot;Lefty&amp;quot; Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106481" start="30117" end="30140" title="Kenesaw Mountain Landis" label="Kenesaw Mountain Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051088" start="30157" end="30181" title="Commissioner of Baseball" label="commissioner of baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="30703" end="30719" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="30724" end="30732" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252979" start="30827" end="30849" title="Moses Fleetwood Walker" label="Moses Fleetwood Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="31027" end="31037" title="Baseball color line" label="color line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="31126" end="31139" title="Negro leagues" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31354" end="31404" title="Negro league baseball#Negro major leagues" label="seven relatively successful leagues beginning 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q127334" start="31509" end="31513" title="1885 in baseball" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006667" start="31557" end="31569" title="Cuban Giants" label="Cuban Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971637" start="31599" end="31632" title="National Colored Base Ball League" label="National Colored Base Ball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2810673" start="31644" end="31648" title="1887 in baseball" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987577" start="31697" end="31718" title="Negro American League" label="Negro American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273453" start="31722" end="31726" title="1951 in baseball" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972699" start="31806" end="31825" title="Indianapolis Clowns" label="Indianapolis Clowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="32043" end="32058" title="Latin Americans" label="Latin Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349768" start="32287" end="32303" title="Mexican Baseball" label="Mexican Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311378" start="32809" end="32817" title="spitball" label="spitball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147525" start="33117" end="33128" title="Ray Chapman" label="Ray Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040536" start="33182" end="33191" title="Carl Mays" label="Carl Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="33888" end="33902" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="33944" end="33960" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="33977" end="33995" title="Babe Ruth" label="George Herman Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q262945" start="35025" end="35039" title="Rogers Hornsby" label="Rogers Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="35267" end="35277" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329352" start="35279" end="35290" title="Jimmie Foxx" label="Jimmie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="35294" end="35306" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q687282" start="35308" end="35322" title="Hank Greenberg" label="Hank Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="35326" end="35333" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371347" start="35349" end="35360" title="Hack Wilson" label="Hack Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="35451" end="35463" title="Baseball/World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="35589" end="35608" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16275924" start="35713" end="35726" title="Gashouse Gang" label="Gashouse Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738181" start="35739" end="35760" title="Major League Baseball on the radio" label="first radio broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="36087" end="36103" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="36596" end="36617" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025016" start="36621" end="36642" title="Cooperstown, New York" label="Cooperstown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q552828" start="36685" end="36692" title="Ty Cobb" label="Ty Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q722059" start="36694" end="36708" title="Walter Johnson" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q73086" start="36710" end="36727" title="Christy Mathewson" label="Christy Mathewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="36729" end="36738" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316903" start="36743" end="36755" title="Honus Wagner" label="Honus Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="36900" end="36910" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149868" start="36932" end="36944" title="left fielder" label="left fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="36945" end="36957" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q297142" start="37058" end="37070" title="Joe DiMaggio" label="Joe DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356229" start="37091" end="37111" title="Joe DiMaggio&amp;#x27;s 56-game hitting streak" label="56 consecutive games"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="37198" end="37210" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="37221" end="37243" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="37258" end="37279" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="37640" end="37645" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="37771" end="37781" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328142" start="37802" end="37813" title="Stan Musial" label="Stan Musial"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="37822" end="37841" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052634" start="37933" end="37980" title="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League" label="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="38617" end="38634" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q39372" start="38989" end="39004" title="Tuskegee Airmen" label="Tuskegee Airmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635689" start="39006" end="39029" title="366th Infantry Regiment" label="366th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="39094" end="39110" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="39129" end="39141" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="39268" end="39281" title="Negro leagues" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="39337" end="39352" title="New York Giants (NL)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q712153" start="39367" end="39378" title="John McGraw" label="John McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084938" start="39409" end="39422" title="Charlie Grant" label="Charlie Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="39634" end="39652" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040584" start="39694" end="39705" title="Josh Gibson" label="Josh Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030254" start="39737" end="39756" title="Washington Senators (1901–60)" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106481" start="39853" end="39876" title="Kenesaw Mountain Landis" label="Kenesaw Mountain Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746900" start="39946" end="39956" title="Bill Veeck" label="Bill Veeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="40005" end="40026" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q573029" start="40213" end="40227" title="Happy Chandler" label="Happy Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q126019" start="40384" end="40397" title="Branch Rickey" label="Branch Rickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="40405" end="40421" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="41127" end="41143" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="41389" end="41404" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q731544" start="41427" end="41447" title="Kansas City Monarchs" label="Kansas City Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="41877" end="41889" title="minor league" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446304" start="41900" end="41915" title="Montreal Royals" label="Montreal Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="42026" end="42034" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="42079" end="42092" title="Baseball color line" label="color barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="42177" end="42193" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278537" start="42197" end="42209" title="Ebbets Field" label="Ebbets Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="42253" end="42268" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q711825" start="42302" end="42312" title="Larry Doby" label="Larry Doby"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="42320" end="42337" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q735795" start="42442" end="42456" title="Roy Campanella" label="Roy Campanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q555730" start="42496" end="42509" title="Satchel Paige" label="Satchel Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="42770" end="42781" title="Racial integration" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="42882" end="42896" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259864" start="42976" end="42989" title="Pumpsie Green" label="Pumpsie Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="43190" end="43208" title="MLB Rookie of the Year Award" label="Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="43294" end="43308" title="Latin Americans" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963399" start="43415" end="43431" title="Chico Carrasquel" label="Chico Carrasquel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315554" start="43459" end="43472" title="Minnie Miñoso" label="Minnie Miñoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="43500" end="43509" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317158" start="44037" end="44051" title="Frank Robinson" label="Frank Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="44075" end="44093" title="MLB Rookie of the Year Award" label="Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="44103" end="44118" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="44152" end="44169" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="44693" end="44705" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173396" start="44713" end="44726" title="Dave Winfield" label="Dave Winfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797381" start="44956" end="44969" title="Arturo Moreno" label="Arturo Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="45044" end="45058" title="Anaheim Angels" label="Anaheim Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353669" start="45940" end="45960" title="Pacific Coast League" label="Pacific Coast League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139426" start="45987" end="46002" title="Hollywood Stars" label="Hollywood Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259700" start="46004" end="46022" title="Los Angeles Angels (PCL)" label="Los Angeles Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347862" start="46024" end="46036" title="Oakland Oaks (PCL)" label="Oakland Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231881" start="46038" end="46054" title="Portland Beavers" label="Portland Beavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397025" start="46056" end="46073" title="Sacramento Solons" label="Sacramento Solons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476692" start="46075" end="46094" title="San Francisco Seals (baseball)" label="San Francisco Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360389" start="46096" end="46112" title="San Diego Padres (PCL)" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417827" start="46114" end="46130" title="Seattle Rainiers" label="Seattle Rainiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="46179" end="46232" title="Minor League Baseball" label="National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131927" start="46477" end="46490" title="Pants Rowland" label="Pants Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106481" start="46549" end="46572" title="Kenesaw Mountain Landis" label="Kenesaw Mountain Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q573029" start="46577" end="46591" title="Happy Chandler" label="Happy Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="47520" end="47533" title="Boston Braves (baseball)" label="Boston Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="47676" end="47693" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870201" start="47860" end="47882" title="Philadelphia Athletics" label="Philadelphia Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="48174" end="48190" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="48199" end="48214" title="New York Giants (NL)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565843" start="48444" end="48464" title="Walter O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Walter O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476692" start="48593" end="48612" title="San Francisco Seals (baseball)" label="San Francisco Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="48619" end="48635" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287915" start="48824" end="48834" title="Dodgers–Giants rivalry" label="It is said"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="48950" end="48969" title="southern California" label="southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="48993" end="49012" title="northern California" label="northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="49239" end="49257" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="Los Angeles Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="49547" end="49556" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="49603" end="49620" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q111678972" start="49716" end="49735" title="Washington Senators (1961–71)" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49817" end="49834" title="Washington Senators (1901–1960)#Washington Nationals/Senators: 1901–1960" label="previous Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="49869" end="49874" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="49922" end="49933" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="50230" end="50247" title="Houston Colt .45s" label="Houston Colt .45s"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="50252" end="50265" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="50326" end="50344" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442149" start="50349" end="50363" title="Seattle Pilots" label="Seattle Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="50533" end="50550" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="50608" end="50622" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="50627" end="50643" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="51220" end="51233" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="51315" end="51331" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="51336" end="51353" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q388858" start="51464" end="51480" title="Colorado Rockies" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="51485" end="51500" title="Florida Marlins" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="51662" end="51671" title="wild card (sports)" label="wild card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049755" start="51813" end="51828" title="Division Series" label="division series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51850" end="51887" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike " label="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike "/>
<link wikidata="Q1134635" start="51908" end="51925" title="1994 World Series" label="1994 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q636375" start="51975" end="51992" title="1995 World Series" label="1995 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="52082" end="52103" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="52109" end="52129" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="52166" end="52186" title="Tampa Bay Devil Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="52534" end="52555" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="52840" end="52849" title="Washington Nationals" label="Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927496" start="52890" end="52899" title="Bud Selig" label="Bud Selig"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="52949" end="52963" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q956100" start="53406" end="53422" title="Carl Yastrzemski" label="Carl Yastrzemski"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="53530" end="53544" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703370" start="53553" end="53565" title="Denny McLain" label="Denny McLain"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="53636" end="53655" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131535" start="53673" end="53683" title="Bob Gibson" label="Bob Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150471" start="53916" end="53927" title="strike zone" label="strike zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="54112" end="54129" title="designated hitter" label="designated hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276641" start="54352" end="54397" title="Brotherhood of Professional Base Ball Players" label="Brotherhood of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="54615" end="54626" title="trade union" label="labor union"/>
<link wikidata="Q196090" start="54636" end="54649" title="Marvin Miller" label="Marvin Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867557" start="54662" end="54703" title="Major League Baseball Players Association" label="Major League Baseball Players Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="54728" end="54740" title="Sandy Koufax" label="Sandy Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q972358" start="54745" end="54757" title="Don Drysdale" label="Don Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="54763" end="54777" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="54794" end="54813" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124625691" start="54850" end="54869" title="Koufax–Drysdale holdout" label="jointly holding out"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="55040" end="55059" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195372" start="55071" end="55081" title="Curt Flood" label="Curt Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="55145" end="55159" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="13th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="55164" end="55173" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="55232" end="55259" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761039" start="55427" end="55443" title="Andy Messersmith" label="Andy Messersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229363" start="55463" end="55475" title="Dave McNally" label="Dave McNally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="55483" end="55497" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032017" start="55580" end="55607" title="Seitz decision" label="an arbitrator&amp;#x27;s ruling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573619" start="55945" end="55969" title="1969 New York Mets season" label="&amp;quot;Miracle Mets&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="56244" end="56261" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Swinging A&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q325250" start="56418" end="56432" title="Catfish Hunter" label="Catfish Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q434503" start="56434" end="56443" title="Vida Blue" label="Vida Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q959112" start="56448" end="56462" title="Reggie Jackson" label="Reggie Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717762" start="56584" end="56603" title="the Big Red Machine" label="the Big Red Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133919" start="56625" end="56640" title="Sparky Anderson" label="Sparky Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="56669" end="56678" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="56690" end="56704" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Famers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155003" start="56717" end="56729" title="Johnny Bench" label="Johnny Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176269" start="56734" end="56744" title="Joe Morgan" label="Joe Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="56858" end="56868" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="56876" end="56890" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="56933" end="56942" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q56223802" start="57081" end="57092" title="total bases" label="total bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q721948" start="57166" end="57176" title="Nolan Ryan" label="Nolan Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="57188" end="57212" title="no-hitter" label="&amp;quot;no-hit&amp;quot; games"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="57903" end="57911" title="steroids" label="steroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198850" start="59002" end="59013" title="pitch count" label="pitch count"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301795" start="60232" end="60243" title="Maury Wills" label="Maury Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="60820" end="60836" title="cable television" label="cable revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="60923" end="60927" title="TBS (TV network)" label="WTBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q193368" start="60929" end="60939" title="Ted Turner" label="Ted Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="61069" end="61073" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q46578" start="61139" end="61153" title="Fox Sports Net" label="Fox Sports Net"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856894" start="62364" end="62391" title="doping in baseball" label="performance-enhancing drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="62568" end="62588" title="satellite television" label="satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276046" start="62593" end="62606" title="digital cable" label="digital cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q903249" start="62906" end="62917" title="YES Network" label="YES Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338942" start="62924" end="62928" title="New England Sports Network" label="NESN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190417" start="63520" end="63541" title="baseball card" label="baseball trading card"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="64309" end="64317" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="64339" end="64343" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296876" start="64630" end="64637" title="Donruss" label="Donruss"/>
<link wikidata="Q910541" start="64696" end="64701" title="Topps" label="Topps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427696" start="64706" end="64711" title="Fleer" label="Fleer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460083" start="66461" end="66474" title="Flood v. Kuhn" label="Flood v. Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="66555" end="66569" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032017" start="66650" end="66664" title="Seitz decision" label="Seitz Decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q144662" start="66890" end="66903" title="sports agents" label="sports agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281541" start="68134" end="68144" title="Luxury tax (sports)" label="luxury tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622430" start="68223" end="68247" title="List of highest paid Major League Baseball players" label="whatever they can afford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155689" start="68984" end="68992" title="1972 Major League Baseball strike" label="stoppage"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="69129" end="69144" title="Spring training" label="Spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="69163" end="69174" title="free agent" label="free agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="69751" end="69759" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="striking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="69812" end="69842" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="70386" end="70398" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="70635" end="70644" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="70674" end="70689" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q552828" start="70705" end="70712" title="Ty Cobb" label="Ty Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302655" start="71088" end="71106" title="Dowd Report" label="his recommendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="71202" end="71214" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q278559" start="71247" end="71255" title="A. Bartlett Giamatti" label="Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582371" start="71654" end="71668" title="1985 Major League Baseball strike" label="two-day strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586102" start="71732" end="71762" title="1990 Major League Baseball lockout" label="32-day spring training lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="71940" end="71951" title="free agent" label="free-agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="72213" end="72229" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="72290" end="72298" title="New York Yankees" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="72302" end="72313" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318025" start="72346" end="72361" title="revenue sharing" label="revenue sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369344" start="72410" end="72420" title="salary cap" label="salary cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281541" start="72575" end="72585" title="Luxury tax (sports)" label="luxury tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134635" start="72816" end="72828" title="1994 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134635" start="72941" end="72958" title="1994 World Series" label="1994 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="73223" end="73229" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="73322" end="73339" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143358" start="73340" end="73349" title="shortstop" label="shortstop"/>
<link wikidata="Q731168" start="73351" end="73365" title="Cal Ripken Jr." label="Cal Ripken Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="73413" end="73423" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="73511" end="73517" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738158" start="73603" end="73627" title="Major League Baseball consecutive games played streaks" label="consecutive games played"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="73675" end="73690" title="Florida Marlins" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317331" start="73699" end="73711" title="1997 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="73820" end="73834" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="73854" end="73874" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491156" start="73946" end="73958" title="1997 Florida Marlins season" label="1997 Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601379" start="74027" end="74039" title="2003 Florida Marlins season" label="2003 Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187392" start="74057" end="74075" title="2003 World Series" label="world championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="74088" end="74107" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="74108" end="74121" title="first baseman" label="first baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q462481" start="74122" end="74134" title="Mark McGwire" label="Mark McGwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="74139" end="74151" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142885" start="74152" end="74162" title="outfielder" label="outfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q455117" start="74163" end="74173" title="Sammy Sosa" label="Sammy Sosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593773" start="74187" end="74200" title="1998 Major League Baseball home run record chase" label="home run race"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="74245" end="74256" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q309438" start="74583" end="74590" title="anabolic steroid" label="steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="74674" end="74690" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="74944" end="74964" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149868" start="74965" end="74977" title="left fielder" label="left fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="74978" end="74989" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137106" start="75028" end="75037" title="List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders" label="home runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="75189" end="75202" title="base on balls" label="base on balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="75257" end="75266" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815849" start="75280" end="75299" title="slugging percentage" label="slugging percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="75510" end="75521" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643442" start="75545" end="75570" title="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders" label="all-time career home runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q411064" start="75961" end="75976" title="androstenedione" label="androstenedione"/>
<link wikidata="Q795416" start="76167" end="76172" title="BALCO" label="BALCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116177" start="76212" end="76225" title="Greg Anderson (trainer)" label="Greg Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q388858" start="76716" end="76732" title="Colorado Rockies" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="76737" end="76752" title="Florida Marlins" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="76934" end="76954" title="Tampa Bay Devil Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="76963" end="76983" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="77109" end="77125" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="77152" end="77164" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="77442" end="77453" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="77662" end="77680" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045044" start="77694" end="77704" title="Jim Bouton" label="Jim Bouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881011" start="77738" end="77747" title="Ball Four" label="Ball Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168187" start="77869" end="77896" title="performance-enhancing drugs" label="performance-enhancing drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13530468" start="77908" end="77915" title="Ephedra (medicine)" label="ephedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385817" start="77929" end="77937" title="Ergogenic use of anabolic steroids" label="steroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067674" start="78074" end="78085" title="Fay Vincent" label="Fay Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611901" start="78933" end="78946" title="Steve Bechler" label="Steve Bechler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593773" start="79693" end="79711" title="1998 Major League Baseball home run record chase" label="1998 home run race"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643442" start="79796" end="79820" title="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders" label="all-time home run record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="79887" end="79899" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927496" start="80184" end="80193" title="Bud Selig" label="Bud Selig"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="80492" end="80518" title="Growth hormone" label="human growth hormone (HGH)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867557" start="80681" end="80722" title="Major League Baseball Players Association" label="Major League Baseball Players Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="81116" end="81134" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147649" start="81191" end="81203" title="Ken Caminiti" label="Ken Caminiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="81385" end="81394" title="The Bronx" label="The Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550756" start="81476" end="81501" title="Lincoln Hospital (Bronx, New York)" label="Lincoln Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q982714" start="81817" end="81829" title="Jose Canseco" label="Jose Canseco"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="82146" end="82157" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683912" start="82159" end="82171" title="Jason Giambi" label="Jason Giambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q462481" start="82177" end="82189" title="Mark McGwire" label="Mark McGwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098626" start="82226" end="82240" title="Gary Sheffield" label="Gary Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q795416" start="82381" end="82386" title="BALCO" label="BALCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="82387" end="82397" title="Grand Jury" label="Grand Jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="82434" end="82457" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081144" start="82745" end="82760" title="Rafael Palmeiro" label="Rafael Palmeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q908951" start="83316" end="83331" title="Mitchell Report (baseball)" label="Mitchell Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q795416" start="85279" end="85284" title="BALCO" label="BALCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q979655" start="85296" end="85308" title="Victor Conte" label="Victor Conte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200715" start="85339" end="85368" title="Designer drug" label="&amp;quot;designer steroids&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q416940" start="85384" end="85405" title="tetrahydrogestrinone" label="&amp;quot;the clear&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q260875" start="85416" end="85425" title="the cream" label="the cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683912" start="85643" end="85655" title="Jason Giambi" label="Jason Giambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="85660" end="85671" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q316170" start="85883" end="85897" title="Tim Montgomery" label="Tim Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q209396" start="85902" end="85914" title="Marion Jones" label="Marion Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136845" start="85936" end="85948" title="C. J. Hunter" label="C. J. Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="86058" end="86081" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116177" start="86574" end="86587" title="Greg Anderson (trainer)" label="Greg Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519952" start="87550" end="87565" title="Game of Shadows" label="Game of Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6305196" start="88023" end="88054" title="juiced ball theory" label="&amp;quot;juiced balls&amp;quot; theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q608445" start="89761" end="89767" title="Slider (baseball)" label="slider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140647" start="89799" end="89822" title="fastball" label="split-fingered fastball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061998" start="89867" end="89875" title="changeup" label="changeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604" start="89944" end="89956" title="Tim Lincecum" label="Tim Lincecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q726918" start="89958" end="89972" title="Pedro Martínez" label="Pedro Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071829" start="89974" end="89988" title="Trevor Hoffman" label="Trevor Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q709138" start="89990" end="90001" title="Greg Maddux" label="Greg Maddux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185532" start="90003" end="90012" title="Matt Cain" label="Matt Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q943668" start="90014" end="90025" title="Tom Glavine" label="Tom Glavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q919620" start="90027" end="90040" title="Johan Santana" label="Johan Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290090" start="90042" end="90055" title="Marco Estrada (baseball)" label="Marco Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q981788" start="90057" end="90073" title="Justin Verlander" label="Justin Verlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107989" start="90079" end="90090" title="Cole Hamels" label="Cole Hamels"/>
<link wikidata="Q44459" start="90125" end="90136" title="knuckleball" label="knuckleball"/>
<link wikidata="Q114468" start="90198" end="90209" title="Phil Niekro" label="Phil Niekro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651169" start="90211" end="90223" title="Jesse Haines" label="Jesse Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q326963" start="90229" end="90241" title="Hoyt Wilhelm" label="Hoyt Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25041503" start="90563" end="90574" title="pitch clock" label="pitch clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434390" start="93032" end="93043" title="Fantography" label="Fantography"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034265" start="93046" end="93079" title="Timeline of Major League Baseball" label="Timeline of Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867452" start="93082" end="93127" title="History of baseball outside the United States" label="History of baseball outside the United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93130" end="93160" title="Variations of baseball#History" label="Variations of baseball#History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3858" wikidata="Q1514249" url="?curid=3858" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award">
<text>The Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award (MVP) is an annual Major League Baseball (MLB) award given to one outstanding player in the American League and one in the National League. The award has been presented by the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America (BBWAA) since 1931.

==History==
Since 1931, the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America (BBWAA) has bestowed a most valuable player award to a player in the National League and a player in the American League. Before 1931, two similar awards were issued—the League Award was issued during 1922–1928 in the American League and during 1924–1929 in the National League, and during 1911–1914, the Chalmers Award was issued to a player in each league. Criteria and a list of winners for these two earlier awards are detailed in below sections.

MVP voting takes place before the postseason, but the results are not announced until after the World Series. The BBWAA began by polling three writers in each league city in 1938, reducing that number to two per league city in 1961. The BBWAA does not offer a clear-cut definition of what &quot;most valuable&quot; means, instead leaving the judgment to the individual voters.

In 1944, the award was named after Kenesaw Mountain Landis, the first Commissioner of Baseball, who served from 1920 until his death on November 25, 1944. Formally named the Kenesaw Mountain Landis Memorial Baseball Award, that naming appeared on a plaque given to winning players. Starting in 2020, Landis&#x27; name no longer appears on the MVP plaque after the BBWAA received complaints from several former MVP winners about Landis&#x27; role against the integration of MLB.

First basemen, with 35 winners, have won the most MVPs among infielders, followed by second basemen (16), third basemen (15), and shortstops (15). Of the 25 pitchers who have won the award, 15 are right-handed while 10 are left-handed. Walter Johnson, Carl Hubbell, and Hal Newhouser are the only pitchers who have won multiple times, with Newhouser winning consecutively in 1944 and 1945.

Hank Greenberg, Stan Musial, Alex Rodriguez, and Robin Yount have won at different positions, while Rodriguez is the only player who has won the award with two different teams at two different positions. Rodriguez and Andre Dawson are the only players to win the award while on a last-place team, the 2003 Texas Rangers and 1987 Chicago Cubs, respectively. Barry Bonds has won the most often (seven times) and the most consecutively (four from 2001 to 2004). Jimmie Foxx was the first player to win multiple times – 10 players have won three times, and 19 have won twice. Frank Robinson and Shohei Ohtani are the only players to win the award in both the American and National Leagues, with Ohtani being the first to win in both leagues in consecutive seasons.

The award&#x27;s only tie occurred in the National League in 1979, when Keith Hernandez and Willie Stargell received an equal number of points. There have been 23 unanimous winners, who received all the first-place votes. The New York Yankees have the most winning players with 24, followed by the St. Louis Cardinals with 21 winners. The award has never been presented to a member of the following three teams: Arizona Diamondbacks, New York Mets, and Tampa Bay Rays.

In recent decades, pitchers have rarely won the award. When Shohei Ohtani won the AL award in 2021, he became the first pitcher in either league to be named the MVP since Clayton Kershaw in 2014, and the first in the American League since Justin Verlander in 2011. Ohtani also became the first two-way player to win the award and in 2023, he became the first player in MLB history to win MVP by unanimous vote twice. Since the creation of the Cy Young Award in 1956, he is the only pitcher to win an MVP award without winning a Cy Young in the same year (Don Newcombe, Sandy Koufax, Bob Gibson, Denny McLain, Vida Blue, Rollie Fingers, Willie Hernández, Roger Clemens, Dennis Eckersley, Justin Verlander, and Clayton Kershaw all won a Cy Young award in their MVP seasons). Ohtani is also the only MVP winner to have played most of his games as a designated hitter, a position that normally does not contribute on defense. In 2024, after winning his third career unanimously MVP award, Ohtani became the first MVP winner to have played exclusively as a designated hitter in a given season. To date, Ohtani is the only player to win both the MVP and the Edgar Martínez Award, an award usually given to the top-performing designated hitter in a season.

Ironically, there was no award given by either league in 1930, which meant that one of the single greatest performances ever went unheralded when Hack Wilson of the Chicago Cubs set the (still standing) MLB record for RBI with 191. He also batted .356 and set the NL record with 56 HRs, a record which stood for 68 years until Sammy Sosa (66) and Mark McGwire (70) both eclipsed him.

==Key==
==Chalmers Award (1911–1914)==
Before the 1910 season, Hugh Chalmers of Chalmers Automobile announced he would present a Chalmers Model 30 automobile to the player with the highest batting average in Major League Baseball at the end of the season. The 1910 race for best average in the American League was between the Detroit Tigers&#x27; widely disliked Ty Cobb and Nap Lajoie of the Cleveland Indians. On the last day of the season, Lajoie overtook Cobb&#x27;s batting average with seven bunt hits against the St. Louis Browns. American League President Ban Johnson said a recalculation showed that Cobb had won the race anyway, and Chalmers ended up awarding cars to both players.

In the following season, Chalmers created the Chalmers Award. A committee of baseball writers was to convene after the season to determine the &quot;most important and useful player to the club and the league&quot;. Since the award was not as effective at advertising as Chalmers had hoped, it was discontinued after 1914.

==League Awards (1922–1929)==
In 1922, the American League created a new award to honor &quot;the baseball player who is of the greatest all-around service to his club&quot;. Winners, voted on by a committee of eight baseball writers chaired by James Crusinberry, received a bronze medal and a cash prize. Voters were required to select one player from each team, and player-coaches and prior award winners were ineligible. Famously, these criteria resulted in Babe Ruth winning only a single MVP award before it was dropped after 1928. The National League award, without these restrictions, lasted from 1924 to 1929.

==BBWAA Most Valuable Player (1931–present)==
The Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America (BBWAA) was first awarded the modern MVP after the 1931 season, adopting the format the National League used to distribute its league award. One writer in each city with a team filled out a ten-place ballot, with ten points for the recipient of a first-place vote, nine for a second-place vote, and so on. In 1938, the BBWAA raised the number of voters to three per city and gave 14 points for a first-place vote. The only significant change since then occurred in 1961 when the number of voters was reduced to two per league city.




==Wins by team==
==See also==
*&quot;Esurance MLB Awards&quot; Best Major Leaguer (in MLB; all positions) (there are also Best Hitter and Best Pitcher awards (in MLB))
*&quot;Players Choice Awards&quot; Player of the Year (in MLB; all positions) (there are also Outstanding Player and Outstanding Pitcher awards (in each league))
*&quot;Baseball America&quot; Major League Player of the Year (in MLB; all positions)
*&quot;Baseball Digest&quot; Player of the Year (in MLB; position players only; from 1969 to 1993, included all positions; in 1994, a separate Pitcher of the Year award was added)
*Best Major League Baseball Player ESPY Award (in MLB; all positions)
*&quot;The Sporting News&quot; Most Valuable Player Award (in each league) (&quot;discontinued in 1946&quot;)
*&quot;The Sporting News&quot; Player of the Year (in MLB; position players only)
*List of Major League Baseball awards
*Baseball awards

==Notes==
* A player is considered inactive if he has announced his retirement or has not played for a full season.
* A unanimous victory indicates that the player received all possible first-place votes.
* Torre is a member of the Hall of Fame, but not as a player. He was inducted in as a manager.
* Hernandez and Stargell both received 216 points in the 1979 voting.

==References==
==External links==

*Most Valuable Player MVP Awards &amp; Cy Young Awards Winners (1911–present) (and &quot;Multiple Winners of the MVP and Cy Young Awards&quot;). Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved 2016-11-07.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="4" end="52" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="54" end="57" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="72" end="93" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="145" end="160" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="176" end="191" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q843862" start="229" end="274" title="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q843862" start="324" end="369" title="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="393" end="413" title="most valuable player" label="most valuable player"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="439" end="454" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="475" end="490" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738184" start="856" end="866" title="Major League Baseball postseason" label="postseason"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="918" end="930" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106481" start="1235" end="1258" title="Kenesaw Mountain Landis" label="Kenesaw Mountain Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051088" start="1270" end="1294" title="Commissioner of Baseball" label="Commissioner of Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="1658" end="1676" title="Baseball color line" label="integration of MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="1679" end="1692" title="First basemen" label="First basemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147776" start="1740" end="1749" title="infielder" label="infielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368195" start="1764" end="1778" title="second basemen" label="second basemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368170" start="1785" end="1798" title="third basemen" label="third basemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143358" start="1809" end="1818" title="shortstop" label="shortstop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="1836" end="1843" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="1876" end="1888" title="right-handed" label="right-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="1902" end="1913" title="left-handed" label="left-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q722059" start="1915" end="1929" title="Walter Johnson" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938945" start="1931" end="1943" title="Carl Hubbell" label="Carl Hubbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q711730" start="1949" end="1962" title="Hal Newhouser" label="Hal Newhouser"/>
<link wikidata="Q687282" start="2070" end="2084" title="Hank Greenberg" label="Hank Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328142" start="2086" end="2097" title="Stan Musial" label="Stan Musial"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="2099" end="2113" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="Alex Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437143" start="2119" end="2130" title="Robin Yount" label="Robin Yount"/>
<link wikidata="Q127582" start="2288" end="2300" title="Andre Dawson" label="Andre Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601896" start="2371" end="2389" title="2003 Texas Rangers" label="2003 Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583615" start="2394" end="2411" title="1987 Chicago Cubs" label="1987 Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="2427" end="2438" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329352" start="2529" end="2540" title="Jimmie Foxx" label="Jimmie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317158" start="2642" end="2656" title="Frank Robinson" label="Frank Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391858" start="2661" end="2674" title="Shohei Ohtani" label="Shohei Ohtani"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="2874" end="2889" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194742" start="2904" end="2919" title="Keith Hernandez" label="Keith Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054942" start="2924" end="2939" title="Willie Stargell" label="Willie Stargell"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="3058" end="3074" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="3130" end="3149" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="3244" end="3264" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="3266" end="3279" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="3285" end="3299" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391858" start="3362" end="3375" title="Shohei Ohtani" label="Shohei Ohtani"/>
<link wikidata="Q520665" start="3473" end="3488" title="Clayton Kershaw" label="Clayton Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q981788" start="3541" end="3557" title="Justin Verlander" label="Justin Verlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636351" start="3596" end="3610" title="two-way player" label="two-way player"/>
<link wikidata="Q285629" start="3857" end="3869" title="Don Newcombe" label="Don Newcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="3871" end="3883" title="Sandy Koufax" label="Sandy Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131535" start="3885" end="3895" title="Bob Gibson" label="Bob Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703370" start="3897" end="3909" title="Denny McLain" label="Denny McLain"/>
<link wikidata="Q434503" start="3911" end="3920" title="Vida Blue" label="Vida Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q542827" start="3922" end="3936" title="Rollie Fingers" label="Rollie Fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569083" start="3938" end="3954" title="Willie Hernández" label="Willie Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="3956" end="3969" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145696" start="3971" end="3987" title="Dennis Eckersley" label="Dennis Eckersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="4148" end="4165" title="designated hitter" label="designated hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404553" start="4454" end="4474" title="Edgar Martínez Award" label="Edgar Martínez Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371347" start="4699" end="4710" title="Hack Wilson" label="Hack Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="4718" end="4730" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352858" start="4988" end="4999" title="1910 Major League Baseball season" label="1910 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060176" start="5018" end="5037" title="Chalmers Automobile" label="Chalmers Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="5127" end="5142" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559149" start="5198" end="5247" title="1910 Chalmers Award" label="1910 race for best average in the American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="5264" end="5278" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q552828" start="5301" end="5308" title="Ty Cobb" label="Ty Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335869" start="5313" end="5323" title="Nap Lajoie" label="Nap Lajoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="5331" end="5348" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143726" start="5436" end="5440" title="Bunt (baseball)" label="bunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11314813" start="5458" end="5474" title="St. Louis Browns" label="St. Louis Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q766590" start="5502" end="5513" title="Ban Johnson" label="Ban Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649737" start="5638" end="5654" title="1911 Major League Baseball season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q152478" start="5874" end="5898" title="sponsor (commercial)" label="effective at advertising"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6200" end="6217" title="James Crusinberry" label="James Crusinberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q379533" start="6323" end="6335" title="player-coach" label="player-coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562842" start="6721" end="6732" title="1931 Major League Baseball season" label="1931 season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7237" end="7268" title="This Year in Baseball Awards#Awards" label="&amp;quot;Esurance MLB Awards&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203310" start="7381" end="7401" title="Players Choice Award" label="Players Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866429" start="7537" end="7597" title="Baseball America Major League Player of the Year" label="&amp;quot;Baseball America&amp;quot; Major League Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886673" start="7629" end="7644" title="Baseball Digest" label="Baseball Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896722" start="7803" end="7847" title="Best Major League Baseball Player ESPY Award" label="Best Major League Baseball Player ESPY Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766028" start="7873" end="7929" title="The Sporting News Most Valuable Player Award" label="&amp;quot;The Sporting News&amp;quot; Most Valuable Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q952797" start="7983" end="8031" title="The Sporting News MLB Player of the Year Award" label="&amp;quot;The Sporting News&amp;quot; Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q458973" start="8065" end="8101" title="List of Major League Baseball awards" label="List of Major League Baseball awards"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8103" end="8118" title="Baseball awards#U.S. major leagues: Awards by organizations other than MLB" label="Baseball awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186921" start="8411" end="8418" title="Manager (baseball)" label="manager"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3859" wikidata="Q594227" url="?curid=3859" title="Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award">
<text>In Major League Baseball, the Rookie of the Year Award is given annually to two outstanding rookie players, one each for the American League (AL) and National League (NL), as voted on by the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America (BBWAA). The award was established in 1940 by the Chicago chapter of the BBWAA, which selected an annual winner from 1940 through 1946. The award became national in 1947; Jackie Robinson, the Brooklyn Dodgers&#x27; second baseman, won the inaugural award. One award was presented for all of MLB in 1947 and 1948; since 1949, the honor has been given to one player each in the NL and AL. Originally, the award was known as the J. Louis Comiskey Memorial Award, named after the Chicago White Sox owner of the 1930s. The award was renamed the Jackie Robinson Award in July 1987, 40 years after Robinson broke the baseball color line.

Nineteen players have been elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame—Robinson, seven AL players, and eleven others from the NL. The award has been shared twice: once by Butch Metzger and Pat Zachry of the NL in 1976; and once by John Castino and Alfredo Griffin of the AL in 1979. Members of the Brooklyn and Los Angeles Dodgers have won the most awards of any franchise (with 18). Fred Lynn and Ichiro Suzuki are the only two players who have been named Rookie of the Year and Most Valuable Player in the same year, and Fernando Valenzuela is the only player to have won Rookie of the Year and the Cy Young Award in the same year. Sam Jethroe is the oldest player to have won the award, at age 32, 33 days older than 2000 winner Kazuhiro Sasaki (also 32). Luis Gil of the New York Yankees and Paul Skenes of the Pittsburgh Pirates are the most recent winners.

==Qualifications and voting==

From 1947 through 1956, each BBWAA voter used discretion as to who qualified as a rookie. In 1957, the term was first defined as someone with fewer than 75 at-bats or 45 innings pitched in any previous Major League season. This guideline was later amended to 90 at-bats, 45 innings pitched, or 45 days on a Major League roster before September 1 of the previous year. The current standard of 130 at-bats, 50 innings pitched, or 45 days on the active roster of a Major League club (excluding time in military service or on the injury list) before September 1 was adopted in 1971.

Since 1980, each voter names three rookies: a first-place choice is given five points, a second-place choice three points, and a third-place choice one point. The award goes to the player who receives the most overall points. Edinson Vólquez received three second-place votes in 2008 balloting despite no longer being a rookie under the award&#x27;s definition.

The award has drawn criticism in recent years because several players with experience in Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB) have won the award, such as Hideo Nomo in 1995, Kazuhiro Sasaki in 2000, Ichiro Suzuki in 2001, and Shohei Ohtani in 2018. The current definition of rookie status for the award is based only on Major League experience, but some feel that past NPB players are not true rookies because of their past professional experience. Others, however, believe it should make no difference since the first recipient and the award&#x27;s namesake played for the Negro leagues before his MLB career and thus could also not be considered a &quot;true rookie&quot;. This issue arose in 2003 when Hideki Matsui narrowly lost the AL award to Ángel Berroa. Jim Souhan of the &quot;Minneapolis Star Tribune&quot; said he did not see Matsui as a rookie in 2003 because &quot;it would be an insult to the Japanese league to pretend that experience didn&#x27;t count.&quot; &quot;The Japan Times&quot; ran a story in 2007 on the labeling of Daisuke Matsuzaka, Kei Igawa, and Hideki Okajima as rookies, saying &quot;[t]hese guys aren&#x27;t rookies.&quot; Past winners such as Jackie Robinson, Don Newcombe, and Sam Jethroe had professional experience in the Negro leagues.

==Winners==

===Key===

===Major Leagues combined (1947–48)===
===American League winners (1949–present)===

===National League winners (1949–present)===

===Wins by team===
Following Corbin Carroll winning the award as a member of the Arizona Diamondbacks, every MLB franchise has had at least one Rookie of the Year winner. The Brooklyn/Los Angeles Dodgers have won more than any other team with 18.
==See also==

*Esurance MLB Awards Best Rookie (in MLB)
*Players Choice Awards Outstanding Rookie (in each league)
*&quot;Baseball America&quot; Rookie of the Year (in MLB)
*&quot;Sporting News&quot; Rookie of the Year Award (in each league)
*Rookie of the Month
*Topps All-Star Rookie Teams
*Baseball awards
*Rookie of the Year (award) (all sports)

==References==
;General
*

;Inline citations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="3" end="24" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="30" end="54" title="Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award" label="Rookie of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="125" end="140" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="150" end="165" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q843862" start="191" end="236" title="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="408" end="423" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="429" end="445" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368195" start="452" end="466" title="second baseman" label="second baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106373" start="663" end="680" title="J. Louis Comiskey" label="J. Louis Comiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="713" end="730" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="777" end="798" title="Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award" label="Jackie Robinson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="847" end="866" title="baseball color line" label="baseball color line"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="911" end="941" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002407" start="1042" end="1055" title="Butch Metzger" label="Butch Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144125" start="1060" end="1070" title="Pat Zachry" label="Pat Zachry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225509" start="1102" end="1114" title="John Castino" label="John Castino"/>
<link wikidata="Q519251" start="1119" end="1134" title="Alfredo Griffin" label="Alfredo Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26036" start="1255" end="1264" title="Fred Lynn" label="Fred Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q600" start="1269" end="1282" title="Ichiro Suzuki" label="Ichiro Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="1351" end="1371" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131057" start="1394" end="1413" title="Fernando Valenzuela" label="Fernando Valenzuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="1472" end="1486" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407699" start="1505" end="1516" title="Sam Jethroe" label="Sam Jethroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045357" start="1603" end="1618" title="Kazuhiro Sasaki" label="Kazuhiro Sasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q107920179" start="1630" end="1638" title="Luis Gil (baseball)" label="Luis Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="1646" end="1662" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q112581490" start="1667" end="1678" title="Paul Skenes" label="Paul Skenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="1686" end="1704" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="1922" end="1928" title="at-bat" label="at-bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192188" start="1936" end="1951" title="innings pitched" label="innings pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q209572" start="2265" end="2281" title="military service" label="military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281221" start="2292" end="2303" title="injury list" label="injury list"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047610" start="2572" end="2587" title="Edinson Vólquez" label="Edinson Vólquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146127" start="2798" end="2826" title="Nippon Professional Baseball" label="Nippon Professional Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q486690" start="2861" end="2871" title="Hideo Nomo" label="Hideo Nomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045357" start="2881" end="2896" title="Kazuhiro Sasaki" label="Kazuhiro Sasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q600" start="2906" end="2919" title="Ichiro Suzuki" label="Ichiro Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391858" start="2933" end="2946" title="Shohei Ohtani" label="Shohei Ohtani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="3281" end="3294" title="Negro leagues" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q954080" start="3412" end="3425" title="Hideki Matsui" label="Hideki Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034836" start="3456" end="3468" title="Ángel Berroa" label="Ángel Berroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198223" start="3470" end="3480" title="Jim Souhan" label="Jim Souhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q862148" start="3494" end="3518" title="Minneapolis Star Tribune" label="Minneapolis Star Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190886" start="3689" end="3704" title="The Japan Times" label="The Japan Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q26121" start="3750" end="3767" title="Daisuke Matsuzaka" label="Daisuke Matsuzaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040784" start="3769" end="3778" title="Kei Igawa" label="Kei Igawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066191" start="3784" end="3798" title="Hideki Okajima" label="Hideki Okajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q285629" start="3902" end="3914" title="Don Newcombe" label="Don Newcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="3967" end="3980" title="Negro leagues" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q64759119" start="4167" end="4181" title="Corbin Carroll" label="Corbin Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="4219" end="4239" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786415" start="4400" end="4419" title="Esurance MLB Awards" label="Esurance MLB Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203310" start="4442" end="4463" title="Players Choice Awards" label="Players Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866431" start="4501" end="4548" title="Baseball America Rookie of the Year" label="&amp;quot;Baseball America&amp;quot; Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579588" start="4559" end="4609" title="Sporting News Rookie of the Year Award" label="&amp;quot;Sporting News&amp;quot; Rookie of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941170" start="4628" end="4647" title="MLB Rookie of the Month Award" label="Rookie of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825122" start="4649" end="4676" title="Topps All-Star Rookie Teams" label="Topps All-Star Rookie Teams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4678" end="4693" title="Baseball awards#United States" label="Baseball awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q259080" start="4695" end="4721" title="Rookie of the Year (award)" label="Rookie of the Year (award)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3860" wikidata="Q1363275" url="?curid=3860" title="National League Championship Series">
<text>The National League Championship Series (NLCS) is a best-of-seven playoff and one of two League Championship Series comprising the penultimate round of Major League Baseball&#x27;s (MLB) postseason. It is contested by the winners of the two National League (NL) Division Series. The winner of the NLCS wins the NL pennant and advances to the World Series, MLB&#x27;s championship series, to play the winner of the American League&#x27;s (AL) Championship Series. The NLCS began in 1969 as a best-of-five playoff and used this format until 1985, when it changed to a best-of-seven format.

==History==
Before 1969, the National League champion (the &quot;pennant winner&quot;) was determined by the best win–loss record at the end of the regular season. There were four &quot;ad hoc&quot; three-game playoff series due to ties under this formulation (in 1946, 1951, 1959, and 1962).

A structured postseason series began in 1969, when both the National and American Leagues were reorganized into two divisions each, East and West. The two division winners within each league played each other in a best-of-five series to determine who would advance to the World Series. In 1985, the format changed to best-of-seven.

The NLCS and ALCS, since the expansion to seven games, are always played in a 2–3–2 format: games 1, 2, 6, and 7 are played in the stadium of the team that has home field advantage, and games 3, 4, and 5 are played in the stadium of the team that does not. Home field advantage is given to the team that has the better record, except a division champion would always get home advantage over a Wild Card team. From 1969 to 1993, home field advantage was alternated between divisions each year regardless of regular season record and from 1995 to 1997 home field advantage was predetermined before the season.

In 1981, a one-off division series was held due to a split season caused by a players&#x27; strike.

In 1994, the league was restructured into three divisions, with the three division winners and a wild card team advancing to a best-of-five postseason round, the now-permanent National League Division Series (NLDS). The winners of that round advance to the best-of-seven NLCS; however, due to the player&#x27;s strike later that season, no postseason was played and the new format did not formally begin until 1995. The playoffs were expanded in 2012 to include a second Wild Card team and in 2022 to include a third Wild Card team.

Seven managers have led a team to the NLCS in three consecutive seasons; however, the most consecutive NLCS appearances by one manager is held by Bobby Cox, who led the Atlanta Braves to eight straight from 1991 to 1999. The Braves (1991–1999) are also the only team in the National League to have made more than three consecutive National League Championship Series appearances. Tony La Russa and Jim Leyland are the only managers to lead their teams to three consecutive League Championship Series appearances in both leagues.

The Milwaukee Brewers, an American League team between 1969 and 1997, and the Houston Astros, a National League team between 1962 and 2012, are the only franchises to play in both the ALCS and NLCS. The Astros are the only team to have won both an NLCS (2005) and an ALCS (2017, 2019, 2021, and 2022). The Astros made four NLCS appearances before moving to the AL in 2013. Every current National League franchise has appeared in the NLCS and all teams except the Brewers have won an NL pennant via the NLCS.

For the first time in history, two wild card teams played in the 2022 National League Championship Series.

==Championship Trophy==
The Warren C. Giles Trophy is awarded to the NLCS winner. Warren Giles served as president of the National League from 1951 to 1969.

==Most Valuable Player Award==
:&quot;See: League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award#National League winners&quot;
A Most Valuable Player (MVP) award is given to the outstanding player in the NLCS. No MVP award is given for Division Series play.

The MVP award has been given to a player on the losing team twice, in 1986 to Mike Scott of the Houston Astros and in 1987 to Jeffrey Leonard of the San Francisco Giants.

Although the National League began its LCS MVP award in 1977, the American League did not begin its LCS MVP award until 1980. The winners are listed in several locations:
* in the below NLCS results table, in the &quot;Series MVP&quot; column
* in the article League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award
* on the MLB website

==Results==


===Appearances by team===
===Years of appearance===
In the sortable table below, teams are ordered first by number of wins, then by number of appearances, and finally by year of first appearance. In the &quot;Season(s)&quot; column, bold years indicate winning appearances.
===Frequent matchups===
==See also==

*List of National League pennant winners
*List of National League Wild Card winners
*National League Division Series
*American League Championship Series

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* League Championship Series History at Baseball Almanac
* World Series and MLB Playoffs at Baseball-Reference.com
* Post-Season Games Directory at Retrosheet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1363275" start="4" end="39" title="National League Championship Series" label="National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363275" start="41" end="45" title="National League Championship Series" label="NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52" end="73" title="Playoff format#Best-of-seven playoff" label="best-of-seven playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q865526" start="89" end="115" title="League Championship Series" label="League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="152" end="173" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738184" start="187" end="197" title="Major League Baseball postseason" label="postseason"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="241" end="256" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q785657" start="262" end="277" title="National League Division Series" label="Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247636" start="314" end="321" title="pennant (sports)" label="pennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="342" end="354" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="414" end="429" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q465473" start="442" end="461" title="American League Championship Series" label="Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591467" start="654" end="668" title="List of National League pennant winners" label="pennant winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589055" start="788" end="813" title="List of Major League Baseball tie-breakers" label="three-game playoff series"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="1609" end="1618" title="Wild card (sports)" label="Wild Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002703" start="1844" end="1859" title="1981 National League Division Series" label="division series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="1903" end="1923" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="players&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q785657" start="2102" end="2133" title="National League Division Series" label="National League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="2223" end="2243" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="player&amp;#x27;s strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907947" start="2606" end="2615" title="Bobby Cox" label="Bobby Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="2629" end="2643" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696934" start="2840" end="2853" title="Tony La Russa" label="Tony La Russa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746376" start="2858" end="2869" title="Jim Leyland" label="Jim Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="2994" end="3011" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="3068" end="3082" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511257" start="3244" end="3248" title="2005 National League Championship Series" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q38156112" start="3263" end="3267" title="2017 American League Championship Series" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q70274121" start="3269" end="3273" title="2019 American League Championship Series" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q108857015" start="3275" end="3279" title="2021 American League Championship Series" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q113621787" start="3285" end="3289" title="2022 American League Championship Series" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q113621764" start="3564" end="3604" title="2022 National League Championship Series" label="2022 National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q458973" start="3635" end="3657" title="Warren C. Giles Trophy" label="Warren C. Giles Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566389" start="3689" end="3701" title="Warren Giles" label="Warren Giles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3808" end="3885" title="League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award#National League winners" label="League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award#National League winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="3916" end="3919" title="Most valuable player" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313545" start="4102" end="4112" title="Mike Scott (baseball)" label="Mike Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176709" start="4150" end="4165" title="Jeffrey Leonard" label="Jeffrey Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186712" start="4456" end="4509" title="League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award" label="League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591467" start="4859" end="4898" title="List of National League pennant winners" label="List of National League pennant winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591464" start="4900" end="4941" title="List of National League Wild Card winners" label="List of National League Wild Card winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q785657" start="4943" end="4974" title="National League Division Series" label="National League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465473" start="4976" end="5011" title="American League Championship Series" label="American League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866428" start="5097" end="5113" title="Baseball Almanac" label="Baseball Almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q863769" start="5149" end="5171" title="Baseball-Reference.com" label="Baseball-Reference.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317054" start="5205" end="5215" title="Retrosheet" label="Retrosheet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3861" wikidata="Q465473" url="?curid=3861" title="American League Championship Series">
<text>The American League Championship Series (ALCS) is a best-of-seven playoff and one of two League Championship Series comprising the penultimate round of Major League Baseball&#x27;s (MLB) postseason. The winner of the ALCS wins the AL pennant and advances to the World Series, MLB&#x27;s championship series, to play the winner of the National League&#x27;s (NL) Championship Series. The ALCS began in 1969 as a best-of-five playoff and used this format until 1985, when it changed to its current best-of-seven format.

==History==
Prior to 1969, the American League champion (the &quot;pennant winner&quot;) was determined by the best win–loss record at the end of the regular season. There was one &quot;ad hoc&quot; single-game playoff held, in , due to a tie under this formulation.

The ALCS started in 1969, when the AL reorganized into two divisions, East and West. The winners of each division played each other in a best-of-five series to determine who would advance to the World Series. In 1985, the format changed to best-of-seven. 

In 1981, a division series was held due to a split season caused by a players&#x27; strike. 

In 1994, the league was restructured into three divisions, with the three division winners and a Wild Card team advancing to a best-of-five postseason round, known as the American League Division Series (ALDS). The winners of that round then advanced to the best-of-seven ALCS; however, due to the player&#x27;s strike later that season, no postseason was played and the new format did not formally begin until 1995. The playoffs were expanded in 2012 to include a second Wild Card team and in 2022 to include a third Wild Card team.

The ALCS and NLCS, since the expansion to best-of-seven, are always played in a 2–3–2 format: Games 1, 2, 6, and 7 are played in the stadium of the team that has home field advantage, and Games 3, 4, and 5 are played in the stadium of the team that does not. The series concludes when one team records its fourth win. Since 1998, home field advantage has been given to the team that has the better regular season record, except a division champion would always get home advantage over a Wild Card team. If both teams have identical records in the regular season, then home field advantage goes to the team that has the winning head-to-head record. From 1969 to 1993, home-field advantage alternated between the two divisions, and from 1995 to 1997 home-field advantage was determined before the season.

Nine managers have led a team to the ALCS in three consecutive seasons; the record for most consecutive ALCS appearances by a manager is jointly held by Joe Torre, who led the New York Yankees to four in a row (1998, 1999, 2000, 2001), and Dusty Baker, who led the Houston Astros to four in a row (2020, 2021, 2022, 2023). The Astros (2017–2023) are also the only team in the American League to have made seven consecutive American League Championship Series appearances. Tony La Russa and Jim Leyland are the only managers to lead their teams to three consecutive League Championship Series appearances in both leagues.

The Milwaukee Brewers, an American League team between 1969 and 1997, and the Houston Astros, a National League team between 1962 and 2012, are the only franchises to play in both the ALCS and NLCS. The Astros are the only team to have won both an NLCS (2005) and an ALCS (2017, 2019, 2021, and 2022). Every current American League franchise has appeared in the ALCS.

==Championship Trophy==
The William Harridge Trophy is awarded to the ALCS champion. Will Harridge served as American League president from 1931 to 1959.

==Most Valuable Player Award==
:&quot;See: League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award#American League winners&quot;
The Lee MacPhail Most Valuable Player (MVP) award is given to the outstanding player in the ALCS. No MVP award is given for Division Series play.

Although the National League began its LCS MVP award in 1977, the American League did not begin its LCS MVP award till 1980. The winners are listed in several locations:
* in the below ALCS results table, in the &quot;Series MVP&quot; column
* in the article League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award
* on the MLB website

==Results==


===Appearances by team===

===Years of appearance===
In the sortable table below, teams are ordered first by number of wins, then by number of appearances, and finally by year of first appearance. In the &quot;Season(s)&quot; column, bold years indicate winning appearances.
===Recurring matchups===
==See also==

*List of American League pennant winners
*List of American League Wild Card winners
*American League Division Series
*National League Championship Series

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* League Championship Series History at Baseball Almanac
* World Series and MLB Playoffs at Baseball-Reference.com
* Post-Season Games Directory at Retrosheet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q465473" start="4" end="39" title="American League Championship Series" label="American League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465473" start="41" end="45" title="American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52" end="73" title="Playoff format#Best-of-seven playoff" label="best-of-seven playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q865526" start="89" end="115" title="League Championship Series" label="League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="152" end="173" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738184" start="187" end="197" title="Major League Baseball postseason" label="postseason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247636" start="234" end="241" title="pennant (sports)" label="pennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="262" end="274" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="334" end="349" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363275" start="362" end="381" title="National League Championship Series" label="Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561396" start="586" end="600" title="List of American League pennant winners" label="pennant winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589055" start="718" end="737" title="List of Major League Baseball tie-breakers" label="single-game playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363291" start="857" end="861" title="American League East" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349939" start="866" end="870" title="American League West" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002703" start="1055" end="1070" title="1981 National League Division Series" label="division series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="1114" end="1134" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="players&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q465503" start="1309" end="1340" title="American League Division Series" label="American League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="1436" end="1456" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="player&amp;#x27;s strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595894" start="1835" end="1855" title="home field advantage" label="home field advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="2160" end="2169" title="Wild card (sports)" label="Wild Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q707804" start="2630" end="2639" title="Joe Torre" label="Joe Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="2653" end="2669" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041697" start="2717" end="2728" title="Dusty Baker" label="Dusty Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="2742" end="2756" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696934" start="2949" end="2962" title="Tony La Russa" label="Tony La Russa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746376" start="2967" end="2978" title="Jim Leyland" label="Jim Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="3103" end="3120" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="3177" end="3191" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511257" start="3353" end="3357" title="2005 National League Championship Series" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q38156112" start="3372" end="3376" title="2017 American League Championship Series" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q70274121" start="3378" end="3382" title="2019 American League Championship Series" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q108857015" start="3384" end="3388" title="2021 American League Championship Series" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q113621787" start="3394" end="3398" title="2022 American League Championship Series" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q458973" start="3496" end="3519" title="William Harridge Trophy" label="William Harridge Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568684" start="3553" end="3566" title="Will Harridge" label="Will Harridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3666" end="3743" title="League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award#American League winners" label="League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award#American League winners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3754" end="3766" title="Lee MacPhail#Lee MacPhail MVP Award" label="Lee MacPhail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186712" start="4156" end="4209" title="League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award" label="League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561396" start="4561" end="4600" title="List of American League pennant winners" label="List of American League pennant winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q13643834" start="4602" end="4643" title="List of American League Wild Card winners" label="List of American League Wild Card winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q465503" start="4645" end="4676" title="American League Division Series" label="American League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363275" start="4678" end="4713" title="National League Championship Series" label="National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866428" start="4799" end="4815" title="Baseball Almanac" label="Baseball Almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q863769" start="4851" end="4873" title="Baseball-Reference.com" label="Baseball-Reference.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317054" start="4907" end="4917" title="Retrosheet" label="Retrosheet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3862" wikidata="Q465503" url="?curid=3862" title="American League Division Series">
<text>In Major League Baseball, the American League Division Series (ALDS) determines which two teams from the American League will advance to the American League Championship Series. The Division Series consists of two best-of-five series, featuring each of the two division winners with the best records and the winners of the wild-card play-off.

==History==

The Division Series was implemented in 1981 as a one-off tournament because of a midseason strike, with the first place teams before the strike taking on the teams in first place after the strike. In 1981, a split-season format forced the first ever divisional playoff series, in which the New York Yankees won the Eastern Division series over the Milwaukee Brewers (who were in the American League until 1998) in five games while in the Western Division, the Oakland Athletics swept the Kansas City Royals (the only team with an overall losing record to ever make the postseason).

In 1994, it was returned permanently when Major League Baseball (MLB) restructured each league into three divisions, but with a different format than in 1981. Each of the division winners, along with one wild card team, qualify for the Division Series. Despite being planned for the 1994 season, the postseason was cancelled that year due to the 1994–95 Major League Baseball strike. In 1995, the first season to feature a division series, the Western Division champion Seattle Mariners defeated the wild card New York Yankees three games to two, while the Central Division champion Cleveland Indians defeated the Eastern Division champion Boston Red Sox in a three-game sweep.

From 1994 to 2011, the wild card was given to the team in the American League with the best overall record that was &quot;not&quot; a division champion. Beginning with the 2012 season, a second wild card team was added, and the two wild card teams play a single-game playoff to determine which team would play in the ALDS. For the 2020 Major League Baseball season only, there was an expanded playoff format, owing to an abbreviated 60-game regular season due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Eight teams qualified from the American League: the top two teams in each division plus the next two best records among the remaining teams. These eight teams played a best-of-three-game series to determine placement in the ALDS. The regular format returned for the 2021 season.

As of 2022, the Yankees have played in and won the most division series, with thirteen wins in twenty-two appearances. In 2015, the Toronto Blue Jays and Houston Astros were the final American League teams to make their first appearances in the ALDS. The Astros had been in the National League through 2012, and had played in the National League Division Series (NLDS) seven times. The Astros are the only team to win the ALDS in six consecutive seasons. The Yankees record of four consecutive victories was broken by the Astros with their victory in the 2021 ALDS against the Chicago White Sox.

===Determining the matchups===
The ALDS is a best-of-five series where the divisional winner with the best winning percentage in the regular season hosts the winner of the Wild Card Series between the top two wild card teams in one matchup, and the divisional winner with the second best winning percentage hosts the winner of the series between the lowest-seeded divisional winner and the lowest-seeded wild card team. (From 2012 to 2021, the wild card team was assigned to play the divisional winner with the best winning percentage in the regular season in one series, and the other two division winners met in the other series. From 1998 to 2011, if the wild-card team and the division winner with the best record were from the same division, the wild-card team played the division winner with the second-best record, and the remaining two division leaders played each other.) The two series winners move on to the best-of-seven ALCS. According to Nate Silver, the advent of this playoff series, and especially of the wild card, has caused teams to focus more on &quot;getting to the playoffs&quot; rather than &quot;winning the pennant&quot; as the primary goal of the regular season.

From 2012 to 2021, the wild card team that advances to the Division Series was to face the number 1 seed, regardless whether or not they are in the same division. The two series winners move on to the best-of-seven ALCS. Beginning with the 2022 season, the winner between the lowest-ranked division winner and lowest-ranked wild card team faces the number 2 seed division winner in the Division Series, while the 4 v. 5 wild card winner still faces the number 1 seed, as there is no reseeding even if the 6-seeded wild card advances. Home-field advantage goes to the team with the better regular season record (or head-to-head record if there is a tie between two or more teams), except for the wild-card team, which never receives the home field advantage.

Beginning in 2003, MLB has implemented a new rule to give the team from the league that wins the All-Star Game with the best regular season record a slightly greater advantage. In order to spread out the Division Series games for broadcast purposes, the two ALDS series follow one of two off-day schedules. Starting in 2007, after consulting the MLBPA, MLB has decided to allow the team with the best record in the league that wins the All-Star Game to choose whether to use the seven-day schedule (1-2-off-3-4-off-5) or the eight-day schedule (1-off-2-off-3-4-off-5). The team only gets to choose the schedule; the opponent is still determined by win–loss records.

Initially, the best-of-5 series played in a 2–3 format, with the first two games set at home for the lower seed team and the last three for the higher seed. Since 1998, the series has followed a 2–2–1 format, where the higher seed team plays at home in Games 1 and 2, the lower seed plays at home in Game 3 and Game 4 (if necessary), and if a Game 5 is needed, the teams return to the higher seed&#x27;s field. When MLB added a second wild card team in 2012, the Division Series re-adopted the 2–3 format due to scheduling conflicts. However, it reverted to the 2–2–1 format starting the next season, 2013.

==Results==


===Appearances by team===
===Years of appearance===
In the sortable table below, teams are ordered first by number of wins, then by number of appearances, and finally by year of first appearance. In the &quot;Season(s)&quot; column, bold years indicate winning appearances.
===Frequent matchups===
==See also==
*National League Division Series (NLDS)
*List of American League pennant winners
*List of National League pennant winners
*List of World Series champions
*MLB division winners
*MLB postseason
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Baseball-Reference.com - annual playoffs
*MLB.com - MLB&#x27;s Division Series historical reference - box scores, highlights, etc.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="3" end="24" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q465503" start="30" end="61" title="American League Division Series" label="American League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465503" start="63" end="67" title="American League Division Series" label="ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="105" end="120" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q465473" start="141" end="176" title="American League Championship Series" label="American League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="323" end="332" title="Wild card (sports)" label="wild-card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="438" end="454" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="midseason strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579925" start="647" end="663" title="1981 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203953" start="705" end="722" title="1981 Milwaukee Brewers season" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579928" start="817" end="834" title="1981 Oakland Athletics season" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579862" start="845" end="863" title="1981 Kansas City Royals season" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="982" end="1003" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="1144" end="1153" title="Wild card (sports)" label="wild card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="1286" end="1322" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421279" start="1410" end="1426" title="1995 Seattle Mariners season" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q4328320" start="1450" end="1466" title="1995 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223516" start="1523" end="1540" title="1995 Cleveland Indians season" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4095052" start="1580" end="1594" title="1995 Boston Red Sox season" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760" start="1791" end="1802" title="2012 Major League Baseball season" label="2012 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q67515766" start="1950" end="1983" title="2020 Major League Baseball season" label="2020 Major League Baseball season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2086" end="2103" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="2517" end="2534" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="2539" end="2553" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q785657" start="2715" end="2746" title="National League Division Series" label="National League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860630" start="2962" end="2979" title="2021 Chicago White Sox season" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q114001174" start="3154" end="3170" title="Wild Card Series" label="Wild Card Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q562521" start="3934" end="3945" title="Nate Silver" label="Nate Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867557" start="5278" end="5283" title="MLBPA" label="MLBPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649712" start="5762" end="5766" title="1998 Major League Baseball season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760" start="6052" end="6056" title="2012 Major League Baseball season" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544882" start="6200" end="6204" title="2013 Major League Baseball season" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q785657" start="6533" end="6564" title="National League Division Series" label="National League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561396" start="6573" end="6612" title="List of American League pennant winners" label="List of American League pennant winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591467" start="6614" end="6653" title="List of National League pennant winners" label="List of National League pennant winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q862958" start="6655" end="6685" title="List of World Series champions" label="List of World Series champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018206" start="6687" end="6707" title="Major League Baseball division winners" label="MLB division winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738184" start="6709" end="6723" title="Major League Baseball postseason" label="MLB postseason"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3863" wikidata="Q785657" url="?curid=3863" title="National League Division Series">
<text>In Major League Baseball, the National League Division Series (NLDS) determines which two teams from the National League will advance to the National League Championship Series. The Division Series consists of two best-of-five series, featuring each of the two division winners with the best records and the winners of the wild-card play-offs.

==History==
The Division Series was implemented in 1981 as a one-off tournament because of a midseason strike, with the first place teams before the strike taking on the teams in first place after the strike. In 1981, a split-season format forced the first ever divisional playoff series, in which the Montreal Expos won the Eastern Division series over the Philadelphia Phillies in five games while in the Western Division, the Los Angeles Dodgers defeated the Houston Astros, also in five games (the Astros were members of the National League until 2012).

In 1994, it was returned permanently when Major League Baseball (MLB) restructured each league into three divisions, but with a different format than in 1981. Each of the division winners, along with one wild card team, qualify for the Division Series. Despite being planned for the 1994 season, the post-season was cancelled that year due to the 1994–95 Major League Baseball strike. In 1995, the first season to feature a division series, the Eastern Division champion Atlanta Braves defeated the wild card Colorado Rockies three games to one, while the Central Division champion Cincinnati Reds defeated the Western Division champion Los Angeles Dodgers in a three-game sweep.

From 1994 to 2011, the wild card was given to the team in the National League with the best overall record that was &quot;not&quot; a division champion. Beginning with the 2012 season, a second wild card team was added, and the two wild card teams play a single-game playoff to determine which team would play in the NLDS. For the 2020 Major League Baseball season only, there was an expanded playoff format, owing to an abbreviated 60-game regular season due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Eight teams qualified from the National League: the top two teams in each division plus the next two best records among the remaining teams. These eight teams played a best-of-three-game series to determine placement in the NLDS. The regular format returned for the 2021 season.

As of 2021, the Atlanta Braves have currently played in the most NL division series with seventeen appearances. The St. Louis Cardinals have currently won the most NL division series, winning eleven of the fourteen series in which they have played. The Pittsburgh Pirates (who finished with a losing record from 1993 to 2012) were the last team to make their first appearance in the NL division series, making their debut in 2013 after winning the 2013 National League Wild Card Game. In 2008, the Milwaukee Brewers became the first team to play in division series in both leagues when they won the National League wild card, their first postseason berth since winning the American League East Division title in 1982 before switching leagues in 1998. Milwaukee had competed in an American League Division Series in the strike-shortened 1981 season.

===Format===
The NLDS is a best-of-five series where the divisional winner with the best winning percentage in the regular season hosts the winner of the Wild Card Series between the top two wild card teams in one matchup, and the divisional winner with the second best winning percentage hosts the winner of the other Wild Card Series between the lowest-seeded divisional winner and the lowest-seeded wild card team. (From 2012 to 2021, the wild card team was assigned to play the divisional winner with the best winning percentage in the regular season in one series, and the other two division winners met in the other series. From 1998 to 2011, if the wild-card team and the division winner with the best record were from the same division, the wild-card team played the division winner with the second-best record, and the remaining two division leaders played each other.) The two series winners move on to the best-of-seven NLCS. According to Nate Silver, the advent of this playoff series, and especially of the wild card, has caused teams to focus more on &quot;getting to the playoffs&quot; rather than &quot;winning the pennant&quot; as the primary goal of the regular season.

From 2012 to 2021, the wild card team that advances to the Division Series was to face the number 1 seed, regardless whether or not they are in the same division. The two series winners move on to the best-of-seven NLCS. Beginning with the 2022 season, the winner between the lowest-ranked division winner and lowest-ranked wild card team faces the #2 seed division winner in the Division Series, while the 4 v. 5 wild card winner faces the #1 seed, as there is no reseeding even if the 6 seed wild card advances. Home-field advantage goes to the team with the better regular season record (or head-to-head record if there is a tie between two or more teams), except for the wild-card team, which never receives the home-field advantage.

Beginning in 2003, MLB has implemented a new rule to give the team with the best regular season record from the league that wins the All-Star Game a slightly greater advantage. In order to spread out the Division Series games for broadcast purposes, the two NLDS series follow one of two off-day schedules. Starting in 2007, after consulting the MLBPA, MLB has decided to allow the team with the best record in the league that wins the All-Star Game to choose whether to use the seven-day schedule (1-2-off-3-4-off-5) or the eight-day schedule (1-off-2-off-3-4-off-5). The team only gets to choose the schedule; the opponent is still determined by win–loss records.

Initially, the best-of-5 series played in a 2–3 format, with the first two games set at home for the lower seed team and the last three for the higher seed. Since 1998, the series has followed a 2–2–1 format, where the higher seed team plays at home in Games 1 and 2, the lower seed plays at home in Game 3 and Game 4 (if necessary), and if a Game 5 is needed, the teams return to the higher seed&#x27;s field. When MLB added a second wild card team in 2012, the Division Series re-adopted the 2–3 format due to scheduling conflicts. However, it reverted to the 2–2–1 format starting the next season, 2013.

==Results==


===Appearances by team===
===Years of appearance===
In the sortable table below, teams are ordered first by number of wins, then by number of appearances, and finally by year of first appearance. In the &quot;Season(s)&quot; column, bold years indicate winning appearances.
===Frequent matchups===

NOTE: With the Houston Astros move to the American League at the conclusion of the 2012 season, the Braves vs. Astros series is not currently possible.

==See also==

*American League Division Series (ALDS)
*List of American League pennant winners
*List of National League pennant winners
*List of World Series champions
*MLB division winners
*MLB postseason

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Baseball-Reference.com - annual playoffs
*MLB.com - MLB&#x27;s Division Series historical reference - box scores, highlights, etc.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="3" end="24" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q785657" start="30" end="61" title="National League Division Series" label="National League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q785657" start="63" end="67" title="National League Division Series" label="NLDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="105" end="120" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363275" start="141" end="176" title="National League Championship Series" label="National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="323" end="332" title="wild card (sports)" label="wild-card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="438" end="454" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="midseason strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579893" start="647" end="661" title="1981 Montreal Expos season" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579952" start="703" end="724" title="1981 Philadelphia Phillies season" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579871" start="774" end="793" title="1981 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579840" start="807" end="821" title="1981 Houston Astros season" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="946" end="967" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="1108" end="1117" title="Wild card (sports)" label="wild card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="1251" end="1287" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072120" start="1375" end="1389" title="1995 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4228473" start="1413" end="1429" title="1995 Colorado Rockies season" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505780" start="1486" end="1501" title="1995 Cincinnati Reds season" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4267103" start="1541" end="1560" title="1995 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760" start="1757" end="1768" title="2012 Major League Baseball season" label="2012 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q67515766" start="1916" end="1949" title="2020 Major League Baseball season" label="2020 Major League Baseball season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2052" end="2069" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="2367" end="2381" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="2467" end="2486" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="2604" end="2622" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q14878253" start="2799" end="2834" title="2013 National League Wild Card Game" label="2013 National League Wild Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005525" start="2839" end="2843" title="2008 in baseball" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="2849" end="2866" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363291" start="3024" end="3053" title="American League East Division" label="American League East Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580739" start="3063" end="3067" title="1982 in baseball" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594188" start="3096" end="3100" title="1998 in baseball" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002862" start="3131" end="3162" title="1981 American League Division Series" label="American League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="3170" end="3186" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="strike-shortened"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580118" start="3187" end="3198" title="1981 in baseball" label="1981 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q114001174" start="3355" end="3371" title="Wild Card Series" label="Wild Card Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q562521" start="4151" end="4162" title="Nate Silver" label="Nate Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867557" start="5475" end="5480" title="MLBPA" label="MLBPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649712" start="5959" end="5963" title="1998 Major League Baseball season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760" start="6249" end="6253" title="2012 Major League Baseball season" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544882" start="6397" end="6401" title="2013 Major League Baseball season" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="6732" end="6746" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q465503" start="6885" end="6916" title="American League Division Series" label="American League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561396" start="6925" end="6964" title="List of American League pennant winners" label="List of American League pennant winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591467" start="6966" end="7005" title="List of National League pennant winners" label="List of National League pennant winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q862958" start="7007" end="7037" title="List of World Series champions" label="List of World Series champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018206" start="7039" end="7059" title="Major League Baseball division winners" label="MLB division winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738184" start="7061" end="7075" title="Major League Baseball postseason" label="MLB postseason"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3864" wikidata="Q1207242" url="?curid=3864" title="2001 World Series">
<text>The 2001 World Series was the championship series of Major League Baseball&#x27;s (MLB) 2001 season. The 97th edition of the World Series, it was a best-of-seven playoff between the National League (NL) champion Arizona Diamondbacks and the three-time defending World Series champions and American League (AL) champion New York Yankees. The underdog Diamondbacks defeated the heavily favored Yankees, four games to three to win the series. Considered one of the greatest World Series of all time,
its memorable aspects included two extra-inning games and three late-inning comebacks. Diamondbacks pitchers Randy Johnson and Curt Schilling were both named World Series Most Valuable Players.

The Yankees advanced to the World Series by defeating the Oakland Athletics, three games to two, in the AL Division Series, and then the Seattle Mariners in the AL Championship Series, four games to one. It was the Yankees&#x27; fourth consecutive World Series appearance, after winning championships in , , and . The Diamondbacks advanced to the World Series by defeating the St. Louis Cardinals, three games to two, in the NL Division Series, and then the Atlanta Braves in the NL Championship Series, four games to one. It was the franchise&#x27;s first appearance in a World Series.

The Series began later than usual as a result of a delay in the regular season after the September 11 attacks and was the first to extend into November. The Diamondbacks won the first two games at home, limiting the Yankees to just one run. The Yankees responded with a close win in Game 3, at which U.S. President George W. Bush threw out the ceremonial first pitch. In Games 4 and 5, the Yankees won in comeback fashion, hitting game-tying home runs off Diamondbacks closer Byung-hyun Kim with one out remaining in consecutive games, before winning in extra innings. The Diamondbacks won Game 6 in a blowout, forcing a decisive Game 7. In the final game, the Yankees led in the ninth inning before the Diamondbacks staged a comeback against closer Mariano Rivera, capped off by a walk-off, bases-loaded bloop single by Luis Gonzalez to clinch Arizona&#x27;s championship victory. This was the third World Series to end in a bases-loaded, walk-off hit, following and , and to this date, the last Series to end on a walk-off of any kind. This series held the record for the latest date that a Series ended (November 4), until that record was tied during the 2009 World Series and broken during the 2022 World Series.

Among several firsts, the 2001 World Series was the first World Series championship for the Diamondbacks; the first World Series played in the state of Arizona or the Mountain Time Zone; the first championship for a Far West state other than California; the first major professional sports team from the state of Arizona to win a championship; and the earliest an MLB franchise had won a World Series (the Diamondbacks had only existed for four years). The home team won every game in the Series, which had only happened twice before, in 1987 and 1991, both won by the Minnesota Twins. The Diamondbacks outscored the Yankees, 37–14, as a result of large margins of victory achieved by Arizona at Bank One Ballpark (now known as Chase Field) relative to the one-run margins the Yankees achieved at Yankee Stadium. Arizona&#x27;s pitching held powerhouse New York to a .183 batting average, the lowest in a seven-game World Series ever, surpassing the St. Louis Cardinals, who hit .185 in the 1985 World Series. This and the 2002 World Series were the last two consecutive World Series to have game sevens until the World Series of 2016 and 2017. The 2001 World Series was the subject of an HBO documentary, &quot;Nine Innings from Ground Zero&quot;, in 2004. It is often referred to as the greatest World Series of all time.

==Background==
===Arizona Diamondbacks===
The Arizona Diamondbacks began play in 1998, along with the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, as the youngest expansion team in Major League Baseball (MLB). After a mediocre debut season, the Diamondbacks finished the following year first in the National League (NL) West with a record, but lost to the New York Mets in the National League Division series. With several All-Star players like Randy Johnson and Matt Williams, the Diamondbacks had high expectations for the 2000 season, but finished third in the NL West with an record. During the offseason, team manager Buck Showalter was fired, and replaced by sportscaster Bob Brenly. The Diamondbacks acquired several notable free agent players during the offseason, including Miguel Batista, Mark Grace, and Reggie Sanders. Most of the Diamondbacks players were above the age of 30, and had already played on a number of teams prior to the 2001 season. In fact, the Diamondbacks starting lineup for the World Series did not include a player under the age of 31, making them the oldest team by player age in World Series history. With several players nearing the age of retirement, Luis Gonzalez noted that the overall team mentality was &quot;there&#x27;s too many good guys in here to let this opportunity slip away&quot;.

Although the Diamondbacks were only one game above .500 by the end of April, Gonzalez had a particularly memorable start to the season, in which he tied the MLB record with 13 home runs during the month of April. The Diamondbacks found greater success in May and June, and at one point had a six-game lead in the NL West. During this span, the team won nine consecutive games, and Johnson tied the MLB record with 20 strikeouts in a nine-inning game. The six game lead did not last long however, and by the end of July, the Diamondbacks were a half game behind the Los Angeles Dodgers in the West. A resurgent August pushed the team back into first place, a spot they maintained for the rest of the season. By the end of the season, several Diamondbacks players had put up exceptional statistics: Curt Schilling had the most wins of any pitcher in MLB that year with 22, while Johnson nearly broke the single season strikeout record with 372. Johnson and Schilling also had the two lowest earned run averages (ERA) in the NL, with 2.49 and 2.98 respectively. Gonzalez ended the season with a .325 batting average and 57 home runs, and finished third in voting for the NL Most Valuable Player Award. The Diamondbacks were also one of the best defensive teams in MLB that year, second in fewest errors committed, and tied with the Seattle Mariners for the best fielding percentage.

The Diamondbacks entered the postseason as the #2 seed in the National League, and played the #4 seed St. Louis Cardinals in the National League Division Series. Schilling threw a shutout in Game 1 to give the Diamondbacks an early series lead, but the Cardinals won Game 2 thanks to a two-run home run from Albert Pujols. Craig Counsell hit a three-run home run late in Game 3 to give the Diamondbacks a 2–1 series lead, but the Cardinals won Game 4 with strong pitching performances from Bud Smith and their relief pitchers. The Diamondbacks clinched the series in Game 5, when Tony Womack hit a game winning single that scored Danny Bautista. They then faced the third seeded Atlanta Braves in the National League Championship Series. Johnson also threw a shutout in Game 1, while the Braves hit three home runs in Game 2 to tie the series at one game apiece. Schilling threw a complete game in Game 3, and the Diamondbacks scored 11 runs in a Game 4 victory to take a 3–1 series lead. The Diamondbacks clinched the series in Game 5 with another strong performance from Johnson. With the win, they became the fastest expansion team to reach the World Series, in just their fourth year of play.

===New York Yankees===

In contrast to the Diamondbacks, the New York Yankees were one of the oldest and most recognized teams in all of North American sports. The Yankees had built a dynasty in the late 1990s that extended into 2000, which included winning three consecutive World Series&#x27; and four of the last five. These teams were led by a group of talented young players that became known as the Core Four: Derek Jeter, Andy Pettitte, Jorge Posada, and Mariano Rivera. Following the Yankees win over the Braves in the 1999 World Series, sportscaster Bob Costas called the Yankees &quot;the team of the decade, [and] most successful franchise of the century.&quot;

The Yankees finished the 2001 season in first place in the AL East with a win–loss record of (a winning percentage of ), games ahead of the Boston Red Sox, good enough to secure the #2 seed in the American League playoff bracket. The Yankees then defeated the fourth seeded Oakland Athletics 3 games to 2 in the AL Division Series, after losing 2 games at home, and the top seeded Seattle Mariners 4 games to 1 in the AL Championship Series to advance to their fourth consecutive World Series, and fifth in six years.

Derek Jeter and Tino Martinez led the Yankees offensively during the 2001 season. Jeter batted .311 with 21 home runs and 74 RBI in 150 games, while Martinez batted .280 with 34 home runs and 113 RBI in 154 games. Roger Clemens and Mike Mussina were the leaders of the Yankees&#x27; pitching staff. Clemens who won the Cy Young Award, his sixth of a career total and major league record 7, finished with a win–loss record of 20–3, an earned-run average (ERA) of 3.51, and struck out 213 batters in 220.1 innings pitched and was by far the Yankee&#x27;s best starter in the World Series. Mussina finished with a win–loss record of 17–11, an ERA of 3.15, and struck out 214 batters in 228.2 innings pitched.

=== September 11 and the month of November ===

After MLB games were postponed as a result of the September 11 attacks, the World Series began on October 27, 2001, the latest start date for a World Series until the 2009 World Series, which started on October 28. The last three games were the first major-league games (other than exhibitions) played in the month of November. This was just the fourth time that no World Series champion was decided within the traditional month of October. The previous three occurrences were in (no series), (series held in September because of World War I), and (series cancelled by the players&#x27; strike). Game 7 was played on November 4; at the time this was the latest date a World Series game was played, and still tied with Game 6 of the 2009 Series for the second-latest date of a World Series game (only behind &#x27;s Game 6, played on November 5).

Additionally, the Series took place in New York City only seven weeks after the attacks, representing a remarkable boost in morale for the fatigued city. A tattered and torn American flag recovered from the wreckage at Ground Zero, which had been used at funerals of fallen Port Authority police officers after the attacks, was flown over Yankee Stadium during the series. According to Port Authority sergeant Antonio Scannella, &quot;We wanted a place America could see this flag so they could see the rips in it, but it still flies.&quot;

President George W. Bush threw out the ceremonial first pitch before Game 3 at Yankee Stadium. Bush had been counseled by security officials to appear before Game 1 in Phoenix because they believed it would be more secure there, but Bush thought it would be better for the country to do it in New York. Security was extremely tight at Yankee Stadium before the game, with bomb sniffing dogs sweeping the property, snipers positioned around the stadium, and vendors screened by federal agents. A Secret Service agent dressed as an umpire and stood on the field with the other umpires before the game, briefly appearing on the TV broadcast. Bush wore a bulletproof vest underneath an FDNY sweater. Having been counseled by Derek Jeter to throw from the rubber on top of the pitcher&#x27;s mound rather than the base of the mound, Bush strode to the rubber, gave a thumbs up to the crowd, and fired a strike over home plate as the crowd chanted &quot;U-S-A&quot;. Bush later reflected, &quot;I had never had such an adrenaline rush as when I finally made it to the mound. I was saying to the crowd, &#x27;I&#x27;m with you, the country&#x27;s with you&#x27; ... And I wound up and fired the pitch. I&#x27;ve been to conventions and rallies and speeches: I&#x27;ve never felt anything so powerful and emotions so strong, and the collective will of the crowd so evident.&quot;

==Summary==
==Matchups==
===Game 1===

The Series commenced on October 27, which was the latest a World Series had started, beating the previous record by four days (1999 World Series, October 23). The Yankees struck first in Game 1 when Derek Jeter was hit by a pitch with one out in the first and scored on Bernie Williams&#x27;s double two batters later. However, Arizona&#x27;s Curt Schilling and two relievers, Mike Morgan and Greg Swindell held the Yankees scoreless afterward. They managed to get only two walks and two hits for the rest of the game, Scott Brosius&#x27;s double in the second and Jorge Posada&#x27;s single in the fourth, both with two outs.

Meanwhile, the Diamondbacks tied the game on Craig Counsell&#x27;s one-out home run in the first off of Mike Mussina. After a scoreless second, Mussina led off the third by hitting Tony Womack with a pitch. He moved to second on Counsell&#x27;s sacrifice bunt before Luis Gonzalez&#x27;s home run put the Diamondbacks up 3–1. A single and right fielder David Justice&#x27;s error put runners on second and third before Matt Williams&#x27;s sacrifice fly put Arizona up 4–1. After Mark Grace was intentionally walked, Damian Miller&#x27;s RBI double gave Arizona a 5–1 lead.

Next inning, Gonzalez hit a two-out double off of Randy Choate. Reggie Sanders was intentionally walked before Gonzalez scored on Steve Finley&#x27;s single. An error by third baseman Brosius scored Sanders, put Finley at third, and Williams at second. Both men scored on Mark Grace&#x27;s double, putting Arizona up 9–1. Though the Diamondbacks got just one more hit for the rest of the game off of Sterling Hitchcock and Mike Stanton (Williams&#x27; leadoff single in the seventh), they went up 1–0 in the series.

The Diamondbacks&#x27; win in Game 1 was the first World Series game won by a non-New York City team since 1997. In every World Series between 1997 and 2001, either both teams were from New York City or a New York City team won in a sweep (1998 and 1999).

===Game 2===

Arizona continued to take control of the Series with the strong pitching performance of Randy Johnson. The Big Unit pitched a complete-game shutout, allowing only four baserunners and three hits while striking out 11 Yankees. Andy Pettitte meanwhile nearly matched him, retiring Arizona in order in five of the seven innings he pitched. In the second, he allowed a leadoff single to Reggie Sanders, who scored on Danny Bautista&#x27;s double. Bautista was the only Arizona runner stranded for the entire game. In the seventh, Pettitte hit Luis Gonzalez with a pitch before Sanders grounded into a forceout. After Bautista singled, Matt Williams&#x27;s three-run home run put Arizona up 4–0. They won the game with that score and led the series two games to none as it moved to New York City. This was the 1,000th game played in the history of the MLB postseason.

===Game 3===

The game was opened in New York City by President George W. Bush, who threw the ceremonial first pitch, a strike to Yankees backup catcher Todd Greene. Bush became the first incumbent U.S. president to throw a World Series first pitch since Jimmy Carter in . He also threw the baseball from the mound where the pitcher would be set (unlike most ceremonial first pitches which are from in front of the mound) and threw it for a strike. Chants of &quot;U-S-A, U-S-A&quot; rang throughout Yankee Stadium. Yankees starter Roger Clemens was outstanding allowing only three hits and struck out nine in seven innings of work. Yankees closer Mariano Rivera pitched two innings for the save.

Jorge Posada&#x27;s leadoff home run off of Brian Anderson in the second put the Yankees up 1–0. The Diamondbacks loaded the bases in the fourth on two walks and one hit before Matt Williams&#x27;s sacrifice fly tied the game. Bernie Williams hit a leadoff single in the sixth and moved to second on a wild pitch one out later before Posada walked. Mike Morgan relieved Anderson and struck out David Justice before Scott Brosius broke the tie with an RBI single. That would be all the scoring as Morgan and Greg Swindell pitched the rest of the game for the Diamondbacks. The Yankees cut Arizona&#x27;s series lead to 2–1 with the win.

===Game 4===

Game 4 saw the Yankees send Orlando Hernández to the mound while the Diamondbacks elected to bring back Curt Schilling on three days&#x27; rest. Both pitchers gave up home runs, with Schilling doing so to Shane Spencer in the third inning and Hernandez doing so to Mark Grace in the fourth. Hernandez pitched solid innings, giving up four hits while Schilling went seven innings and gave up one.

With the game still tied entering the eighth, Arizona struck. After Mike Stanton recorded the first out of the inning, Luis Gonzalez singled and Erubiel Durazo hit a double to bring him in. Matt Williams followed by grounding into a fielder&#x27;s choice off of Ramiro Mendoza, which scored pinch runner Midre Cummings and gave the team a 3–1 lead.

With his team on the verge of taking a commanding 3–1 series lead, Diamondbacks manager Bob Brenly elected to bring in closer Byung-hyun Kim in the bottom of the eighth for a two-inning save. Kim, at 22, became the first Korean-born player to play in the MLB World Series. Kim struck out the side in the eighth, but ran into trouble in the ninth.

Derek Jeter led off by trying to bunt for a hit but was thrown out by Williams. Paul O&#x27;Neill then lined a single in front of Gonzalez. After Bernie Williams struck out, Kim seemed to be out of trouble with Tino Martinez coming to the plate. However, Martinez drove the first pitch he saw from Kim into the right-center field bleachers, tying the score at 3–3. The Yankees were not done, as Jorge Posada walked and David Justice moved him into scoring position with a single. Kim struck Spencer out to end the threat.

When the scoreboard clock in Yankee Stadium passed midnight, World Series play in November began, with the message on the scoreboard &quot;Welcome to November Baseball&quot;.

Mariano Rivera took the hill for the Yankees in the tenth and retired the Diamondbacks in order. Kim went out for a third inning of work and retired Scott Brosius and Alfonso Soriano, but Jeter hit an opposite field home run on a 3–2 pitch count from Kim. This home run gave the Yankees a 4–3 victory and tied the Series at two games apiece which guaranteed a return trip to Arizona and made Jeter the first player to hit a November home run and earning him the tongue-in-cheek nickname of &quot;Mr. November&quot;.

===Game 5===

Game 5 saw the Yankees return to Mike Mussina for the start while the Diamondbacks sent Miguel Batista, who had not pitched in twelve days, to the mound. Batista pitched a strong scoreless innings, striking out six, and reliever Greg Swindell got the last out of the eighth inning. Mussina bounced back from his poor Game 1 start, recording ten strikeouts, but allowed solo home runs in the fifth inning to Steve Finley and Rod Barajas.

In the top of the ninth, Paul O&#x27;Neill was honored by Yankee fans who chanted his name to which O&#x27;Neill, who was visibly in tears, tipped his hat. With the Diamondbacks leading 2–0 in the ninth, Byung-hyun Kim was called upon for the save despite having thrown three innings the night before. Jorge Posada doubled to open the inning, but Kim got Shane Spencer to ground out and then struck out Chuck Knoblauch. As had happened the previous night, Kim could not hold the lead as Scott Brosius hit a 1–0 pitch over the left field wall, the second straight game tying home run in the bottom of the ninth for the Yankees. Kim was pulled from the game in favor of Mike Morgan who recorded the final out.

Morgan retired the Yankees in order in the 10th and 11th innings, while the Diamondbacks got to Mariano Rivera in the 11th. Danny Bautista and Erubiel Durazo opened the inning with hits and Matt Williams advanced them into scoring position with a sacrifice bunt. Rivera then intentionally walked Steve Finley to load the bases, then got Reggie Sanders to line out and Mark Grace grounded out to end the inning.

Arizona went to midseason trade acquisition Albie Lopez in the 12th, and in his first at bat he gave up a single to Knoblauch (who had entered the game as a pinch runner). Brosius moved him over with a bunt, and then Alfonso Soriano ended the game with an RBI single to give the Yankees a 3–2 victory and a 3–2 series lead as the series went back to Phoenix. Lopez would not pitch again in the series. Sterling Hitchcock got the win for the Yankees after he relieved Rivera for the twelfth.

===Game 6===

With Arizona in a must-win situation, Randy Johnson pitched seven innings and struck out seven, giving up just two runs, and Bobby Witt and Troy Brohawn finished the blowout. The Diamondbacks struck first when Tony Womack hit a leadoff double off of Andy Pettitte and scored on Danny Bautista&#x27;s single in the first. Next inning, Womack&#x27;s bases-loaded single scored two and Bautista&#x27;s single scored another. The Yankees loaded the bases in the third on a single and two walks, but Johnson struck out Jorge Posada to end the inning. The Diamondbacks broke the game open with eight runs in the bottom half. Pettitte allowed a leadoff walk to Greg Colbrunn and subsequent double to Matt Williams before being relieved by Jay Witasick, who allowed four straight singles to Reggie Sanders, Jay Bell, Damian Miller, and Johnson that scored three runs. After Womack struck out, Bautista&#x27;s single scored two more runs and Luis Gonzalez&#x27;s double scored another, with Bautista being thrown out at home. Colbrunn&#x27;s single and Williams&#x27;s double scored a run each before Sanders struck out to end the inning. In the fourth, Bell reached first on a strike-three wild pitch before scoring on Miller&#x27;s double. Johnson struck out before Womack singled to knock Witasick out of the game. With Randy Choate pitching, Yankees second baseman Alfonso Soriano&#x27;s error on Bautista&#x27;s ground ball allowed Miller to score and put runners on first and second before Gonzalez&#x27;s single scored the Diamondbacks&#x27; final run. Choate and Mike Stanton kept them scoreless for the rest of the game. Pettitte was charged with six runs in two innings while Witasick was charged with nine runs in innings, the most runs allowed by any pitcher in a World Series game since Hall of Famer Walter Johnson also allowed nine runs in Game 7 of the 1925 World Series. The Yankees scored their only runs in the sixth on back-to-back one-out singles by Shane Spencer and Luis Sojo with runners on second and third, but by then the score had become so far out of reach that it didn&#x27;t do the Yankees much good. The Diamondbacks hit six doubles and Danny Bautista batted 3-for-4 with five RBIs. The team set a World Series record with 22 hits and defeated the New York Yankees in its most lopsided postseason loss in 293 postseason games, since surpassed by a 16–1 loss to the Boston Red Sox in Game 3 of the 2018 American League Division Series. The 15–2 win evened the series at three games apiece and set up a Game 7 for the ages between Roger Clemens and Curt Schilling.

===Game 7===

It was a matchup of two 20-game winners in the Series finale. Roger Clemens, at 39 years old, became the oldest Game 7 starter. Curt Schilling had already started two games of the Series and pitched his 300th inning of the season on just three days&#x27; rest. The two aces matched each other inning by inning and after seven full innings, the game was tied at 1–1. The Diamondbacks scored first in the sixth inning with a Steve Finley single and a Danny Bautista double (Bautista, trying to stretch it into a triple, was called out at third base). The Yankees responded with an RBI single from Tino Martinez, which drove in Derek Jeter who had singled earlier. Brenly stayed with Schilling into the eighth, and the move backfired as Alfonso Soriano hit a home run on an 0–2 pitch. After Schilling struck out Scott Brosius, he gave up a single to David Justice, and he left the game trailing 2–1. When Brenly came to the mound to remove Schilling, he was heard on the Sounds of the Game microphone telling his clearly upset pitcher, &quot;love you brother, you&#x27;re my hero&quot; and assuring him that &quot;that ain&#x27;t gonna beat us, we&#x27;re gonna get that back and then some.&quot; He then brought in Game 5 starter Miguel Batista to get Jeter out and then in an unconventional move, brought in the previous night&#x27;s starter and winner Randy Johnson, who had thrown 104 pitches, in relief to keep it a one-run game. It proved to be a smart move, as Johnson retired pinch hitter Chuck Knoblauch (who batted for the left handed Paul O&#x27;Neill) on a fly out to Bautista in right field, then returned to the mound for the top of the ninth where he got Bernie Williams to fly out to Steve Finley in center field and Martinez to ground out to Tony Womack at shortstop, and then struck out catcher Jorge Posada to send the game to the bottom of the ninth inning.

With the Yankees ahead 2–1 in the bottom of the eighth, manager Joe Torre decided to relieve setup man Mike Stanton, who had got the last two outs, to his ace closer Mariano Rivera for a two-inning save. Rivera struck out the side in the eighth, including Arizona&#x27;s Luis Gonzalez, Matt Williams, and Bautista. Although he was effective in the eighth, this game would end in the third ninth-inning comeback of the Series.

Mark Grace led off the inning with a single to center on a 1–0 pitch. Rivera&#x27;s errant throw to second base on a bunt attempt by catcher Damian Miller on an 0–1 pitch put runners on first and second. Jeter tried to reach for the ball, but got tangled in the legs of pinch-runner David Dellucci, who was sliding in an attempt to break up the double play. During the next at bat, Rivera appeared to regain control when he fielded pinch hitter Jay Bell&#x27;s (who was hitting for Johnson) bunt and threw out Dellucci at third base, but third baseman Brosius decided to hold onto the baseball instead of throwing to first to complete the double play. Midre Cummings was sent in to pinch-run for Damian Miller, who had reached second base safely. With Cummings at second and Bell at first, the next batter, Womack, hit a double down the right-field line on a 2–2 pitch that tied the game and earned Rivera a blown save, his first in a postseason since 1997. Bell advanced to third and the Yankees pulled the infield and outfield in as the potential winning run (Bell) stood at third with fewer than two outs. After Rivera hit Craig Counsell unintentionally with an 0–1 pitch, the bases were loaded. On an 0–1 pitch, with Williams in the on-deck circle, Gonzalez lofted a soft floater single over the drawn-in Jeter that barely reached the outfield grass, plating Jay Bell with the winning run.

Gonzalez&#x27;s single ended New York&#x27;s bid for a fourth consecutive title (and fifth in six seasons) and brought Arizona its first championship in its fourth year of existence, making the Diamondbacks the fastest expansion team to win a World Series (beating out the 1997 Florida Marlins, who had done it in their fifth season at that time). It was also the first, and remains the only, major professional sports championship for the state of Arizona. Randy Johnson picked up his third win of the Series, becoming the first pitcher since Mickey Lolich of the 1968 Tigers to win three games in a World Series. Rivera took the loss, his only postseason loss in his career. Coincidentally, this was also the second World Series in a 5-year span (1997 to 2001) to end with a game-winning RBI single. Edgar Renteria hit the game-winner in the 1997 series, while Gonzalez hit it here, with Craig Counsell being on the basepaths for each. No other World Series has ended with a game-winning hit since 2001.

In 2009, Game 7 of the 2001 World Series was chosen by &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; as the Best Postseason Game of the Decade (2000–2009).

In the years that have followed, many fans regardless of team allegiance consider Game 7 of the 2001 World Series to be one of the greatest games ever played in the history of professional baseball.

==Composite box==
2001 World Series (4–3): Arizona Diamondbacks (N.L.) over New York Yankees (A.L.)
==Media coverage==
For the second consecutive year, Fox carried the World Series with its top broadcast team, Joe Buck and Tim McCarver (himself a Yankees broadcaster). This was the first year of Fox&#x27;s exclusive rights to the World Series (in the previous contract, Fox only broadcast the World Series in even numbered years while NBC broadcast it in odd numbered years), which it has held since. This particular contract also had given Fox exclusive rights to the entire baseball postseason, which aired over its family of networks, but shortly after the World Series, Fox sold its cable outlet Fox Family Channel, on which it aired Division Series games, shortly after the World Series ended, to Disney, which renamed the channel to ABC Family; since this made the channel a corporate sibling of ESPN, Disney would move those games to ESPN in 2003 after airing them for one more season on ABC Family. 

ESPN Radio provided national radio coverage for the fourth consecutive year, with Jon Miller and Joe Morgan calling the action.

Locally, the Series was broadcast by KTAR-AM in Phoenix with Thom Brennaman, Greg Schulte, Rod Allen and Jim Traber, and by WABC-AM in New York City with John Sterling and Michael Kay. This was WABC&#x27;s last broadcast of Yankees baseball after twenty-one seasons as the team&#x27;s flagship, and also the last time Sterling and Kay broadcast together after ten seasons. Sterling and the Yankees joined WCBS-AM the next season on the radio side, while Kay was promoted to television as the YES Network launched for 2002. 

===Books and films===
Buster Olney, who covered the Yankees for &quot;The New York Times&quot; before joining ESPN, would write a book titled &quot;The Last Night of the Yankee Dynasty&quot;, published in 2004. The book is a play by play account of Game 7 in addition to stories about key players, executives, and moments from the 1996–2001 dynasty. In a 2005 reprinting, Olney included a new epilogue covering the aftermath of the 2001 World Series up to the Boston Red Sox epic comeback from down 3–0 in the 2004 ALCS.

The official MLB Productions documentary film of the series was released in 2001.

In 2004, HBO released &quot;Nine Innings from Ground Zero&quot;, a documentary focusing on the special role that baseball, and particularly the Yankees, played in helping to heal New York after 9/11. The film features interviews with players, fans who lost family members, firefighters, sportswriters, and then United States President George W. Bush.

In 2005, A&amp;E Home Video released the &quot;New York Yankees Fall Classic Collectors Edition (1996–2001)&quot; DVD set. Game 4 of the 2001 World Series is included in the set. In 2008, &quot;The Arizona Diamondbacks 2001 World Series&quot; DVD set was released. All seven games are included on this set.

==Aftermath==
The duo of Curt Schilling and Randy Johnson were awarded the World Series Most Valuable Player, the first players to split the award since Steve Yeager, Ron Cey, and Pedro Guerrero did so for the Dodgers in the 1981 World Series, and last to do so, to date. This would not be the only award they split as both were named Sports Illustrated Sportsperson of the Year for 2001.

Rivera&#x27;s blown save and the Yankees&#x27; loss proved to be life-saving for Yankees utility player Enrique Wilson. Had the Yankees won, Wilson was planning to fly home to the Dominican Republic on American Airlines Flight 587 on November 12 after what would have been a Yankees victory parade down the Canyon of Heroes. But after the Yankees lost (and thus no parade occurred), Wilson decided to fly home earlier. Flight 587 would crash in Belle Harbor, Queens, killing everyone on board. Rivera later said, &quot;I am glad we lost the World Series because it means that I still have a friend.&quot;

During the offseason, several Yankees moved on to other teams or retired, the most notable changes being the free agent departures of Martinez and Knoblauch to the St. Louis Cardinals and Kansas City Royals, and Brosius and O&#x27;Neill retiring. Martinez would later return to the Yankees to finish his career in 2005.

After winning the NL West again in 2002 the Diamondbacks were swept 3–0 by St. Louis in the NLDS. From here they declined, losing 111 games in 2004 as Bob Brenly was fired during that season. Arizona would not win another NL West title until 2007. Schilling was traded to the Boston Red Sox after the 2003 season and in 2004 helped lead them to their first World Series championship since 1918. He helped them win another championship in 2007 and retired after four years with Boston, missing the entire 2008 season with a shoulder injury. Johnson was traded to the Yankees after the 2004 season, a season that saw him throw a perfect game against the Atlanta Braves, though he would be traded back to the Diamondbacks two years later and finish his career with the San Francisco Giants in 2009. The last player from the 2001 Diamondbacks roster, Lyle Overbay, retired following the 2014 season with the Milwaukee Brewers while the last player from the 2001 Yankees, Randy Choate, retired following the 2016 season.

From 2002 through 2007, the Yankees&#x27; misfortune in the postseason continued, with the team losing the ALDS to the Anaheim Angels in 2002, the World Series to the Florida Marlins in 2003, the ALCS to the Boston Red Sox (in the process becoming the first team in postseason history to blow a 3–0 series lead) in 2004, the ALDS again to the Angels in 2005, and then losing the ALDS to the Detroit Tigers and the Cleveland Indians in 2006 and 2007, respectively. In addition, including the World Series loss in 2001, every World Series champion from 2001 to 2004 won the title at the Yankees&#x27; expense in postseason play, which is an AL record and as of 2023 tied for the MLB record with the Los Angeles Dodgers from 2016 to 2019. Joe Torre&#x27;s contract was allowed to expire and he was replaced by Joe Girardi in 2008, a season in which the Yankees would miss the playoffs for the first time since 1993. The Yankees won their 27th World Series championship in 2009, defeating the defending 2008 champion Philadelphia Phillies in six games, but could not pull off another dynasty like they did during the late 1990s and early 2000s; in fact, they failed to reach the World Series during the entirety of the 2010s. The Yankees would finally return to the World Series in 2024 only to fall in five games to the Los Angeles Dodgers. Since 2001, the Yankees have played in four World Series and lost three of them (&#x27;01, ´03, &#x27;24)

This is the state of Arizona&#x27;s only championship among the four major North American men&#x27;s professional sports. However, the WNBA&#x27;s Phoenix Mercury have won three championships since then (2007, 2009, and 2014).

The Diamondbacks and the Baltimore Ravens, who won the Super Bowl earlier in 2001, created the first instance of two major sports teams winning a championship game or series on their first attempts. This would not occur again until 2019, when the Toronto Raptors and Washington Nationals accomplished this feat.

The Diamondbacks would not return to the World Series again until 2023; this time, they would go on to lose to the Texas Rangers in five games.

==Quotes==
==See also==
* 2001 Japan Series

== General sources ==

== Citations ==
==External links==

* Book on 2001 WS is &quot;the last word on the inside game of baseball&quot;
* SI.com: MLB Postseason 2001
* USA Today: Quest for a Title
* CBS Sportsline: 2001 MLB Playoffs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1207242" start="4" end="21" title="2001 World Series" label="2001 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="30" end="49" title="World Series" label="championship series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="53" end="74" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628391" start="88" end="99" title="2001 Major League Baseball season" label="2001 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203506" start="148" end="169" title="best-of-seven playoff" label="best-of-seven playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="182" end="197" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598458" start="212" end="232" title="2001 Arizona Diamondbacks season" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="289" end="304" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598967" start="319" end="335" title="2001 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q123682" start="606" end="619" title="Randy Johnson" label="Randy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q954975" start="624" end="638" title="Curt Schilling" label="Curt Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372040" start="655" end="689" title="World Series Most Valuable Player Award" label="World Series Most Valuable Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598983" start="750" end="767" title="2001 Oakland Athletics season" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598455" start="796" end="814" title="2001 American League Division Series" label="AL Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599071" start="829" end="845" title="2001 Seattle Mariners season" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511207" start="853" end="875" title="2001 American League Championship Series" label="AL Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599120" start="1069" end="1088" title="2001 St. Louis Cardinals season" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598955" start="1117" end="1135" title="2001 National League Division Series" label="NL Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598469" start="1150" end="1164" title="2001 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511255" start="1172" end="1194" title="2001 National League Championship Series" label="NL Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1369" end="1389" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1580" end="1594" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="1595" end="1609" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064159" start="1624" end="1646" title="ceremonial first pitch" label="ceremonial first pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="1722" end="1730" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q997419" start="1749" end="1755" title="closer (baseball)" label="closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q489302" start="1756" end="1770" title="Byung-hyun Kim" label="Byung-hyun Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="2030" end="2044" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2062" end="2070" title="Glossary of baseball (W)#walk-off home run" label="walk-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737865" start="2101" end="2114" title="Luis Gonzalez (outfielder, born 1967)" label="Luis Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q155391" start="2438" end="2455" title="2009 World Series" label="2009 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q113580778" start="2478" end="2495" title="2022 World Series" label="2022 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134980" start="2665" end="2683" title="Mountain Time Zone" label="Mountain Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="2714" end="2728" title="Western United States" label="Far West state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569265" start="3036" end="3040" title="1987 World Series" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q590944" start="3045" end="3049" title="1991 World Series" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="3067" end="3082" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068011" start="3194" end="3211" title="Chase Field" label="Bank One Ballpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q675214" start="3295" end="3309" title="Yankee Stadium (1923)" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="3370" end="3385" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582533" start="3448" end="3467" title="1985 St. Louis Cardinals season" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559938" start="3489" end="3506" title="1985 World Series" label="1985 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187726" start="3521" end="3538" title="2002 World Series" label="2002 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906838" start="3628" end="3632" title="2016 World Series" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632053" start="3637" end="3641" title="2017 World Series" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="3687" end="3690" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593351" start="3904" end="3908" title="1998 Arizona Diamondbacks season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="3925" end="3945" title="Tampa Bay Devil Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="3963" end="3977" title="expansion team" label="expansion team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594481" start="4067" end="4085" title="1999 Arizona Diamondbacks season" label="the following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="4099" end="4114" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209761" start="4120" end="4124" title="National League West" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594965" start="4156" end="4169" title="1999 New York Mets season" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594960" start="4177" end="4208" title="1999 National League Division Series" label="National League Division series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="4223" end="4231" title="Major League Baseball All-Star" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q123682" start="4245" end="4258" title="Randy Johnson" label="Randy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299589" start="4263" end="4276" title="Matt Williams (third baseman)" label="Matt Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597159" start="4325" end="4336" title="2000 Arizona Diamondbacks season" label="2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q27020041" start="4399" end="4408" title="offseason" label="offseason"/>
<link wikidata="Q921030" start="4423" end="4437" title="Buck Showalter" label="Buck Showalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="4465" end="4477" title="Sports commentator" label="sportscaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907595" start="4478" end="4488" title="Bob Brenly" label="Bob Brenly"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="4532" end="4542" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112725" start="4583" end="4597" title="Miguel Batista" label="Miguel Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767793" start="4599" end="4609" title="Mark Grace" label="Mark Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308306" start="4615" end="4629" title="Reggie Sanders" label="Reggie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q25392108" start="4786" end="4801" title="starting lineup" label="starting lineup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737865" start="4988" end="5001" title="Luis Gonzalez (outfielder, born 1967)" label="Luis Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025711" start="5177" end="5187" title="Winning percentage" label="above .500"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="5308" end="5316" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="5549" end="5558" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q176903" start="5570" end="5576" title="inning" label="inning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598856" start="5697" end="5716" title="2001 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q809898" start="5917" end="5927" title="Baseball statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q954975" start="5929" end="5943" title="Curt Schilling" label="Curt Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="6121" end="6139" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="6229" end="6244" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="6303" end="6329" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202128" start="6425" end="6431" title="Error (baseball)" label="errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="6461" end="6477" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q859741" start="6491" end="6510" title="fielding percentage" label="fielding percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="6575" end="6590" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599120" start="6615" end="6634" title="2001 St. Louis Cardinals season" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598955" start="6642" end="6673" title="2001 National League Division Series" label="National League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505648" start="6693" end="6700" title="Shutouts in baseball" label="shutout"/>
<link wikidata="Q148726" start="6821" end="6834" title="Albert Pujols" label="Albert Pujols"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001998" start="6836" end="6850" title="Craig Counsell" label="Craig Counsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983947" start="7003" end="7012" title="Bud Smith" label="Bud Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198553" start="7023" end="7037" title="relief pitcher" label="relief pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823692" start="7093" end="7104" title="Tony Womack" label="Tony Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196988" start="7124" end="7130" title="single (baseball)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220138" start="7143" end="7157" title="Danny Bautista" label="Danny Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598469" start="7192" end="7206" title="2001 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511255" start="7214" end="7249" title="2001 National League Championship Series" label="National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132884" start="7394" end="7407" title="complete game" label="complete game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319161" start="7895" end="7902" title="Dynasty (sports)" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170163" start="8116" end="8125" title="Core Four" label="Core Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q353511" start="8127" end="8138" title="Derek Jeter" label="Derek Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q372506" start="8140" end="8153" title="Andy Pettitte" label="Andy Pettitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q952368" start="8155" end="8167" title="Jorge Posada" label="Jorge Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="8173" end="8187" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316770" start="8238" end="8255" title="1999 World Series" label="1999 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458861" start="8270" end="8280" title="Bob Costas" label="Bob Costas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363291" start="8444" end="8451" title="American League East" label="AL East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598518" start="8525" end="8539" title="2001 Boston Red Sox season" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="8582" end="8597" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598983" start="8659" end="8676" title="2001 Oakland Athletics season" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598455" start="8697" end="8715" title="2001 American League Division Series" label="AL Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q675214" start="8741" end="8745" title="Yankee Stadium (1923)" label="home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599071" start="8766" end="8782" title="2001 Seattle Mariners season" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511207" start="8803" end="8825" title="2001 American League Championship Series" label="AL Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q353511" start="8904" end="8915" title="Derek Jeter" label="Derek Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808412" start="8920" end="8933" title="Tino Martinez" label="Tino Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="9118" end="9131" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069430" start="9136" end="9148" title="Mike Mussina" label="Mike Mussina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="9338" end="9356" title="earned-run average" label="earned-run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="9709" end="9729" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155391" start="9826" end="9843" title="2009 World Series" label="2009 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="10232" end="10252" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="players&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="10780" end="10794" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="11048" end="11057" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="11058" end="11072" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064159" start="11087" end="11109" title="ceremonial first pitch" label="ceremonial first pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="11543" end="11557" title="United States Secret Service" label="Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q353511" start="12659" end="12670" title="Derek Jeter" label="Derek Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q711840" start="12730" end="12745" title="Bernie Williams" label="Bernie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q954975" start="12803" end="12817" title="Curt Schilling" label="Curt Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848099" start="12837" end="12848" title="Mike Morgan (baseball)" label="Mike Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606318" start="12853" end="12866" title="Greg Swindell" label="Greg Swindell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122597" start="12979" end="12992" title="Scott Brosius" label="Scott Brosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q952368" start="13025" end="13037" title="Jorge Posada" label="Jorge Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001998" start="13133" end="13147" title="Craig Counsell" label="Craig Counsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069430" start="13192" end="13204" title="Mike Mussina" label="Mike Mussina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823692" start="13269" end="13280" title="Tony Womack" label="Tony Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737865" start="13355" end="13368" title="Luis Gonzalez (outfielder, born 1967)" label="Luis Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018182" start="13441" end="13454" title="David Justice" label="David Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299589" start="13507" end="13520" title="Matt Williams (third baseman)" label="Matt Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767793" start="13568" end="13578" title="Mark Grace" label="Mark Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012717" start="13605" end="13618" title="Damian Miller" label="Damian Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029171" start="13713" end="13725" title="Randy Choate" label="Randy Choate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308306" start="13727" end="13741" title="Reggie Sanders" label="Reggie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025950" start="13793" end="13805" title="Steve Finley" label="Steve Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767793" start="13935" end="13945" title="Mark Grace" label="Mark Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498774" start="14063" end="14081" title="Sterling Hitchcock" label="Sterling Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297125" start="14086" end="14098" title="Mike Stanton (left-handed pitcher)" label="Mike Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q123682" start="14539" end="14552" title="Randy Johnson (pitcher)" label="Randy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q372506" start="14677" end="14690" title="Andy Pettitte" label="Andy Pettitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308306" start="14834" end="14848" title="Reggie Sanders" label="Reggie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220138" start="14864" end="14878" title="Danny Bautista" label="Danny Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737865" start="14990" end="15003" title="Luis Gonzalez (outfielder, born 1967)" label="Luis Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299589" start="15082" end="15095" title="Matt Williams (third baseman)" label="Matt Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738184" start="15298" end="15312" title="Major League Baseball postseason" label="MLB postseason"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="15379" end="15393" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064159" start="15409" end="15431" title="ceremonial first pitch" label="ceremonial first pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812398" start="15468" end="15479" title="Todd Greene" label="Todd Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="15503" end="15512" title="incumbent" label="incumbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="15570" end="15582" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560045" start="15780" end="15785" title="U-S-A! cheer" label="U-S-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="15847" end="15860" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="15963" end="15977" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q952368" start="16013" end="16025" title="Jorge Posada" label="Jorge Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962977" start="16057" end="16071" title="Brian Anderson (pitcher)" label="Brian Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299589" start="16190" end="16203" title="Matt Williams (third baseman)" label="Matt Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q711840" start="16240" end="16255" title="Bernie Williams" label="Bernie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848099" start="16362" end="16373" title="Mike Morgan (baseball)" label="Mike Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018182" start="16407" end="16420" title="David Justice" label="David Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122597" start="16428" end="16441" title="Scott Brosius" label="Scott Brosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606318" start="16520" end="16533" title="Greg Swindell" label="Greg Swindell"/>
<link wikidata="Q129443" start="16692" end="16709" title="Orlando Hernández" label="Orlando Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q954975" start="16768" end="16782" title="Curt Schilling" label="Curt Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488284" start="16869" end="16882" title="Shane Spencer" label="Shane Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767793" start="16929" end="16939" title="Mark Grace" label="Mark Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297125" start="17129" end="17141" title="Mike Stanton (left-handed pitcher)" label="Mike Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737865" start="17180" end="17193" title="Luis Gonzalez (outfielder, born 1967)" label="Luis Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297133" start="17206" end="17220" title="Erubiel Durazo" label="Erubiel Durazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299589" start="17251" end="17264" title="Matt Williams (third baseman)" label="Matt Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296949" start="17323" end="17337" title="Ramiro Mendoza" label="Ramiro Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842990" start="17365" end="17379" title="Midre Cummings" label="Midre Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907595" start="17499" end="17509" title="Bob Brenly" label="Bob Brenly"/>
<link wikidata="Q489302" start="17537" end="17551" title="Byung-hyun Kim" label="Byung-hyun Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q353511" start="17759" end="17770" title="Derek Jeter" label="Derek Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q865424" start="17839" end="17856" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (baseball)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q711840" start="17905" end="17920" title="Bernie Williams (born 1968)" label="Bernie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808412" start="17970" end="17983" title="Tino Martinez" label="Tino Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q952368" start="18154" end="18166" title="Jorge Posada" label="Jorge Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018182" start="18178" end="18191" title="David Justice" label="David Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="18458" end="18472" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122597" start="18607" end="18620" title="Scott Brosius" label="Scott Brosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363352" start="18625" end="18640" title="Alfonso Soriano" label="Alfonso Soriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069430" start="19022" end="19034" title="Mike Mussina" label="Mike Mussina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112725" start="19077" end="19091" title="Miguel Batista" label="Miguel Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606318" start="19218" end="19231" title="Greg Swindell" label="Greg Swindell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025950" start="19396" end="19408" title="Steve Finley" label="Steve Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124232" start="19413" end="19424" title="Rod Barajas" label="Rod Barajas"/>
<link wikidata="Q489302" start="19631" end="19645" title="Byung-hyun Kim" label="Byung-hyun Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q952368" start="19729" end="19741" title="Jorge Posada" label="Jorge Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488284" start="19782" end="19795" title="Shane Spencer" label="Shane Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q939053" start="19830" end="19845" title="Chuck Knoblauch" label="Chuck Knoblauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122597" start="19914" end="19927" title="Scott Brosius" label="Scott Brosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848099" start="20095" end="20106" title="Mike Morgan (baseball)" label="Mike Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="20232" end="20246" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220138" start="20260" end="20274" title="Danny Bautista" label="Danny Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297133" start="20279" end="20293" title="Erubiel Durazo" label="Erubiel Durazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299589" start="20326" end="20339" title="Matt Williams (third baseman)" label="Matt Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025950" start="20432" end="20444" title="Steve Finley" label="Steve Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308306" start="20473" end="20487" title="Reggie Sanders" label="Reggie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767793" start="20504" end="20514" title="Mark Grace" label="Mark Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712356" start="20592" end="20603" title="Albie Lopez" label="Albie Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363352" start="20765" end="20780" title="Alfonso Soriano" label="Alfonso Soriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498774" start="20950" end="20968" title="Sterling Hitchcock" label="Sterling Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q123682" start="21092" end="21105" title="Randy Johnson" label="Randy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935745" start="21179" end="21189" title="Bobby Witt" label="Bobby Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10385144" start="21194" end="21206" title="Troy Brohawn" label="Troy Brohawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823692" start="21264" end="21275" title="Tony Womack" label="Tony Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q372506" start="21304" end="21317" title="Andy Pettitte" label="Andy Pettitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220138" start="21332" end="21346" title="Danny Bautista" label="Danny Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q952368" start="21568" end="21580" title="Jorge Posada" label="Jorge Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605425" start="21708" end="21721" title="Greg Colbrunn" label="Greg Colbrunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299589" start="21747" end="21760" title="Matt Williams (third baseman)" label="Matt Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167356" start="21786" end="21798" title="Jay Witasick" label="Jay Witasick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308306" start="21837" end="21851" title="Reggie Sanders" label="Reggie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163212" start="21853" end="21861" title="Jay Bell" label="Jay Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012717" start="21863" end="21876" title="Damian Miller" label="Damian Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737865" start="21987" end="22000" title="Luis Gonzalez (outfielder, born 1967)" label="Luis Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029171" start="22368" end="22380" title="Randy Choate" label="Randy Choate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363352" start="22414" end="22429" title="Alfonso Soriano" label="Alfonso Soriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297125" start="22616" end="22628" title="Mike Stanton (left-handed pitcher)" label="Mike Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q722059" start="22859" end="22873" title="Walter Johnson" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561782" start="22914" end="22931" title="1925 World Series" label="1925 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488284" start="23016" end="23029" title="Shane Spencer" label="Shane Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038470" start="23034" end="23043" title="Luis Sojo" label="Luis Sojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="23442" end="23456" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063432" start="23474" end="23510" title="2018 American League Division Series" label="2018 American League Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="23717" end="23730" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q954975" start="23783" end="23797" title="Curt Schilling" label="Curt Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025950" start="24078" end="24090" title="Steve Finley" label="Steve Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220138" start="24104" end="24118" title="Danny Bautista" label="Danny Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808412" start="24250" end="24263" title="Tino Martinez" label="Tino Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q353511" start="24280" end="24291" title="Derek Jeter" label="Derek Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363352" start="24389" end="24404" title="Alfonso Soriano" label="Alfonso Soriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122597" start="24464" end="24477" title="Scott Brosius" label="Scott Brosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018182" start="24502" end="24515" title="David Justice" label="David Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112725" start="24883" end="24897" title="Miguel Batista" label="Miguel Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q123682" start="25007" end="25020" title="Randy Johnson" label="Randy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q939053" start="25149" end="25164" title="Chuck Knoblauch" label="Chuck Knoblauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q865424" start="25197" end="25214" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (baseball)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q711840" start="25322" end="25337" title="Bernie Williams" label="Bernie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025950" start="25352" end="25364" title="Steve Finley" label="Steve Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823692" start="25411" end="25422" title="Tony Womack" label="Tony Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q952368" start="25465" end="25477" title="Jorge Posada" label="Jorge Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q707804" start="25595" end="25604" title="Joe Torre" label="Joe Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="25697" end="25711" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737865" start="25802" end="25815" title="Luis Gonzalez (outfielder, born 1967)" label="Luis Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299589" start="25817" end="25830" title="Matt Williams (third baseman)" label="Matt Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767793" start="25958" end="25968" title="Mark Grace" label="Mark Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012717" start="26099" end="26112" title="Damian Miller" label="Damian Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746568" start="26241" end="26255" title="David Dellucci" label="David Dellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163212" start="26403" end="26411" title="Jay Bell" label="Jay Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251475" start="26597" end="26608" title="double play" label="double play"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842990" start="26610" end="26624" title="Midre Cummings" label="Midre Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012717" start="26654" end="26667" title="Damian Miller" label="Damian Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001998" start="27084" end="27098" title="Craig Counsell" label="Craig Counsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491156" start="27626" end="27646" title="1997 Florida Marlins season" label="1997 Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q123682" start="27811" end="27824" title="Randy Johnson" label="Randy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838697" start="27897" end="27910" title="Mickey Lolich" label="Mickey Lolich"/>
<link wikidata="Q168880" start="28155" end="28169" title="Edgar Renteria" label="Edgar Renteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="28421" end="28439" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28453" end="28487" title="List of 2009 all-decade Sports Illustrated awards and honors#Major League Baseball" label="Best Postseason Game of the Decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="28745" end="28765" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="28778" end="28794" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301896" start="28854" end="28857" title="MLB on Fox" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247194" start="28912" end="28920" title="Joe Buck" label="Joe Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803927" start="28925" end="28937" title="Tim McCarver" label="Tim McCarver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592044" start="28949" end="28968" title="List of New York Yankees broadcasters" label="Yankees broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738172" start="29138" end="29141" title="Major League Baseball on NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="29403" end="29421" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="Fox Family Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="29505" end="29511" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="29605" end="29609" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738169" start="29712" end="29722" title="Major League Baseball on ESPN Radio" label="ESPN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271243" start="29794" end="29804" title="Jon Miller" label="Jon Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176269" start="29809" end="29819" title="Joe Morgan" label="Joe Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338484" start="29878" end="29885" title="KTAR (AM)" label="KTAR-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="29889" end="29896" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249025" start="29902" end="29916" title="Thom Brennaman" label="Thom Brennaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606227" start="29918" end="29930" title="Greg Schulte" label="Greg Schulte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356100" start="29932" end="29941" title="Rod Allen" label="Rod Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11309622" start="29946" end="29956" title="Jim Traber" label="Jim Traber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322074" start="29965" end="29972" title="WABC (AM)" label="WABC-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259065" start="29995" end="30008" title="John Sterling (sportscaster)" label="John Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928311" start="30013" end="30024" title="Michael Kay (sports broadcaster)" label="Michael Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450606" start="30246" end="30253" title="WHSQ" label="WCBS-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q903249" start="30333" end="30344" title="YES Network" label="YES Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002173" start="30388" end="30400" title="Buster Olney" label="Buster Olney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="30436" end="30454" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002173" start="30514" end="30550" title="The Last Night of the Yankee Dynasty" label="The Last Night of the Yankee Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="30980" end="30983" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q954975" start="31656" end="31670" title="Curt Schilling" label="Curt Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q123682" start="31675" end="31688" title="Randy Johnson" label="Randy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372040" start="31706" end="31739" title="World Series Most Valuable Player" label="World Series Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614376" start="31784" end="31796" title="Steve Yeager" label="Steve Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700330" start="31798" end="31805" title="Ron Cey" label="Ron Cey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030308" start="31811" end="31825" title="Pedro Guerrero (first baseman/outfielder)" label="Pedro Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579871" start="31841" end="31848" title="1981 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983763" start="31856" end="31873" title="1981 World Series" label="1981 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653207" start="31966" end="32009" title="Sports Illustrated Sportsperson of the Year" label="Sports Illustrated Sportsperson of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379851" start="32125" end="32139" title="Enrique Wilson" label="Enrique Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="32201" end="32219" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q384845" start="32223" end="32251" title="American Airlines Flight 587" label="American Airlines Flight 587"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="32328" end="32344" title="Canyon of Heroes" label="Canyon of Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="32791" end="32810" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="32815" end="32833" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599721" start="32992" end="33004" title="2002 Arizona Diamondbacks season" label="Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600506" start="33023" end="33032" title="2002 St. Louis Cardinals season" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600328" start="33040" end="33044" title="2002 National League Division Series" label="NLDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069230" start="33091" end="33095" title="2004 Arizona Diamondbacks season" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607898" start="33190" end="33194" title="2007 Arizona Diamondbacks season" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="33224" end="33238" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601093" start="33249" end="33260" title="2003 Arizona Diamondbacks season" label="2003 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4095054" start="33268" end="33272" title="2004 Boston Red Sox season" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341797" start="33305" end="33317" title="2004 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560463" start="33337" end="33341" title="1918 Boston Red Sox season" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071224" start="33386" end="33390" title="2007 World Series" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292261" start="33567" end="33587" title="Randy Johnson&amp;#x27;s perfect game" label="throw a perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072123" start="33600" end="33614" title="2004 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466482" start="33714" end="33734" title="2009 San Francisco Giants season" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269437" start="33795" end="33807" title="Lyle Overbay" label="Lyle Overbay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15911949" start="33852" end="33869" title="2014 Milwaukee Brewers season" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029171" start="33915" end="33927" title="Randy Choate" label="Randy Choate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599720" start="34072" end="34076" title="2002 American League Division Series" label="ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599715" start="34084" end="34098" title="2002 Anaheim Angels season" label="Anaheim Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187392" start="34112" end="34124" title="2003 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601379" start="34132" end="34147" title="2003 Florida Marlins season" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131038" start="34161" end="34165" title="2004 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4095054" start="34173" end="34187" title="2004 Boston Red Sox season" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603956" start="34290" end="34294" title="2005 American League Division Series" label="ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604516" start="34308" end="34314" title="2005 Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim season" label="Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159406" start="34356" end="34370" title="2006 Detroit Tigers season" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466207" start="34379" end="34396" title="2007 Cleveland Indians season" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605757" start="34400" end="34404" title="2006 American League Division Series" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607887" start="34409" end="34413" title="2007 American League Division Series" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q114555608" start="34624" end="34628" title="2023 Major League Baseball season" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="34662" end="34681" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q707804" start="34701" end="34710" title="Joe Torre" label="Joe Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186457" start="34772" end="34783" title="Joe Girardi" label="Joe Girardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149730" start="34964" end="34977" title="2008 World Series" label="2008 champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466492" start="34978" end="34999" title="2009 Philadelphia Phillies season" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q124543265" start="35243" end="35247" title="2024 World Series" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187392" start="35394" end="35397" title="2003 World Series" label="´03"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="35431" end="35438" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738356" start="35474" end="35530" title="major professional sports teams of the United States and Canada" label="four major North American men&amp;#x27;s professional sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="35545" end="35549" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274643" start="35557" end="35572" title="Phoenix Mercury" label="Phoenix Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901596" start="35614" end="35618" title="2007 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901600" start="35620" end="35624" title="2009 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274643" start="35630" end="35634" title="2014 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597196" start="35663" end="35679" title="2000 Baltimore Ravens season" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q625210" start="35693" end="35703" title="Super Bowl XXXV" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138453" start="35885" end="35900" title="2018–19 Toronto Raptors season" label="Toronto Raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q56281319" start="35905" end="35925" title="2019 Washington Nationals season" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q122708808" start="36017" end="36021" title="2023 World Series" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q115152808" start="36066" end="36079" title="2023 Texas Rangers season" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598822" start="36122" end="36139" title="2001 Japan Series" label="2001 Japan Series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3865" wikidata="Q1568891" url="?curid=3865" title="1903 World Series">
<text>The 1903 World Series was the first modern World Series to be played in Major League Baseball. It matched the American League (AL) champion Boston Americans against the National League (NL) champion Pittsburgh Pirates in a best-of-nine series, with Boston prevailing five games to three, winning the last four. The first three games were played in Boston, the next four in Allegheny (home of the Pirates), and the eighth (last) game in Boston.

Pittsburgh pitcher Sam Leever injured his shoulder while trap shooting, so his teammate Deacon Phillippe pitched five complete games. Phillippe won three of his games, but it was not enough to overcome the club from the new American League. Boston pitchers Bill Dinneen and Cy Young led Boston to victory. In Game 1, Phillippe struck out ten Boston batters. The next day, Dinneen bettered that mark, striking out 11 Pittsburgh batters in Game 2.

Honus Wagner, bothered by injuries, batted only 6-for-27 (.222) in the Series and committed six errors. The shortstop was deeply distraught by his performance. The following spring, Wagner (who in 1903 led the National League in batting average) refused to send his portrait to a &quot;Hall of Fame&quot; for batting champions. &quot;I was too bum last year&quot;, he wrote. &quot;I was a joke in that Boston-Pittsburgh Series. What does it profit a man to hammer along and make a few hits when they are not needed only to fall down when it comes to a pinch? I would be ashamed to have my picture up now.&quot;

Due to overflow crowds at the Exposition Park games in Allegheny City, if a batted ball rolled under a rope in the outfield that held spectators back, a &quot;ground-rule triple&quot; would be scored. 17 ground-rule triples were hit in the four games played at the stadium.

In the series, Boston came back from a three games to one deficit, winning the final four games to capture the title. Such a large comeback would not happen again until the Pirates came back to defeat the Washington Senators in the 1925 World Series, and has happened only 11 times in baseball history. (The Pirates themselves repeated this feat in against the Baltimore Orioles.) Much was made of the influence of Boston&#x27;s &quot;Royal Rooters&quot;, who traveled to Exposition Park and sang their theme song &quot;Tessie&quot; to distract the opposing players (especially Wagner). Boston wound up winning three out of four games in Allegheny City.

Pirates owner Barney Dreyfuss added his share of the gate receipts to the players&#x27; share, so the losing team&#x27;s players actually finished with a larger individual share than the winning team&#x27;s.

The Series brought the new American League prestige and proved its best could beat the best of the National League, thus strengthening the demand for future World Series competitions.

==Background==

===A new league===
In 1901, Ban Johnson, president of the Western League, a minor league organization, formed the American League to take advantage of the National League&#x27;s 1900 contraction from twelve teams to eight. Johnson and fellow owners raided the National League and signed away many star players, including Cy Young and Jimmy Collins. Johnson had a list of 46 National Leaguers he targeted for the American League; by 1902, all but one had made the jump. The constant raiding, however, nixed the idea of a championship between the two leagues. Pirates owner Barney Dreyfuss, whose team ran away with the 1902 National League pennant, was open to a postseason contest and even said he would allow the American League champion to stock its roster with all-stars. However, Johnson had spoken of putting a team in Pittsburgh and even attempted to raid the Pirates&#x27; roster in August 1902, which soured Dreyfuss. At the end of the season, however, the Pirates played a group of American League All-Stars in a four-game exhibition series, winning two games to one, with one tie.

The leagues finally called a truce in the winter of 1902–03 and formed the National Commission to preside over organized baseball. The following season, the Boston Americans and Pittsburgh Pirates had secured their respective championship pennants by September. That August, Dreyfuss challenged the American League to an 11-game championship series. Encouraged by Johnson and National League President Harry Pulliam, Americans owner Henry J. Killilea met with Dreyfuss in Pittsburgh in September and instead agreed to a best-of-nine championship, with the first three games played in Boston, the next four in Allegheny City, and the remaining two (if necessary) in Boston.

One significant point about this agreement was that it was an arrangement primarily between the two clubs rather than a formal arrangement between the leagues. In short, it was a voluntary event, a fact which would result in no Series at all for . The formal establishment of the Series as a compulsory event started in .

==The teams==

The Pirates won their third straight pennant in 1903 thanks to a powerful lineup that included legendary shortstop Honus Wagner, who hit .355 and drove in 101 runs, player-manager Fred Clarke, who hit .351, and Ginger Beaumont, who hit .341 and led the league in hits and runs. The Pirates&#x27; pitching was weaker than it had been in previous years but boasted 24-game winner Deacon Phillippe and 25-game winner Sam Leever.

The Americans had a strong pitching staff, led by Cy Young, who went 28–9 in 1903 and became the all-time wins leader that year. Bill Dinneen and Long Tom Hughes, right-handers like Young, had won 21 games and 20 games each. The Boston outfield, featuring Chick Stahl (.274), Buck Freeman (.287, 104 RBI) and Patsy Dougherty (.331, 101 runs scored) was considered excellent.
Although the Pirates had dominated their league for the previous three years, they went into the series riddled with injuries and plagued by bizarre misfortunes. Otto Krueger, the team&#x27;s only utility player, was beaned on September 19 and never fully played in the series. 16-game winner Ed Doheny left the team three days later, exhibiting signs of paranoia; he was committed to an insane asylum the following month. Leever had been battling an injury to his pitching arm (which he made worse by entering a trapshooting competition). Worst of all, Wagner, who had a sore thumb throughout the season, injured his right leg in September and was never 100 percent for the postseason.

Some sources say Boston were heavy underdogs. Boston bookies actually gave even odds to the teams (and only because Dreyfuss and other &quot;sports&quot; were alleged to have bet on Pittsburgh to bring down the odds). The teams were generally thought to be evenly matched, with the Americans credited with stronger pitching and the Pirates with superior offense and fielding. The outcome, many believed, hinged on Wagner&#x27;s health. &quot;If Wagner does not play, bet your money at two to one on Boston&quot;, said the &quot;Sporting News&quot;, &quot;but if he does play, place your money at two to one on Pittsburg.&quot;

==Summary==

==Matchups==
===Game 1===
The Pirates started Game 1 strong, scoring six runs in the first four innings, and held on to win the first World Series game in modern baseball history. They extended their lead to 7–0 on an inside-the-park home run by Jimmy Sebring in the seventh, the first home run in World Series history. Boston scored a few runs in the last three innings, but it was too little, too late; they ended up losing 7–3 in the first ever World Series game. Both Phillippe and Young threw complete games, with Phillippe striking out ten and Young fanning five, but Young also gave up twice as many hits and allowed three earned runs to Phillippe&#x27;s two.

===Game 2===
After starting out strong in Game 1, the Pirates simply shut down offensively, eking out a mere three hits, all singles. Pittsburgh starter Sam Leever went 1 inning and gave up three hits and two runs, before his ailing arm forced him to leave in favor of Bucky Veil, who finished the game. Bill Dinneen struck out 11 and pitched a complete game for the Americans, while Patsy Dougherty hit home runs in the first and sixth innings for two of the Boston&#x27;s three runs. The Americans&#x27; Patsy Dougherty led off the Boston scoring with an inside-the-park home run, the first time a lead-off batter did just that until Alcides Escobar of the Kansas City Royals duplicated the feat in the 2015 World Series, 112 years later. Dougherty&#x27;s second home run was the first in World Series history to actually sail over the fence, an incredibly rare feat at the time.

===Game 3===
Phillippe, pitching after only a single day of rest, started Game 3 for the Pirates and didn&#x27;t let them down, hurling his second complete-game victory of the Series to put Pittsburgh up two games to one.

===Game 4===
After two days of rest, Phillippe was ready to pitch a second straight game. He threw his third complete-game victory of the series against Bill Dinneen, who was making his second start of the series. But Phillippe&#x27;s second straight win was almost not to be, as the Americans, down 5–1 in the top of the ninth, rallied to narrow the deficit to one run. The comeback attempt failed, as Phillippe managed to put an end to it and give the Pirates a commanding 3–1 series lead.

===Game 5===
Game 5 was a pitcher&#x27;s duel for the first five innings, with Boston&#x27;s Cy Young and Pittsburgh&#x27;s Brickyard Kennedy giving up no runs. That changed in the top of the sixth, however, when the Americans scored a then-record six runs before being retired. Young, on the other hand, managed to keep his shutout intact before finally giving up a pair of runs in the bottom of the eighth. He went the distance and struck out four for his first World Series win.

===Game 6===
Game 6 was a rematch between the starters of Game 2, Boston&#x27;s Dinneen and Pittsburgh&#x27;s Leever. Leever pitched a complete game this time but so did Dinneen, who outmatched him to earn his second complete-game victory of the series. After losing three of the first four games of the World Series, the underdog Americans had tied the series at three games apiece.

===Game 7===
The fourth and final game in Allegheny saw Phillippe start his fourth game of the Series for the Pirates. This time, however, he did not fare as well as he did in his first three starts. Cy Young, in his third start of the Series, held the Pirates to three runs and put the Americans ahead for the first time as the Series moved back to Boston.

===Game 8===

The final game of this inaugural World Series started out as an intense pitcher&#x27;s duel, scoreless until the bottom of the fourth when Hobe Ferris hit a two-run single. Phillippe started his fifth and final game of the series and Dinneen his fourth. As he did in Game 2, Dinneen threw a complete-game shutout, striking out seven and leading his Americans to victory, while Phillippe pitched respectably but could not match Dinneen because his arm had been worn out with five starts in the eight games, giving up three runs to give the first 20th-century World Championship to the Boston Americans, Honus Wagner striking out to end the Series.

==Composite line score==
1903 World Series (5–3): Boston Americans (A.L.) over Pittsburgh Pirates (N.L.)
==Series Statistics==

===Boston Americans===

====Batting====
&quot;Note: GP=Games Played; AB=At Bats; R=Runs; H=Hits; 2B=Doubles; 3B=Triples; HR=Home Runs; RBI=Runs Batted In; BB=Walks; AVG=Batting Average; OBP=On Base Percentage; SLG=Slugging Percentage&quot;
====Pitching====
&quot;Note: G=Games Played; GS=Games Started; ERA=Earned Run Average; W=Wins; L=Losses; SV=Saves; IP=Innings Pitched; H=Hits; R=Runs; ER= Earned Runs; BB=Walks; SO= Strikeouts&quot; 
===Pittsburgh Pirates===

====Batting====
&quot;Note: GP=Games Played; AB=At Bats; R=Runs; H=Hits; 2B=Doubles; 3B=Triples; HR=Home Runs; RBI=Runs Batted In; BB=Walks; AVG=Batting Average; OBP=On Base Percentage; SLG=Slugging Percentage&quot;
====Pitching====
&quot;Note: G=Games Played; GS=Games Started; ERA=Earned Run Average; W=Wins; L=Losses; SV=Saves; IP=Innings Pitched; H=Hits; R=Runs; ER= Earned Runs; BB=Walks; SO= Strikeouts&quot;
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1568891" start="4" end="21" title="1903 World Series" label="1903 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="43" end="55" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="72" end="93" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="110" end="125" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558080" start="140" end="156" title="1903 Boston Americans season" label="Boston Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="169" end="184" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558118" start="199" end="217" title="1903 Pittsburgh Pirates season" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752800" start="373" end="382" title="Allegheny, Pennsylvania" label="Allegheny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407781" start="464" end="474" title="Sam Leever" label="Sam Leever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489425" start="502" end="515" title="trap shooting" label="trap shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245037" start="533" end="549" title="Deacon Phillippe" label="Deacon Phillippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908773" start="702" end="714" title="Bill Dinneen" label="Bill Dinneen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="719" end="727" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316903" start="892" end="904" title="Honus Wagner" label="Honus Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421611" start="1534" end="1549" title="Exposition Park (Pittsburgh)" label="Exposition Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752800" start="1559" end="1573" title="Allegheny City" label="Allegheny City"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030254" start="1984" end="2003" title="History of the Washington Senators (1901–60)" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561782" start="2011" end="2028" title="1925 World Series" label="1925 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="2140" end="2157" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374781" start="2214" end="2227" title="Royal Rooters" label="Royal Rooters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705671" start="2299" end="2305" title="Tessie" label="Tessie"/>
<link wikidata="Q95225" start="2448" end="2463" title="Barney Dreyfuss" label="Barney Dreyfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q766590" start="2872" end="2883" title="Ban Johnson" label="Ban Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019183" start="2902" end="2916" title="Western League (1885–1899)" label="Western League"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="2958" end="2973" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="3165" end="3173" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186024" start="3178" end="3191" title="Jimmy Collins" label="Jimmy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q95225" start="3416" end="3431" title="Barney Dreyfuss" label="Barney Dreyfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="3668" end="3678" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952490" start="4011" end="4030" title="National Baseball Commission" label="National Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671753" start="4338" end="4351" title="Harry Pulliam" label="Harry Pulliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316903" start="5063" end="5075" title="Honus Wagner" label="Honus Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494850" start="5128" end="5139" title="Fred Clarke" label="Fred Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106758" start="5159" end="5174" title="Ginger Beaumont" label="Ginger Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245037" start="5326" end="5342" title="Deacon Phillippe" label="Deacon Phillippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407781" start="5362" end="5372" title="Sam Leever" label="Sam Leever"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="5425" end="5433" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908773" start="5504" end="5516" title="Bill Dinneen" label="Bill Dinneen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816259" start="5521" end="5536" title="Long Tom Hughes" label="Long Tom Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096157" start="5631" end="5642" title="Chick Stahl" label="Chick Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982853" start="5651" end="5663" title="Buck Freeman" label="Buck Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="5675" end="5678" title="Run batted in" label="RBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148246" start="5684" end="5699" title="Patsy Dougherty" label="Patsy Dougherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="5711" end="5715" title="Run (baseball)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109690" start="5912" end="5924" title="Otto Krueger (baseball)" label="Otto Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q526301" start="5947" end="5961" title="utility player" label="utility player"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876271" start="5967" end="5973" title="beanball" label="beaned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334744" start="6043" end="6052" title="Ed Doheny" label="Ed Doheny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="6105" end="6113" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516931" start="6138" end="6151" title="insane asylum" label="insane asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489425" start="6263" end="6275" title="trapshooting" label="trapshooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q664702" start="6491" end="6498" title="bookies" label="bookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="6966" end="6979" title="Sporting News" label="Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q845485" start="7297" end="7321" title="inside-the-park home run" label="inside-the-park home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201249" start="7325" end="7338" title="Jimmy Sebring" label="Jimmy Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132884" start="7577" end="7590" title="complete game" label="complete game"/>
<link wikidata="Q906099" start="7709" end="7719" title="earned run" label="earned run"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983608" start="8016" end="8026" title="Bucky Veil" label="Bucky Veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148246" start="8253" end="8268" title="Patsy Dougherty" label="Patsy Dougherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q845485" start="8304" end="8328" title="inside-the-park home run" label="inside-the-park home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377438" start="8383" end="8398" title="Alcides Escobar" label="Alcides Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="8406" end="8424" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648402" start="8452" end="8469" title="2015 World Series" label="2015 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966063" start="9470" end="9487" title="Brickyard Kennedy" label="Brickyard Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874994" start="10726" end="10737" title="Hobe Ferris" label="Hobe Ferris"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="11285" end="11301" title="Boston Americans" label="Boston Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="11314" end="11332" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3866" wikidata="Q162262" url="?curid=3866" title="Bluetongue disease">
<text>Bluetongue (BT) disease is a noncontagious, arthropod-borne viral disease affecting ruminants, primarily sheep and other domestic or wild ruminants, including cattle, yaks, goats, buffalo, deer, dromedaries, and antelope. It is caused by Bluetongue virus (BTV), a non-enveloped, double-stranded RNA virus belongs to the genus &quot;Orbivirus&quot; within the family &quot;Reoviridae&quot;. The virus is mainly transmitted by biting midges, specifically &quot;Culicoides&quot; species (e.g. &quot;Culicoides imicola&quot;, &quot;Culicoides oxystoma,&quot; and &quot;Culicoides variipennis&quot;). BTV has a widespread geographical distribution, encompassing numerous continents and regions, including Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, and various tropical and subtropical regions. At present, there are more than 28 recognized serotypes of BTV. Bluetongue outbreaks have had a significant economic impact, with estimated global losses reaching approximately 3 billion USD.

== Clinical signs ==
In sheep, BTV causes an acute disease with high morbidity and mortality. BTV also infects goats, cattle, and other domestic animals, as well as wild ruminants (for example, blesbuck, white-tailed deer, elk, and pronghorn antelope). The clinical signs are summarized under the term FFF (fever, face, feet).

Major signs are high fever, excessive salivation, swelling of the face and tongue, and cyanosis (in severe conditions) of the tongue. Swelling of the lips and tongue gives the tongue its typical blue appearance, though this sign is confined to a minority of the animals. Nasal signs may be prominent, with nasal discharge and stertorous respiration.

Some animals also develop foot lesions, beginning with coronitis, with consequent lameness. In sheep, this can lead to knee-walking. In cattle, constant changing of position of the feet gives bluetongue the nickname the dancing disease. Torsion of the neck (opisthotonos or torticollis) is observed in severely affected animals.

Not all animals develop signs, but all those that do lose condition rapidly, and the sickest die within a week. For affected animals that do not die, recovery is very slow, lasting several months.

The incubation period is 5–20 days, and all signs usually develop within a month. The mortality rate is normally low, but it is high in susceptible breeds of sheep. In Africa, local breeds of sheep may have no mortality, but in imported breeds, it may be up to 90%.

The manifestation of clinical signs in cattle is contingent upon the strain of virus. BTV-8 has been documented to cause a severe disease state and mortality in cattle. The current circulation of BTV-3 in Northern Europe is epidemiologically noteworthy due to the presentation of clinical signs in cattle and a higher sheep mortality rate than that observed with BTV-8. Other ruminants, such as goats, typically exhibit minimal or no clinical signs despite high virus levels in blood. Therefore, they could serve as potential virus reservoirs of BTV. Red deer are an exception, and in them the disease may be as acute as in sheep.

Lamb infected in utero can develop congenital hydranencephaly. This abnormality is a condition in which the brain&#x27;s cerebral hemispheres are like swiss cheese, or absent, and replaced by sacs filled with cerebrospinal fluid. Ewes infected with bluetongue virus while pregnant can have lambs with this defect, as well as giving birth to lambs who are small, weak, deformed or blind. These affected lambs die within a few days of birth, or are born dead.

==Microbiology==
Bluetongue is caused by the pathogenic vector-borne RNA virus, &quot;Bluetongue virus&quot; (&quot;BTV&quot;), of the genus &quot;Orbivirus&quot; within the &quot;Reoviridae&quot; family. The virus particle consists of 10 strands of double-stranded RNA surrounded by two protein shells. Unlike other arboviruses, BTV lacks a lipid envelope. The virus exhibits icosahedral symmetry, with a diameter of approximately 80–90 nm. The structure of the 70 nm core was determined in 1998 and was at the time the largest atomic structure to be solved. 

The 10 viral genome segments have been found to encode 7 structural (VP1–VP7) and 5 non-structural (NS1, NS2, NS3/NS3A, NS4 and NS5) proteins. There are currently more than 28 known serotypes of BTV. The sequence of genome Seg-2 and its translated protein VP2, as well as that of Seg-6 and its translated protein VP5, exhibit variations that determine the serotypes.

The two outer capsid proteins, VP2 and VP5, mediate attachment and penetration of BTV into the target cell. VP2 and VP5 are the primary antigenic targets for antibody targeting by the host immune system. The virus makes initial contact with the cell with VP2, triggering receptor-mediated endocytosis of the virus. The low pH within the endosome then triggers BTV&#x27;s membrane penetration protein VP5 to undergo a conformational change that disrupts the endosomal membrane. Uncoating yields a transcriptionally active 470S core particle which is composed of two major proteins VP7 and VP3, and the three minor proteins VP1, VP4 and VP6 in addition to the dsRNA genome. There is no evidence that any trace of the outer capsid remains associated with these cores, as has been described for reovirus. The cores may be further uncoated to form 390S subcore particles that lack VP7, also in contrast to reovirus. Subviral particles are probably akin to cores derived &quot;in vitro&quot; from virions by physical or proteolytic treatments that remove the outer capsid and causes activation of the BTV transcriptase. In addition to the seven structural proteins, three non-structural (NS) proteins, NS1, NS2, NS3 (and a related NS3A) are synthesised in BTV-infected cells. Of these, NS3/NS3A is involved in the egress of the progeny virus. The two remaining non-structural proteins, NS1 and NS2, are produced at high levels in the cytoplasm and are believed to be involved in virus replication, assembly and morphogenesis.

== Evolution ==
The viral genome is replicated via structural protein VP1, an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The lack of proof-reading abilities results in high levels of transcription errors, resulting in single nucleotide mutations. Despite this, the BTV genome is quite stable, exhibiting a low rate of variants arising in populations. Evidence suggests this is due to purifying selection across the genome as the virus is transmitted alternately through its insect and animal hosts. However, individual gene segments undergo different selective pressures and some, particularly segments 4 and 5, are subject to positive selection.

The BTV genome exhibits rapid evolution through genetic drift, reassortment of genome segments (genetic shift), and intragenic recombination. This evolutionary process, in conjunction with the random fixation of quasispecies variants during transmission between susceptible animals and vectors, is postulated to be the primary driver of the genetic diversity observed in BTV field strains. Reassortment can lead to a rapid shift in phenotypes independent of the slow rate of mutation. During this process, gene segments are not randomly reassorted. Rather, there appears to be a mechanism for selecting for or against certain segments from the parental serotypes present. However, this selective mechanism is still poorly understood.

To date, BTV serotypes 25 and above have been identified as the causative agents of infection in small ruminants. The infection is subclinical, which likely explains why these serotypes, which are less or non-virulent, have not been identified earlier through laboratory diagnosis studies. It is noteworthy that BTV serotypes 25 and higher are transmitted without midges, indicating that direct contact between sheep or goats may be a potential vector.

==Epidemiology==

The presence of the insect vectors determines the bluetongue disease&#x27;s global distribution, with regions in Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, and other tropical/subtropical area being most affected.

The virus persists in areas where climatic conditions support the survival of &quot;Culicoides&quot; midges during winter. This adaptability allows the disease to establish itself in new regions when conditions become favorable.

An outline of the transmission cycle of BTV is illustrated in article Parasitic flies of domestic animals.

Its occurrence is seasonal in the affected Mediterranean countries, subsiding when temperatures drop and hard frosts kill the adult midge vectors.
Viral survival and vector longevity is seen during milder winters.
A significant contribution to the northward spread of bluetongue disease has been the ability of &quot;C. obsoletus&quot; and &quot;C.pulicaris&quot; to acquire and transmit the pathogen, both of which are spread widely throughout Europe. This is in contrast to the original &quot;C.imicola&quot; vector, which is limited to North Africa and the Mediterranean. The relatively recent novel vector has facilitated a far more rapid spread than the simple expansion of habitats north through global warming.

In August 2006, cases of bluetongue were found in the Netherlands, then Belgium, Germany, and Luxembourg.
In 2007, the first case of bluetongue in the Czech Republic was detected in one bull near Cheb at the Czech-German border.
In September 2007, the UK reported its first ever suspected case of the disease, in a Highland cow on a rare-breeds farm near Ipswich, Suffolk.
Since then, the virus has spread from cattle to sheep in Britain.
By October 2007, bluetongue had become a serious threat in Scandinavia and Switzerland
and the first outbreak in Denmark was reported. In autumn 2008, several cases were reported in the southern Swedish provinces of Småland, Halland, and Skåne,
as well as in areas of the Netherlands bordering Germany, prompting veterinary authorities in Germany to intensify controls.
Norway had its first finding in February 2009, when cows at two farms in Vest-Agder in the south of Norway showed an immune response to bluetongue. A number of countries, including Norway and Finland, were certified as free of the disease in 2011 and 2021, respectively.

In 2023, Europe witnessed a series of notable epizootic occurrences at higher latitudes, partially attributable to the emergence of a novel serotype, BTV-3. The serotype was first identified in the Netherlands in September 2023 and has since been documented in numerous European countries, including Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, France, Spain, the UK, Norway, and Sweden.

Although the disease is not a threat to humans, the most vulnerable common domestic ruminants are cattle, goats, and especially, sheep.

===Overwintering===
A puzzling aspect of BTV is its survival between midge seasons in temperate regions. Adults of &quot;Culicoides&quot; are killed by cold winter temperatures, and BTV infections typically do not last for more than 60 days, which is not long enough for BTV to survive until the next spring. It is believed that the virus somehow survives in overwintering midges or animals. Multiple mechanisms have been proposed. A few adult &quot;Culicoides&quot; midges infected with BTV may survive the mild winters of the temperate zone. Some midges may even move indoors to avoid the cold temperature of the winter. Additionally, BTV could cause a chronic or latent infection in some animals, providing another means for BTV to survive the winter. BTV can also be transmitted from mother to fetus. The outcome is abortion or stillbirth if fetal infection occurs early in gestation and survival if infection occurs late. However infection at an intermediate stage, before the fetal immune system is fully developed, may result in a chronic infection that lingers until the first months after birth of the lamb. Midges then spread the pathogen from the calves to other animals, starting a new season of infection.

===Climate change===
The spread of bluetongue to Southern, Central, and Northern Europe provides an illustrative example of the complex interactions between climate change, vector habitat suitability, animal population density, distribution, and movement, which collectively influence the patterns of disease emergence and transmission.

==Treatment and prevention==
There are currently no antiviral medications that have been approved for the treatment of bluetongue disease. The standard of care involves the administration of anti-inflammatory drugs and supportive nursing care to alleviate the clinical signs and symptoms. Prevention is effected via quarantine, vaccination, and control of the midges vector, including inspection of aircraft. The recurrent emergence of novel strains and the occurrence of new outbreaks with significant socio-economic impacts highlight the urgent need for effective antiviral strategies. The current vaccines for bluetongue virus (BTV) are serotype-specific, which limits their utility and has led to interest in host-targeted antiviral strategies that offer broader activity against multiple serotypes and a reduced risk of resistance development.

===Livestock management and insect control===
Some available key measures include vector control, such as the use of insecticides, insect-proof nets, and improved housing to reduce exposure to biting midges. Additionally, the removal of infected animals helps prevent further transmission by reducing the number of viremic hosts, while movement restrictions—including quarantines and health certifications—prevent the introduction of the virus to uninfected regions.

===Vaccines===
Vaccination still represents an effective strategy for protecting ruminants against bluetongue. However, this is only possible with a vaccine that is effective against the relevant serotype. The most prevalent vaccines are live attenuated vaccines and killed or inactivated vaccines. Other potential vaccines include subunit vaccines, virus-like particles, DNA vaccines, disabled unfectious single animal vaccines (DISA), and disabled infectious single-cycle vaccines (DISC).

Protection by live attenuated vaccines (LAVs) are serotype specific. Multiserotype LAV cocktails can induce neutralizing antibodies against unincluded serotypes, and subsequent vaccinations with three different pentavalent LAV cocktails induce broad protection. These pentavalent cocktails contain 15 different serotypes in total: serotypes 1 through 14, as well as 19.

Immunization with any of the available vaccines, though, precludes later serological monitoring of affected cattle populations, a problem that could be resolved using next-generation subunit vaccines.

In January 2015, the vaccine Raksha Blu was launched in India. It is designed to protect livestock against five strains of the bluetongue virus.

The vaccine Syvazul BTV was authorized for veterinary use in the European Union in January 2019.

In January 2025, the Committee for Veterinary Medicinal Products (CVMP) of the European Medicines Agency adopted a positive opinion, recommending the granting of a marketing authorization for the veterinary medicinal product Bluevac-3, suspension for injection, intended for cattle and sheep. The applicant for this veterinary medicinal product is CZ Vaccines S.A.U. Bluevac-3 is a vaccine containing inactivated bluetongue virus, serotype 3, BTV-3/NET2023 as active substance. The vaccine is intended to stimulate the active immunity of sheep and cattle against bluetongue virus serotype 3. The CVMP also adopted a positive opinion, recommending the granting of a marketing authorization for the veterinary medicinal product Syvazul BTV 3, suspension for injection, intended for sheep. The applicant for this veterinary medicinal product is Laboratorios Syva S.A. Syvazul BTV 3 is a vaccine containing Bluetongue virus, serotype 3, BTV-3/NET2023, inactivated as active substance. It is intended for the active immunization of sheep against bluetongue virus serotype 3.

==History==
In the early stages of its identification, BT was referred to by a number of different names, including &quot;epizootic catarrh,&quot; &quot;fever,&quot; &quot;malarial catarrhal fever of sheep,&quot; and &quot;epizootic malignant catarrhal fever of sheep.&quot; This was due to the prevailing belief at the time that BT was caused by an intraerythrocytic parasite. The English translation &quot;Bluetongue&quot; was initially proposed by Spreull and derived from the Afrikaans term &quot;bloutong,&quot; which refers to the condition of cyanosis of the tongue in clinically affected sheep. Although bluetongue disease was already recognized in South Africa in the early 19th century, a comprehensive description of the disease was not published until the first decade of the 20th century. In 1906, Arnold Theiler showed that bluetongue was caused by a filterable agent. He also created the first bluetongue vaccine, which was developed from an attenuated BT V strain. For many decades, bluetongue was thought to be confined to Africa. The first confirmed outbreak outside of Africa occurred in Cyprus in 1943.
In 2021, a vessel owned by Khalifeh Livestock Trading and managed by Talia Shipping Line, both based in Lebanon, has been denied right to dock in Spain, as it has about 895 male calves suspected to be infected by bluetongue disease.

==Related diseases==
African horse sickness is related to bluetongue and is spread by the same midges (&quot;Culicoides&quot; species). It can kill the horses it infects and mortality may go as high as 90% of the infected horses during an epidemic.

&quot;Epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus&quot; is closely related and crossreacts with &quot;Bluetongue virus&quot; on many blood tests.

== References ==
== Further reading ==


== External links ==
* 
* 
* Canadian Food Inspection Agency Animal Disease Information
** Bluetongue disease fact sheet
** Biosecurity training video
** Farm-level biosecurity practices
* News and announcements on the Bluetongue outbreak in the UK, &quot;Farmers Guardian&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162262" start="0" end="23" title="Bluetongue disease" label="Bluetongue (BT) disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29" end="42" title="infectious disease#Contagiousness" label="noncontagious"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="60" end="65" title="virus" label="viral"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="84" end="92" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="105" end="110" title="domestic sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="159" end="165" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408062" start="167" end="170" title="yak" label="yak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="173" end="177" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979192" start="180" end="187" title="Bovinae" label="buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="189" end="193" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q71516" start="195" end="206" title="dromedary" label="dromedaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="212" end="220" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q883122" start="238" end="254" title="Bluetongue virus" label="Bluetongue virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q137495" start="496" end="514" title="Culicoides imicola" label="Culicoides imicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q13633153" start="565" end="587" title="Culicoides variipennis" label="Culicoides variipennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="1157" end="1166" title="ruminants" label="ruminants"/>
<link wikidata="Q24818" start="1181" end="1189" title="blesbuck" label="blesbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="1191" end="1208" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="1210" end="1213" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="1219" end="1237" title="pronghorn antelope" label="pronghorn antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="1321" end="1326" title="sign (medicine)" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="1353" end="1359" title="saliva" label="saliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="1365" end="1373" title="edema" label="swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q192120" start="1402" end="1410" title="cyanosis" label="cyanosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560633" start="1641" end="1651" title="stertorous" label="stertorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756015" start="1924" end="1936" title="opisthotonos" label="opisthotonos"/>
<link wikidata="Q615363" start="1940" end="1951" title="torticollis" label="torticollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193566" start="2198" end="2215" title="incubation period" label="incubation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="2280" end="2294" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38829" start="2342" end="2347" title="breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="3012" end="3020" title="Red deer" label="Red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565270" start="3139" end="3154" title="hydranencephaly" label="hydranencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="3302" end="3321" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="3597" end="3605" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="3608" end="3630" title="virus (biology)" label="vector-borne RNA virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q883122" start="3638" end="3654" title="Bluetongue virus" label="Bluetongue virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839826" start="3699" end="3708" title="Orbivirus" label="Orbivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q910576" start="3732" end="3742" title="Reoviridae" label="Reoviridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q630622" start="3869" end="3880" title="arboviruses" label="arboviruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="3894" end="3899" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135604" start="4753" end="4782" title="receptor-mediated endocytosis" label="receptor-mediated endocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q824237" start="4819" end="4827" title="endosome" label="endosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314425" start="8364" end="8399" title="Parasitic flies of domestic animals" label="Parasitic flies of domestic animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="8445" end="8458" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="8540" end="8547" title="vector (epidemiology)" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q193719" start="9317" end="9321" title="Cheb" label="Cheb"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="9476" end="9492" title="Ipswich, Suffolk" label="Ipswich, Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q50623" start="10003" end="10013" title="Vest-Agder" label="Vest-Agder"/>
<link wikidata="Q182899" start="12592" end="12602" title="quarantine" label="quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="12604" end="12615" title="vaccine" label="vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="12643" end="12649" title="Vector (epidemiology)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387529" start="14297" end="14308" title="Pentavalent vaccine" label="pentavalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495176" start="14924" end="14967" title="Committee for Veterinary Medicinal Products" label="Committee for Veterinary Medicinal Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="14982" end="15007" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="16631" end="16643" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q119270" start="16785" end="16799" title="Arnold Theiler" label="Arnold Theiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="17081" end="17087" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q386408" start="17352" end="17374" title="African horse sickness" label="African horse sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q18976038" start="17587" end="17622" title="Epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus" label="Epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435787" start="18017" end="18033" title="Farmers Guardian" label="Farmers Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3869" wikidata="Q92653" url="?curid=3869" title="Bruce Perens">
<text>Bruce Perens (born around 1958) is an American computer programmer and advocate in the free software movement. He created &quot;The Open Source Definition&quot; and published the first formal announcement and manifesto of open source. He co-founded the Open Source Initiative (OSI) with Eric S. Raymond.

In 2005, Perens represented Open Source at the United Nations World Summit on the Information Society, at the invitation of the United Nations Development Programme. He has appeared before national legislatures and is often quoted in the press, advocating for open source and the reform of national and international technology policy.

Perens is also an amateur radio operator, with call sign K6BP. He promotes open radio communications standards and open-source hardware.

In 2016 Perens, along with Boalt Hall (Berkeley Law) professor Lothar Determann, co-authored &quot;Open Cars&quot; which appeared in the Berkeley Technology Law Journal.

In 2018 Perens founded the Open Research Institute (ORI), a non-profit research and development organization to address technologies involving Open Source, Open Hardware, Open Standards, Open Content, and Open Access to Research. In April 2022 he divorced himself from the organization and reported he was starting a new charity, HamOpen.org, to redirect his focus, and align with the ARRL organization for their liability insurance benefit. HamOpen has been most visible supporting the convention exhibitions of projects Perens supports, including M17 and FreeDV.

==Companies==
Perens operates two companies: Algoram is a start-up which is creating a web-based control system for radio transmitters and other devices. Legal Engineering is a legal-technical consultancy which specializes in resolving copyright infringement in relation to open source software.

==Early life==
Perens grew up in Long Island, New York. He was born with cerebral palsy, which caused him to have slurred speech as a child, a condition that led to a misdiagnosis of him as developmentally disabled in school and led the school to fail to teach him to read. He developed an interest in technology at an early age: besides his interest in amateur radio, he ran a pirate radio station in the town of Lido Beach and briefly engaged in phone phreaking.

==Career==

===Computer graphics===
Perens worked for seven years at the New York Institute of Technology Computer Graphics Lab. After that, he worked at Pixar for 12 years, from 1987 to 1999. He is credited as a studio tools engineer on the Pixar films &quot;A Bug&#x27;s Life&quot; (1998) and &quot;Toy Story 2&quot; (1999).

===No-Code International===
Perens founded No-Code International in 1998 with the goal of ending the Morse Code test then required for an amateur radio license. His rationale was that amateur radio should be a tool for young people to learn advanced technology and networking, rather than something that preserved antiquity and required new hams to master outmoded technology before they were allowed on the air.

Perens lobbied intensively on the Internet, at amateur radio events in the United States, and during visits to other nations. One of his visits was to Iceland, where he had half of that nation&#x27;s radio amateurs in the room, and their vote in the International Amateur Radio Union was equivalent to that of the entire United States.

===Debian Social Contract===
In 1997, Perens was carbon-copied on an email conversation between Donnie Barnes of Red Hat and Ean Schuessler, who was then working on Debian. Schuessler bemoaned that Red Hat had never stated its social contract with the developer community. Perens took this as inspiration to create a formal social contract for Debian. In a blog posting, Perens claims not to have made use of the Three Freedoms (later the Four Freedoms) published by the Free Software Foundation in composing his document. Perens proposed a draft of the Debian Social Contract to the Debian developers on the debian-private mailing list early in June 1997. Debian developers contributed discussion and changes for the rest of the month while Perens edited, and the completed document was then announced as Debian project policy. Part of the Debian Social Contract was the Debian Free Software Guidelines, a set of 10 guidelines for determining whether a set of software can be described as &quot;free software&quot;, and thus whether it could be included in Debian.

===Open Source Definition and The Open Source Initiative===
On February 3, 1998, a group of people (not including Perens) met at VA Linux Systems to discuss the promotion of Free Software to business in pragmatic terms, rather than the moral terms preferred by Richard Stallman. Christine Petersen of the nanotechnology organization Foresight Institute, who was present because Foresight took an early interest in Free Software, suggested the term &quot;Open Source&quot;. The next day, Eric S. Raymond recruited Perens to work with him on the formation of Open Source. Perens modified the Debian Free Software Guidelines into the Open Source Definition by removing Debian references and replacing them with &quot;Open Source&quot;.

The original announcement of The Open Source Definition was made on February 9, 1998, on Slashdot and elsewhere; the definition was given in Linux Gazette on February 10, 1998.

Concurrently, Perens and Raymond established the Open Source Initiative, an organization intended to promote open source software.

Perens left OSI in 1999, a year after co-founding it. In February 1999 in an email to the Debian developers mailing list he explained his decision and stated that, though &quot;most hackers know that Free Software and Open Source are just two words for the same thing&quot;, the success of &quot;open source&quot; as a marketing term had &quot;de-emphasized the importance of the freedoms involved in Free Software&quot;; he added, &quot;It&#x27;s time for us to fix that.&quot; He stated his regret that OSI co-founder Eric Raymond &quot;seems to be losing his free software focus.&quot; But in the following 2000s he spoke about Open source again. Perens presently volunteers as the Open Source Initiative&#x27;s representative to the European Technical Standards Institute (&quot;ETSI&quot;), and is a frequent participant in review of license texts submitted to OSI for certification as Open Source licenses.

===Linux Capital Group===
In 1999, Perens left Pixar and became the president of Linux Capital Group, a business incubator and venture capital firm focusing on Linux-based businesses. Their major investment was in Progeny Linux Systems, a company headed by Debian founder Ian Murdock. In 2000, as a result of the economic downturn, Perens shut down Linux Capital Group. (Progeny Linux Systems would end operations in 2007.)

===Hewlett-Packard===
From December 2000 to September 2002, Perens served as &quot;Senior Global Strategist for Linux and Open Source&quot; at Hewlett-Packard, internally evangelizing for the use of Linux and other open-source software. He was fired as a result of his anti-Microsoft statements, which especially became an issue after HP acquired Compaq, a major manufacturer of Microsoft Windows-based PCs, in 2002.

===UserLinux===
In 2003 Perens created UserLinux, a Debian-based distribution whose stated goal was, &quot;Provide businesses with freely available, high quality Linux operating systems accompanied by certifications, service, and support options designed to encourage productivity and security while reducing overall costs.&quot; UserLinux was eventually overtaken in popularity by Ubuntu, another Debian-based distribution, which was started in 2004, and UserLinux became unmaintained in 2006.

===SourceLabs===
Perens was an employee of SourceLabs, a Seattle-based open source software and services company, from June 2005 until December 2007. He produced a video commercial, &quot;Impending Security Breach&quot;, for SourceLabs in 2007. (SourceLabs was acquired by EMC in 2009.)

===University faculty===
Between 1981 and 1986, Perens was on the staff of the New York Institute of Technology Computer Graphics Lab as a Unix kernel programmer.

In 2002, Perens was a remote Senior Scientist for Open Source with the Cyber Security Policy Laboratory of George Washington University under the direction of Tony Stanco. Stanco was director of the laboratory for a year, while its regular director was on sabbatical.

Between 2006 and 2007, Perens was a visiting lecturer and researcher for the University of Agder under a three-year grant from the Competence Fund of Southern Norway. During this time he consulted the Norwegian Government and other entities on government policy issues related to computers and software. After this time Perens worked remotely on Agder programs, mainly concerning the European Internet Accessibility Observatory.

===Other activities===
In 2007, some of Perens&#x27;s government advisory roles included a meeting with the President of the Chamber of Deputies (the lower house of parliament) in Italy and testimony to the Culture Committee of the Chamber of Deputies; a keynote speech at the foundation of Norway&#x27;s Open Source Center, following Norway&#x27;s Minister of Governmental Reform (Perens is on the advisory board of the center); he provided input on the revision of the European Interoperability Framework; and he was keynote speaker at a European Commission conference on &quot;Digital Business Ecosystems at the Centre Borschette, Brussels, on November 7&quot;.

In 2009, Perens acted as an expert witness on open source in the Jacobsen v. Katzer U.S. Federal lawsuit. His report, which was made publicly available by Jacobsen, presented the culture and impact of open-source software development to the federal courts.

Perens delivered one of the keynote addresses at the 2012 linux.conf.au conference in Ballarat, Australia. He discussed the need for open source software to market itself better to non-technical users. He also discussed some of the latest developments in open-source hardware, such as Papilio and Bus Pirate.

In 2013, Perens spoke in South America, as the closing keynote at Latinoware 2013. He was the keynote of CISL – Conferencia Internacional de Software Libre, in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and keynoted a special event along with the Minister of software and innovation of Chubut Province, in Puerto Madrin, Patagonia, Argentina. He keynoted the Festival de Software Libre 2013, in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico.

In 2014–2015, Perens took a break from Open Source conferences, having spoken at them often since 1996. In 2016, he returned to the conference circuit, keynoting the Open Source Insight conference in Seoul, sponsored by the Copyright Commission of South Korea. Perens web site presently advertises his availability to keynote conferences as long as travel and lodging expenses are compensated.

In 2020, Perens delivered the talk, &quot;What Comes After Open Source?&quot; for DebConf 2020. He discussed the future of open source licensing and the need to develop alternative licensing structures so that open source developers could get paid for their work.

==Views==
Perens poses &quot;Open Source&quot; as a means of marketing the free and open-source software idea to business people and mainstream who might be more interested in the practical benefits of an open source development model and ecosystem than abstract ethics. He states that open source and free software are only two ways of talking about the same phenomenon, a point of view not shared by Stallman and his free software movement. Perens postulated in 2004 an economic theory for business use of Open Source in his paper &quot;The Emerging Economic Paradigm of Open Source&quot; and his speech &quot;Innovation Goes Public&quot;. This differs from Raymond&#x27;s theory in &quot;The Cathedral and the Bazaar&quot;, which having been written before there was much business involvement in open source, explains open source as a consequence of programmer motivation and leisure.

In February 2008, for the 10th anniversary of the phrase &quot;open source&quot;, Perens published a message to the community called &quot;State of Open Source Message: A New Decade For Open Source&quot;. Around the same time the ezine RegDeveloper published an interview with Perens where he spoke of the successes of open source, but also warned of dangers, including a proliferation of OSI-approved licenses which had not undergone legal scrutiny. He advocated the use of the GPLv3 license, especially noting Linus Torvalds&#x27; refusal to switch away from GPLv2 for the Linux kernel.

Bruce Perens supported Bernie Sanders for President and he claims that his experience with the open source movement influenced that decision. On July 13, 2016, following Sanders&#x27;s endorsement of Hillary Clinton for president, Perens endorsed Clinton.

In January 2013, Perens advocated for abolishment of the Second Amendment to the U.S. constitution, stating that he does &quot;not believe in private ownership of firearms&quot; and that he would &quot;take away guns currently held by individuals, without compensation for their value.&quot; He reiterated this view in a June 2014 interview in Slashdot, and in November 2017 on his Twitter account.

==Amateur radio and other activities==
Perens is an avid amateur radio enthusiast (call sign K6BP) and maintained technocrat.net, which he closed in late 2008, because its revenues did not cover its costs.

==Media appearances==
Perens is featured in the 2001 documentary film &quot;Revolution OS&quot; and the 2006 BBC television documentary &quot;The Code-Breakers&quot;.

From 2002 to 2006, Prentice Hall PTR published the Bruce Perens&#x27; Open Source Series, a set of 24 books covering various open source software tools, for which Perens served as the series editor. It was the first book series to be published under an open license.

==Personal life==
Perens lives in Berkeley, California with his wife, Valerie, and son, Stanley, born in 2000.

==References==
==External links==

* Project Proposal and Call for Participation: The Linux Standard Base
* &quot;It&#x27;s Time to Talk About Free Software Again&quot;, 1999
* Video with Bruce Perens at Hannover Industry Trade Fair, Germany, May 2008
* A talk about open source recorded in Rome in June 2007</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92653" start="0" end="12" title="Bruce Perens" label="Bruce Perens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="47" end="66" title="Programmer" label="computer programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076638" start="87" end="109" title="free software movement" label="free software movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367020" start="128" end="154" title="The Open Source Definition" label="The Open Source Definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="222" end="233" title="Open-source model" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q845918" start="253" end="275" title="Open Source Initiative" label="Open Source Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q188954" start="287" end="302" title="Eric S. Raymond" label="Eric S. Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q689182" start="352" end="406" title="World Summit on the Information Society" label="United Nations World Summit on the Information Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="433" end="469" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="660" end="682" title="Amateur radio" label="amateur radio operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="689" end="698" title="call sign" label="call sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q159172" start="757" end="777" title="open-source hardware" label="open-source hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q110707316" start="1500" end="1503" title="M17 (amateur radio)" label="M17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105653" start="1508" end="1514" title="Codec 2" label="FreeDV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1847" end="1858" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="1887" end="1901" title="cerebral palsy" label="cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142806" start="2004" end="2028" title="Developmental disability" label="developmentally disabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="2192" end="2204" title="pirate radio" label="pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716595" start="2228" end="2238" title="Lido Beach, New York" label="Lido Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162746" start="2268" end="2277" title="phreaking" label="phreaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013625" start="2353" end="2407" title="New York Institute of Technology Computer Graphics Lab" label="New York Institute of Technology Computer Graphics Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="2434" end="2439" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q216153" start="2540" end="2557" title="A Bug&amp;#x27;s Life" label="A Bug&amp;#x27;s Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q187266" start="2581" end="2592" title="Toy Story 2" label="Toy Story 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="2746" end="2759" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q660898" start="3408" end="3421" title="Carbon copy" label="carbon-copied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367020" start="4231" end="4262" title="Debian Free Software Guidelines" label="Debian Free Software Guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="4687" end="4703" title="Richard Stallman" label="Richard Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367020" start="5189" end="5215" title="The Open Source Definition" label="The Open Source Definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q59083" start="5249" end="5257" title="Slashdot" label="Slashdot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827109" start="5301" end="5314" title="Linux Gazette" label="Linux Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q845918" start="5387" end="5409" title="Open Source Initiative" label="Open Source Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="6511" end="6526" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068028" start="6598" end="6619" title="Progeny Linux Systems" label="Progeny Linux Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="6952" end="6967" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="7083" end="7092" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q324603" start="7156" end="7162" title="Compaq" label="Compaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="7188" end="7205" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389742" start="7266" end="7275" title="UserLinux" label="UserLinux"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="7609" end="7615" title="Ubuntu (operating system)" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="7780" end="7787" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013625" start="8090" end="8144" title="New York Institute of Technology Computer Graphics Lab" label="New York Institute of Technology Computer Graphics Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="8282" end="8310" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470769" start="8521" end="8540" title="University of Agder" label="University of Agder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412699" start="8828" end="8871" title="European Internet Accessibility Observatory" label="European Internet Accessibility Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q841424" start="8999" end="9018" title="Chamber of Deputies (Italy)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932779" start="9345" end="9380" title="European Interoperability Framework" label="European Interoperability Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q663272" start="9568" end="9582" title="expert witness" label="expert witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119806" start="9605" end="9623" title="Jacobsen v. Katzer" label="Jacobsen v. Katzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096425" start="9741" end="9773" title="open-source software development" label="open-source software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230172" start="9856" end="9869" title="linux.conf.au" label="linux.conf.au"/>
<link wikidata="Q17856" start="9884" end="9892" title="Ballarat" label="Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="11246" end="11275" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="11590" end="11603" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q467363" start="11862" end="11890" title="The Cathedral and the Bazaar" label="The Cathedral and the Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12539" end="12544" title="GNU General Public License#Version 3" label="GPLv3"/>
<link wikidata="Q34253" start="12572" end="12586" title="Linus Torvalds" label="Linus Torvalds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12621" end="12626" title="GNU General Public License#Version 2" label="GPLv2"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="12673" end="12687" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="12850" end="12865" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="12964" end="13005" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment to the U.S. constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="13364" end="13377" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="13390" end="13399" title="call sign" label="call sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435107" start="13590" end="13603" title="Revolution OS" label="Revolution OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="13623" end="13626" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726581" start="13656" end="13673" title="The Code-Breakers" label="The Code-Breakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978136" start="13733" end="13770" title="Bruce Perens&amp;#x27; Open Source Series" label="Bruce Perens&amp;#x27; Open Source Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="13984" end="14004" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3870" wikidata="Q4997555" url="?curid=3870" title="Bundle theory">
<text>Bundle theory, originated by the 18th century Scottish philosopher David Hume, is the ontological theory about objecthood in which an object consists only of a collection (&quot;bundle&quot;) of properties, relations or tropes.

According to bundle theory, an object consists of its properties and nothing more; thus, there cannot be an object without properties and one cannot &quot;conceive&quot; of such an object. For example, when we think of an apple, we think of its properties: redness, roundness, being a type of fruit, &quot;etc&quot;. There is nothing above and beyond these properties; the apple is nothing more than the collection of its properties. In particular, there is no &quot;substance&quot; in which the properties are &quot;inherent&quot;.

Bundle theory has been contrasted with the &quot;ego theory&quot; of the self, which views the egoic self as a soul-like substance existing in the same manner as the corporeal self.

==Arguments in favor==
The difficulty in conceiving and or describing an object without also conceiving and or describing its properties is a common justification for bundle theory, especially among current philosophers in the Anglo-American tradition.

The inability to comprehend any aspect of the thing other than its properties implies, this argument maintains, that one cannot conceive of a &quot;bare particular&quot; (a &quot;substance&quot; without properties), an implication that directly opposes substance theory. The conceptual difficulty of &quot;bare particulars&quot; was illustrated by John Locke when he described a &quot;substance&quot; by itself, apart from its properties as &quot;something, I know not what. [...] The idea then we have, to which we give the general name substance, being nothing but the supposed, but unknown, support of those qualities we find existing, which we imagine cannot subsist sine re substante, without something to support them, we call that support substantia; which, according to the true import of the word, is, in plain English, standing under or upholding.&quot;

Whether a &quot;relation&quot; of an object is one of its properties may complicate such an argument. However, the argument concludes that the conceptual challenge of &quot;bare particulars&quot; leaves a bundle of properties and nothing more as the only possible conception of an object, thus justifying bundle theory.

==Objections==
Bundle theory maintains that properties are &quot;bundled&quot; together in a collection without describing how they are tied together. For example, bundle theory regards an apple as red, four inches (100 mm) wide, and juicy but lacking an underlying &quot;substance&quot;. The apple is said to be a &quot;bundle of properties&quot; including redness, being four inches (100 mm) wide, and juiciness.
Hume used the term &quot;bundle&quot; in this sense, also referring to the personal identity, in his main work: &quot;I may venture to affirm of the rest of mankind, that they are nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions, which succeed each other with inconceivable rapidity, and are in a perpetual flux and movement&quot;.

Critics question how bundle theory accounts for the properties&#x27; &quot;&quot; (the &quot;togetherness&quot; relation between those properties) without an underlying &quot;substance&quot;. Critics also question how any two given properties are determined to be properties of the same object if there is no &quot;substance&quot; in which they both &quot;inhere&quot;. This argument is done away with if one considers spatio-temporal location to be a property as well.

Traditional bundle theory explains the &quot;compresence&quot; of properties by defining an object as a collection of properties &quot;bound&quot; together. Thus, different combinations of properties and relations produce different objects. Redness and juiciness, for example, may be found together on top of the table because they are part of a bundle of properties located on the table, one of which is the &quot;looks like an apple&quot; property.

By contrast, substance theory explains the &quot;compresence&quot; of properties by asserting that the properties are found together because it is the &quot;substance&quot; that has those properties. In substance theory, a &quot;substance&quot; is the thing in which properties &quot;inhere&quot;. For example, redness and juiciness are found on top of the table because redness and juiciness &quot;inhere&quot; in an apple, making the apple red and juicy.

The &quot;bundle theory of substance&quot; explains &quot;compresence&quot;. Specifically, it maintains that properties&#x27; compresence itself engenders a &quot;substance&quot;. Thus, it determines &quot;substancehood&quot; empirically by the &quot;togetherness&quot; of properties rather than by a &quot;bare particular&quot; or by any other non-empirical underlying strata. The &quot;bundle theory of substance&quot; thus rejects the substance theories of Aristotle, Descartes, Leibniz, and more recently, J. P. Moreland, Jia Hou, Joseph Bridgman, Quentin Smith, and others.

==Buddhism==

The Indian Madhyamaka philosopher, Chandrakirti, used the aggregate nature of objects to demonstrate the lack of essence in what is known as the sevenfold reasoning. In his work, &quot;Guide to the Middle Way&quot; (Sanskrit: &quot;Madhyamakāvatāra&quot;), he says:

He goes on to explain what is meant by each of these seven assertions, but briefly in a subsequent commentary he explains that the conventions of the world do not exist essentially when closely analyzed, but exist only through being taken for granted, without being subject to scrutiny that searches for an essence within them.

Another view of the Buddhist theory of the self, especially in early Buddhism, is that the Buddhist theory is essentially an eliminativist theory. According to this understanding, the self can not be reduced to a bundle because there is nothing that answers to the concept of a self. Consequently, the idea of a self must be eliminated.

==See also==
*Anattā
*Platonic realism
*Substance theory

==References==
==Further reading==
*David Hume (1738), &quot;A Treatise of Human Nature&quot;, Book I, Part IV, Section VI
*Derek Parfit (1984), &quot;Reasons and Persons&quot;

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4997555" start="0" end="13" title="Bundle theory" label="Bundle theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="67" end="77" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="86" end="97" title="ontology" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q41798914" start="111" end="121" title="Object (philosophy)" label="objecthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q511345" start="220" end="226" title="trope (philosophy)" label="tropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="696" end="705" title="substance theory" label="substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q352099" start="746" end="754" title="inherence" label="inherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="1453" end="1469" title="substance theory" label="substance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="1548" end="1558" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254571" start="2876" end="2893" title="personal identity" label="personal identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="4081" end="4097" title="substance theory" label="substance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="4986" end="4995" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="4997" end="5006" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="5008" end="5015" title="Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106703" start="5036" end="5050" title="J. P. Moreland" label="J. P. Moreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23446" start="5078" end="5091" title="Quentin Smith" label="Quentin Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q844421" start="5131" end="5141" title="Madhyamaka" label="Madhyamaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q456963" start="5155" end="5167" title="Chandrakirti" label="Chandrakirti"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="5233" end="5240" title="essence" label="essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727629" start="5305" end="5328" title="Madhyamakāvatāra" label="Guide to the Middle Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="5336" end="5344" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q488506" start="6068" end="6074" title="Anatta" label="Anattā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="6076" end="6092" title="Platonic realism" label="Platonic realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="6094" end="6110" title="Substance theory" label="Substance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="6148" end="6158" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451675" start="6173" end="6199" title="A Treatise of Human Nature" label="A Treatise of Human Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q962160" start="6236" end="6248" title="Derek Parfit" label="Derek Parfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301514" start="6263" end="6282" title="Reasons and Persons" label="Reasons and Persons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3873" wikidata="Q152025" url="?curid=3873" title="Bernard Montgomery">
<text>Field Marshal Bernard Law Montgomery, 1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein (; 17 November 1887 – 24 March 1976), nicknamed &quot;Monty&quot;, was a senior British Army officer who served in the First World War, the Irish War of Independence and the Second World War.

Montgomery first saw action in the First World War as a junior officer of the Royal Warwickshire Regiment. At Méteren, near the Belgian border at Bailleul, he was shot through the right lung by a sniper, during the First Battle of Ypres. On returning to the Western Front as a general staff officer, he took part in the Battle of Arras in AprilMay 1917. He also took part in the Battle of Passchendaele in late 1917 before finishing the war as chief of staff of the 47th (2nd London) Division. In the inter-war years he commanded the 17th (Service) Battalion, Royal Fusiliers and, later, the 1st Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment before becoming commander of the 9th Infantry Brigade and then general officer commanding (GOC), 8th Infantry Division.

During the Western Desert campaign of the Second World War, Montgomery commanded the British Eighth Army from August 1942. He subsequently commanded the British Eighth Army during the Allied invasion of Sicily and the Allied invasion of Italy and was in command of all Allied ground forces during the Battle of Normandy (Operation Overlord), from D-Day on 6 June 1944 until 1 September 1944. He then continued in command of the 21st Army Group for the rest of the North West Europe campaign, including the failed attempt to cross the Rhine during Operation Market Garden. When German armoured forces broke through the US lines in Belgium during the Battle of the Bulge, Montgomery received command of the northern shoulder of the Bulge. Montgomery&#x27;s 21st Army Group, including the US Ninth Army and the First Allied Airborne Army, crossed the Rhine in Operation Plunder in March 1945. By the end of the war, troops under Montgomery&#x27;s command had taken part in the encirclement of the Ruhr Pocket, liberated the Netherlands, and captured much of north-west Germany. On 4 May 1945, Montgomery accepted the surrender of the German forces in north-western Europe at Lüneburg Heath, south of Hamburg, after the surrender of Berlin to the USSR on 2 May.

After the war he became Commander-in-Chief of the British Army of the Rhine (BAOR) in Germany and then Chief of the Imperial General Staff (1946–1948). From 1948 to 1951, he served as Chairman of the Commanders-in-Chief Committee of the Western Union. He then served as NATO&#x27;s Deputy Supreme Allied Commander Europe until his retirement in 1958.

==Early life==
Montgomery was born in Kennington, Surrey, in 1887, the fourth child of nine, to a Church of Ireland minister, Henry Montgomery, and his wife Maud (&quot;née&quot; Farrar). The Montgomerys, an Ulster Scots &#x27;Ascendancy&#x27; gentry family, were the County Donegal branch of the Clan Montgomery. The Rev. Henry Montgomery, at that time Vicar of St Mark&#x27;s Church, Kennington, was the second son of Sir Robert Montgomery, a native of Inishowen in County Donegal in the north-west of Ulster, and a noted colonial administrator in British India. Sir Robert died a month after his grandson&#x27;s birth. He was probably a descendant of Colonel Alexander Montgomery. Bernard&#x27;s mother, Maud, was the daughter of Frederic William Canon Farrar, the famous preacher, and was eighteen years younger than her husband.

After the death of Sir Robert Montgomery, Henry inherited the Montgomery ancestral estate of New Park in Moville, a small town in Inishowen in the north of County Donegal in Ulster, the northern province in Ireland. There was still £13,000 to pay on a mortgage, a large debt in the 1880s (equivalent to £ in ) and Henry was at the time still only an Anglican vicar. Despite selling off all the farms that were in the townland of Ballynally, on the north-western shores of Lough Foyle, &quot;there was barely enough to keep up New Park and pay for the blasted summer holiday&quot; (i.e., at New Park).

It was a financial relief of some magnitude when, in 1889, Henry was made Bishop of Tasmania, then still a British colony, and Bernard spent his formative years there. Bishop Montgomery considered it his duty to spend as much time as possible in the rural areas of Tasmania and was away for up to six months at a time. While he was away, his wife, still in her mid-twenties, gave her children &quot;constant&quot; beatings, then ignored them most of the time. Of Bernard&#x27;s siblings, Sibyl died prematurely in Tasmania, and Harold, Donald and Una all emigrated. Maud Montgomery took little active interest in the education of her young children other than to have them taught by tutors brought from Britain, although he briefly attended the then coeducational St Michael&#x27;s Collegiate School. The loveless environment made Bernard something of a bully, as he himself recalled: &quot;I was a dreadful little boy. I don&#x27;t suppose anybody would put up with my sort of behaviour these days.&quot; Later in life Montgomery refused to allow his son David to have anything to do with his grandmother, and refused to attend her funeral in 1949.

The family returned to England once for a Lambeth Conference in 1897, and Bernard and his brother Harold were educated at The King&#x27;s School, Canterbury. In 1901, Bishop Montgomery became secretary of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and the family returned to London. Montgomery attended St Paul&#x27;s School and then the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from which he was almost expelled for rowdiness and violence. On graduation in September 1908 he was commissioned into the 1st Battalion the Royal Warwickshire Regiment as a second lieutenant, and first saw overseas service later that year in India. He was promoted to lieutenant in 1910, and in 1912 became adjutant of the 1st Battalion of his regiment at Shorncliffe Army Camp.

==First World War==
The Great War began in August 1914 and Montgomery moved to France with his battalion that month, which was at the time part of the 10th Infantry Brigade of the 4th Division of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF). He was promoted to temporary captain on 14 September. He saw action at the Battle of Le Cateau that month and during the retreat from Mons. At Méteren, near the Belgian border at Bailleul on 13 October 1914, during an Allied counter-offensive, he was shot through the right lung by a sniper. Lying in the open, he remained still and pretended to be dead, in the hope that he would not receive any more enemy attention. One of his men did attempt to rescue him but was shot dead by a hidden enemy sniper and collapsed over Montgomery. The sniper continued to fire and Montgomery was hit once more, in the knee, but the dead soldier, in Montgomery&#x27;s words, &quot;received many bullets meant for me.&quot; Assuming them to both be dead, the officers and men of Montgomery&#x27;s battalion chose to leave them where they were until darkness arrived and stretcher bearers managed to recover the two bodies, with Montgomery by this time barely clinging on to life. The doctors at the advanced dressing station (ADS), too, had no hope for him and ordered a grave to be dug. Miraculously, however, Montgomery was still alive and, after being placed in an ambulance and then being sent to a hospital, was treated and eventually evacuated to England, where he would remain for well over a year. He was appointed a Companion of the Distinguished Service Order (DSO), for his gallant leadership during this period: the citation for this award, published in &quot;The London Gazette&quot; in December 1914 reads:

After recovering in early 1915, he was appointed brigade major, first of the 112th Infantry Brigade, and then with 104th Infantry Brigade, then training in Lancashire. He returned to the Western Front in early 1916 with his brigade, seeing service with it during the Battle of the Somme later in the year. In January 1917 he was assigned as a general staff officer, grade 2 (GSO2) with the 33rd Division and took part in the Battle of Arras in AprilMay. In July he transferred over as a GSO2 to IX Corps, part of General Sir Herbert Plumer&#x27;s Second Army.

It was in this role that Montgomery served at the Battle of Passchendaele which began in late July 1917. He was promoted to the temporary rank of major in February 1918, and brevet major in June. He finished the war in November 1918 as GSO1 (effectively chief of staff) of the 47th (2nd London) Division, with the temporary rank of lieutenant colonel, to which appointment and rank he had been assigned to on 16 July. A photograph from October 1918, reproduced in many biographies, shows the then unknown Lieutenant-Colonel Montgomery standing in front of Winston Churchill (then the Minister of Munitions) at the parade following the liberation of Lille.

Montgomery was profoundly influenced by his experiences during the war, in particular by the leadership, or rather the lack of it, being displayed by the senior commanders. He later wrote:

==Between the world wars==

===1920s and Ireland===
After the First World War, Montgomery commanded the 17th (Service) Battalion of the Royal Fusiliers, a battalion in the British Army of the Rhine, before reverting to his substantive rank of captain (brevet major) in November 1919. He had not at first been selected for the Staff College in Camberley, Surrey (his only hope of ever achieving high command). But at a tennis party in Cologne, he was able to persuade the Commander-in-chief (C-in-C) of the British Army of Occupation, Field Marshal Sir William Robertson, to add his name to the list.

After graduating from the Staff College, he was appointed brigade major in the 17th Infantry Brigade in January 1921. The brigade was stationed in County Cork, Ireland, carrying out counter-guerilla operations during the final stages of the Irish War of Independence.

Montgomery came to the conclusion that the conflict could not be won without harsh measures, and that self-government for Ireland was the only feasible solution; in 1923, after the establishment of the Irish Free State and during the Irish Civil War, Montgomery wrote to Colonel Arthur Ernest Percival of the Essex Regiment:

In one noteworthy incident on 2 May 1922, Montgomery led a force of 60 soldiers and 4 armoured cars to the town of Macroom to search for four British officers who were missing in the area. While he had hoped the show of force would assist in finding the men, he was under strict orders not to attack the IRA. On arriving in the town square in front of Macroom Castle, he summoned the IRA commander, Charlie Browne, to parley. At the castle gates Montgomery spoke to Browne, explaining what would happen should the officers not be released. Once finished, Browne responded with his own ultimatum to Montgomery to &quot;leave town within 10 minutes&quot;. Browne then turned heels and returned to the Castle. At this point another IRA officer, Pat O&#x27;Sullivan, whistled to Montgomery drawing his attention to scores of IRA volunteers who had quietly taken up firing positions all around the square—surrounding Montgomery&#x27;s forces. Realising his precarious position, Montgomery led his troops out of the town, a decision which raised hostile questions in the House of Commons but was later approved by Montgomery&#x27;s own superiors. Unknown to Montgomery at this time, the four missing officers had already been executed.

In May 1923, Montgomery was posted to the 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division, a Territorial Army (TA) formation. He returned to the 1st Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment in 1925 as a company commander and was promoted to major in July 1925. From January 1926 to January 1929 he served as Deputy Assistant Adjutant General at the Staff College, Camberley, in the temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel.

=== Marriage and family ===
In 1925, in his first known courtship of a woman, Montgomery, then in his late thirties, proposed to a 17-year-old girl, Betty Anderson. His approach included drawing diagrams in the sand of how he would deploy his tanks and infantry in a future war, a contingency which seemed very remote at that time. She respected his ambition and single-mindedness but declined his proposal.

In 1927, he met and married Elizabeth (Betty) Carver, &quot;née&quot; Hobart. She was the sister of the future Second World War commander Sir Percy Hobart. Betty Carver had two sons in their early teens, John and Dick, from her first marriage to Oswald Carver. Dick Carver later wrote that it had been &quot;a very brave thing&quot; for Montgomery to take on a widow with two children. Montgomery&#x27;s son, David, was born in August 1928.

While on holiday in Burnham-on-Sea in Somerset in 1937, Betty suffered an insect bite which became infected, and she died in her husband&#x27;s arms from septicaemia following amputation of her leg. The loss devastated Montgomery, who was then serving as a brigadier, but he insisted on throwing himself back into his work immediately after the funeral. Montgomery&#x27;s marriage had been extremely happy. Much of his correspondence with his wife was destroyed when his quarters at Portsmouth were bombed during the Second World War. After Montgomery&#x27;s death, John Carver wrote that his mother had arguably done the country a favour by keeping his personal oddities—his extreme single-mindedness, and his intolerance of and suspicion of the motives of others—within reasonable bounds long enough for him to have a chance of attaining high command.

Both of Montgomery&#x27;s stepsons became army officers in the 1930s (both were serving in India at the time of their mother&#x27;s death), and both served in the Second World War, each eventually attaining the rank of colonel. While serving as a GSO2 with Eighth Army, Dick Carver was sent forward during the pursuit after El Alamein to help identify a new site for Eighth Army HQ. He was taken prisoner at Mersa Matruh on 7 November 1942. Montgomery wrote to his contacts in England asking that inquiries be made via the Red Cross as to where his stepson was being held, and that parcels be sent to him. Like many British POWs, the most famous being General Richard O&#x27;Connor, Dick Carver escaped in September 1943 during the brief hiatus between Italy&#x27;s departure from the war and the German seizure of the country. He eventually reached British lines on 5 December 1943, to the delight of his stepfather, who sent him home to Britain to recuperate.

===1930s===
In January 1929 Montgomery was promoted to brevet lieutenant-colonel. That month he returned to the 1st Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment again, as Commander of Headquarters Company; he went to the War Office to help write the Infantry Training Manual in mid-1929. In 1931 Montgomery was promoted to substantive lieutenant-colonel and became the Commanding officer (CO) of the 1st Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment and saw service in Palestine and British India. He was promoted to colonel in June 1934 (seniority from January 1932). He attended and was then recommended to become an instructor at the Indian Army Staff College (now the Pakistan Command and Staff College) in Quetta, British India.

On completion of his tour of duty in India, Montgomery returned to Britain in June 1937 where he took command of the 9th Infantry Brigade with the temporary rank of brigadier. His wife died that year.

In 1938, he organised an amphibious combined operations landing exercise that impressed the new C-in-C of Southern Command, General Sir Archibald Percival Wavell. He was promoted to major-general on 14 October 1938 and took command of the 8th Infantry Division in the British mandate of Palestine. In Palestine, Montgomery was involved in suppressing an Arab revolt which had broken out over opposition to Jewish emigration. He returned in July 1939 to Britain, suffering a serious illness on the way, to command the 3rd Infantry Division. Reporting the suppression of the revolt in April 1939, Montgomery wrote, &quot;I shall be sorry to leave Palestine in many ways, as I have enjoyed the war out here&quot;.

==Second World War==

===British Expeditionary Force===

====Phoney war====

Britain declared war on Germany on 3 September 1939 and the 3rd Division, together with its new General Officer Commanding (GOC), was deployed to France as part of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), commanded by General Lord Gort. Shortly after the division&#x27;s arrival overseas, Montgomery faced serious trouble from his military superiors and the clergy for his frank attitude regarding the sexual health of his soldiers, but was defended from dismissal by his superior Alan Brooke, commander of II Corps, of which Montgomery&#x27;s division formed a part. Montgomery had issued a circular on the prevention of venereal disease, worded in such &quot;obscene language&quot; that both the Church of England and Roman Catholic senior chaplains objected; Brooke told Monty that he did not want any further errors of this kind, though deciding not to get him to formally withdraw it as it would remove any &quot;vestige of respect&quot; left for him.

Although Montgomery&#x27;s new command was a Regular Army formation, comprising the 7th (Guards), and the 8th and 9th Infantry Brigades along with supporting units, he was not impressed with its readiness for battle. As a result, while most of the rest of the BEF set about preparing defences for an expected German attack sometime in the future, Montgomery began training his 3rd Division in offensive tactics, organising several exercises, each of which lasted for several days at a time. Mostly they revolved around the division advancing towards an objective, often a river line, only to come under attack and forced to withdraw to another position, usually behind another river. These exercises usually occurred at night with only very minimal lighting being allowed. By the spring of 1940 Montgomery&#x27;s division had gained a reputation of being a very agile and flexible formation. By then the Allies had agreed to Plan D, where they would advance deep into Belgium and take up positions on the River Dyle by the time the German forces attacked. Brooke, Montgomery&#x27;s corps commander, was pessimistic about the plan but Montgomery, in contrast, was not concerned, believing that he and his division would perform well regardless of the circumstances, particularly in a war of movement.

====Battle of France====
Montgomery&#x27;s training paid off when the Germans began their invasion of the Low Countries on 10 May 1940 and the 3rd Division advanced to its planned position, near the Belgian city of Louvain. Soon after arrival, the division was fired on by members of the Belgian 10th Infantry Division who mistook them for German paratroopers; Montgomery resolved the incident by approaching them and offering to place himself under Belgian command, although Montgomery himself took control when the Germans arrived. During this time he began to develop a particular habit, which he would keep throughout the war, of going to bed at 21:30 every night without fail and giving only a single order—that he was not to be disturbed—which was only very rarely disobeyed.

The 3rd Division saw comparatively little action but, owing to the strict training methods of Montgomery, the division always managed to be in the right place at the right time, especially so during the retreat into France. By 27 May, when the Belgian Army on the left flank of the BEF began to disintegrate, the 3rd Division achieved something very difficult, the movement at night from the right to the left of another division and only 2,000 yards behind it. This was performed with great professionalism and occurred without any incidents and thereby filled a very vulnerable gap in the BEF&#x27;s defensive line. On 29/30 May, Montgomery temporarily took over from Brooke, who received orders to return to the United Kingdom, as GOC of II Corps for the final stages of the Dunkirk evacuation.

The 3rd Division, temporarily commanded by Kenneth Anderson in Montgomery&#x27;s absence, returned to Britain intact with minimal casualties. Operation Dynamo—codename for the Dunkirk evacuation—saw 330,000 Allied military personnel, including most of the BEF, to Britain, although the BEF was forced to leave behind a significant amount of equipment.

===Service in the United Kingdom 1940−1942===
On his return Montgomery antagonised the War Office with trenchant criticisms of the command of the BEF and was briefly relegated to divisional command of 3rd Division, which was the only fully equipped division in Britain. He was made a Companion of the Order of the Bath.

Montgomery was ordered to make ready the 3rd Division to invade the neutral Portuguese Azores. Models of the islands were prepared and detailed plans worked out for the invasion. The invasion plans did not go ahead and plans switched to invading Cape Verde island also belonging to neutral Portugal. These invasion plans also did not go ahead. Montgomery was then ordered to prepare plans for the invasion of neutral Ireland and to seize Cork, Cobh and Cork harbour. These invasion plans, like those of the Portuguese islands, also did not go ahead and in July 1940, Montgomery was appointed acting lieutenant-general and after handing over command of his division to James Gammell, he was placed in command of V Corps, responsible for the defence of Hampshire and Dorset and started a long-running feud with the new Commander-in-chief (C-in-C) of Southern Command, Lieutenant-General Claude Auchinleck.

In April 1941, he became commander of XII Corps responsible for the defence of Kent. During this period he instituted a regime of continuous training and insisted on high levels of physical fitness for both officers and other ranks. He was ruthless in sacking officers he considered unfit for command in action. Promoted to temporary lieutenant-general in July, overseeing the defence of Kent, Sussex and Surrey. In December Montgomery was given command of South-Eastern Command. He renamed his command the South-Eastern Army to promote offensive spirit. During this time he further developed and rehearsed his ideas and trained his soldiers, culminating in Exercise Tiger in May 1942, a combined forces exercise involving 100,000 troops.

===North Africa and Italy===

====Montgomery&#x27;s early command====

In 1942, a new field commander was required in the Middle East, where Auchinleck was fulfilling both the role of C-in-C of Middle East Command and commander Eighth Army. He had stabilised the Allied position at the First Battle of El Alamein, but after a visit in August 1942, the Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, replaced him as C-in-C with General Sir Harold Alexander and William Gott as commander of the Eighth Army in the Western Desert. However, after Gott was killed flying back to Cairo, Churchill was persuaded by Brooke, who by this time was Chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS), to appoint Montgomery, who had only just been nominated to replace Alexander, as commander of the British First Army for Operation Torch, the invasion of French North Africa.

A story, probably apocryphal but popular at the time, is that the appointment caused Montgomery to remark that &quot;After having an easy war, things have now got much more difficult.&quot; A colleague is supposed to have told him to cheer up—at which point Montgomery said &quot;I&#x27;m not talking about me, I&#x27;m talking about Rommel!&quot;

Montgomery&#x27;s assumption of command transformed the fighting spirit and abilities of the Eighth Army. Taking command on 13 August 1942, he immediately became a whirlwind of activity. He ordered the creation of the X Corps, which contained all armoured divisions, to fight alongside his XXX Corps, which was all infantry divisions. This arrangement differed from the German Panzer Corps: one of Rommel&#x27;s Panzer Corps combined infantry, armour and artillery units under one corps commander. The only common commander for Montgomery&#x27;s all-infantry and all-armour corps was the Eighth Army Commander himself. Writing post-war the English historian Correlli Barnett commented that Montgomery&#x27;s solution &quot;was in every way opposite to Auchinleck&#x27;s and in every way wrong, for it carried the existing dangerous separatism still further.&quot; Montgomery reinforced the long front line at El Alamein, something that would take two months to accomplish. He asked Alexander to send him two new British divisions (51st Highland and 44th Home Counties) that were then arriving in Egypt and were scheduled to be deployed in defence of the Nile Delta. He moved his field HQ to Burg al Arab, close to the Air Force command post in order to better coordinate combined operations.

Montgomery was determined that the army, navy and air forces should fight their battles in a unified, focused manner according to a detailed plan. He ordered immediate reinforcement of the vital heights of Alam Halfa, just behind his own lines, expecting the German commander, Erwin Rommel, to attack with the heights as his objective, something that Rommel soon did. Montgomery ordered all contingency plans for retreat to be destroyed. &quot;I have cancelled the plan for withdrawal. If we are attacked, then there will be no retreat. If we cannot stay here alive, then we will stay here dead&quot;, he told his officers at the first meeting he held with them in the desert, though, in fact, Auchinleck had no plans to withdraw from the strong defensive position he had chosen and established at El Alamein.

Montgomery made a great effort to appear before troops as often as possible, frequently visiting various units and making himself known to the men, often arranging for cigarettes to be distributed. Although he still wore a standard British officer&#x27;s cap on arrival in the desert, he briefly wore an Australian broad-brimmed hat before switching to wearing the black beret (with the badge of the Royal Tank Regiment and the British General Officer&#x27;s cap badge) for which he became notable. The black beret was offered to him by Jim Fraser while the latter was driving him on an inspection tour. Both Brooke and Alexander were astonished by the transformation in atmosphere when they visited on 19 August, less than a week after Montgomery had taken command.

Alan Brooke said that Churchill was always impatient for his generals to attack at once, and he wrote that Montgomery was always &quot;my Monty&quot; when Montgomery was out of favour with Churchill. Eden had some late night drinks with Churchill, and Eden said at a meeting of the Chiefs of Staff the next day (29 October 1942) that the Middle East offensive was &quot;petering out&quot;. Alanbrooke had told Churchill &quot;fairly plainly&quot; what he thought of Eden&#x27;s ability to judge the tactical situation from a distance, and was supported at the Chiefs of Staff meeting by Smuts.

====First battles with Rommel====
Rommel attempted to turn the left flank of the Eighth Army at the Battle of Alam el Halfa from 31 August 1942. The German/Italian armoured corps infantry attack was stopped in very heavy fighting. Rommel&#x27;s forces had to withdraw urgently lest their retreat through the British minefields be cut off. Montgomery was criticised for not counter-attacking the retreating forces immediately, but he felt strongly that his methodical build-up of British forces was not yet ready. A hasty counter-attack risked ruining his strategy for an offensive on his own terms in late October, planning for which had begun soon after he took command. He was confirmed in the permanent rank of lieutenant-general in mid-October.

The conquest of Libya was essential for airfields to support Malta and to threaten the rear of Axis forces opposing Operation Torch. Montgomery prepared meticulously for the new offensive after convincing Churchill that the time was not being wasted. (Churchill sent a telegram to Alexander on 23 September 1942 which began, &quot;We are in your hands and of course a victorious battle makes amends for much delay.&quot;) He was determined not to fight until he thought there had been sufficient preparation for a decisive victory, and put into action his beliefs with the gathering of resources, detailed planning, the training of troops—especially in clearing minefields and fighting at night—and in the use of 252 of the latest American-built Sherman tanks, 90 M7 Priest self-propelled howitzers, and making a personal visit to every unit involved in the offensive. By the time the offensive was ready in late October, Eighth Army had 231,000 men on its ration strength.

====El Alamein====
The Second Battle of El Alamein began on 23 October 1942, and ended 12 days later with one of the first large-scale, decisive Allied land victories of the war. Montgomery correctly predicted both the length of the battle and the number of casualties (13,500).

Historian Correlli Barnett has pointed out that the rain also fell on the Germans, and that the weather is therefore an inadequate explanation for the failure to exploit the breakthrough, but nevertheless the Battle of El Alamein had been a great success. Over 30,000 prisoners of war were taken, including the German second-in-command, General von Thoma, as well as eight other general officers.

====Tunisia====
Montgomery was advanced to KCB and promoted to full general. He kept the initiative, applying superior strength when it suited him, forcing Rommel out of each successive defensive position. On 6 March 1943, Rommel&#x27;s attack on the over-extended Eighth Army at Medenine (Operation Capri) with the largest concentration of German armour in North Africa was successfully repulsed. At the Mareth Line, 20 to 27 March, when Montgomery encountered fiercer frontal opposition than he had anticipated, he switched his major effort into an outflanking inland pincer, backed by low-flying RAF fighter-bomber support. For his role in North Africa he was awarded the Legion of Merit by the United States government in the rank of Chief Commander.

====Sicily====
The next major Allied attack was the Allied invasion of Sicily (Operation Husky). Montgomery considered the initial plans for the Allied invasion, which had been agreed in principle by General Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Supreme Allied Commander Allied Forces Headquarters, and General Alexander, the 15th Army Group commander, to be unworkable because of the dispersion of effort. He managed to have the plans recast to concentrate the Allied forces, having Lieutenant General George Patton&#x27;s US Seventh Army land in the Gulf of Gela (on the Eighth Army&#x27;s left flank, which landed around Syracuse in the south-east of Sicily) rather than near Palermo in the west and north of Sicily. Inter-Allied tensions grew as the American commanders, Patton and Omar Bradley (then commanding US II Corps under Patton), took umbrage at what they saw as Montgomery&#x27;s attitudes and boastfulness. However, while they were considered three of the greatest soldiers of their time, due to their competitiveness they were renowned for &quot;squabbling like three schoolgirls&quot; thanks to their &quot;bitchiness&quot;, &quot;whining to their superiors&quot; and &quot;showing off&quot;.

====Italy====


Montgomery&#x27;s Eighth Army was then fully involved in the Allied invasion of Italy in early September 1943, becoming the first of the Allied forces to land in Western Europe. Led by Lieutenant General Sir Miles Dempsey&#x27;s XIII Corps, the Eighth Army landed on the toe of Italy in Operation Baytown on 3 September, four years to the day after Britain declared war on Germany. They encountered little enemy resistance. The Germans had made the decision to fall back and did what they could to stall the Eighth Army&#x27;s advance, including blowing up bridges, laying mines, and setting up booby-traps. All of these slowed the Army&#x27;s advance north on the awful Italian roads, although it was Montgomery who was later much criticised for the lack of progress. On 9 September the British 1st Airborne Division landed at the key port of Taranto in the heel of Italy as part of Operation Slapstick, capturing the port unopposed. On the same day the U.S. Fifth Army under Lieutenant General Mark W. Clark (which actually contained a large number of British troops) landed at Salerno, near Naples, as part of Operation Avalanche but soon found itself fighting for its very existence with the Germans launching several determined counterattacks to try and push the Allies back into the sea, with Montgomery&#x27;s men being too far away to provide any real assistance. The situation was tense over the next few days but the two armies (both of which formed the 15th Army Group under General Alexander) finally began to meet on 16 September, by which time the crisis at Salerno was virtually over.

Clark&#x27;s Fifth Army then began to advance to the west of the Apennine Mountains while Montgomery, with Lieutenant General Charles Allfrey&#x27;s V Corps having arrived to reinforce Dempsey&#x27;s XIII Corps, advanced to the east. The Foggia airfields soon fell to Allfrey&#x27;s V Corps, but the Germans fought hard in the defence of Termoli and Biferno. Movement soon came to an almost complete halt in the early part of November when the Eighth Army came up against a new defensive line established by the Germans on the River Sangro, which was to be the scene of much bitter and heavy fighting for the next month. While some ground was gained, it was often at the expense of heavy casualties and the Germans always managed to retreat to new defensive positions.

Montgomery abhorred what he considered to be a lack of coordination, a dispersion of effort, a strategic muddle and a lack of opportunism in the Allied campaign in Italy, describing the whole affair as a &quot;dog&#x27;s breakfast&quot;.

===Normandy===


As a result of his dissatisfaction with Italy, he was delighted to receive the news that he was to return to Britain in January 1944. He was assigned to command the 21st Army Group consisting of all Allied ground forces participating in Operation Overlord, codename for the Allied invasion of Normandy. Overall direction was assigned to the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces, American General Dwight D. Eisenhower. Both Churchill and Eisenhower had found Montgomery difficult to work with in the past and wanted the position to go to the more affable General Sir Harold Alexander. However Montgomery&#x27;s patron, General Sir Alan Brooke, firmly argued that Montgomery was a much superior general to Alexander and ensured his appointment. Without Brooke&#x27;s support, Montgomery would have remained in Italy. At St Paul&#x27;s School on 7 April and 15 May Montgomery presented his strategy for the invasion. He envisaged a ninety-day battle, with all forces reaching the Seine. The campaign would pivot on an Allied-held Caen in the east of the Normandy bridgehead, with relatively static British and Canadian armies forming a shoulder to attract and defeat German counter-attacks, relieving the US armies who would move and seize the Cotentin Peninsula and Brittany, wheeling south and then east on the right forming a pincer.

During the ten weeks of the Battle of Normandy, unfavourable autumnal weather conditions disrupted the Normandy landing areas. Montgomery&#x27;s initial plan was for the Anglo-Canadian troops under his command to break out immediately from their beachheads on the Calvados coast towards Caen with the aim of taking the city on either D Day or two days later. Montgomery attempted to take Caen with the 3rd Infantry Division, the 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division and the 3rd Canadian Division, but was stopped from 6–8 June by the 21st Panzer Division and 12th SS Panzer Division &quot;Hitlerjugend&quot;, who hit the advancing Anglo-Canadian troops very hard. The 12th Waffen SS Division &quot;Hitlerjugend&quot;, as its name implies, was drawn entirely from the more fanatical elements of the Hitler Youth, and commanded by the ruthless SS-&quot;Brigadeführer&quot; Kurt Meyer, aka &quot;Panzer Meyer&quot;. Rommel followed up this success by ordering the 2nd Panzer Division to Caen while Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt received permission from Hitler to have the elite 1st SS Panzer Division &quot;Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler&quot; and 2nd SS Panzer Division &quot;Das Reich&quot; sent to Caen as well. Montgomery thus had to face what Stephen Badsey called the &quot;most formidable&quot; of all the German divisions in France.

The failure to take Caen immediately has been the source of an immense historiographical dispute with bitter nationalist overtones. Broadly, there has been a &quot;British school&quot; which accepts Montgomery&#x27;s post-war claim that he never intended to take Caen at once, and instead the Anglo-Canadian operations around Caen were a &quot;holding operation&quot; intended to attract the bulk of the German forces towards the Caen sector to allow the Americans to stage the &quot;break out operation&quot; on the left flank of the German positions, which was all part of Montgomery&#x27;s &quot;Master Plan&quot; that he had conceived long before the Normandy campaign. By contrast, the &quot;American school&quot; argued that Montgomery&#x27;s initial &quot;master plan&quot; was for the 21st Army Group to take Caen at once and move his tank divisions into the plains south of Caen, to then stage a breakout that would lead the 21st Army Group into the plains of northern France and hence into Antwerp and finally the Ruhr. Letters written by Eisenhower at the time of the battle make it clear that Eisenhower was expecting from Montgomery &quot;the early capture of the important focal point of Caen&quot;. Later, when this plan had clearly failed, Eisenhower wrote that Montgomery had &quot;evolved&quot; the plan to have the US forces achieve the break-out instead.

As the campaign progressed, Montgomery altered his initial plan for the invasion and continued the strategy of attracting and holding German counter-attacks in the area north of Caen rather than to the south, to allow the U.S. First Army in the west to take Cherbourg. A memo summarising Montgomery&#x27;s operations written by Eisenhower&#x27;s chief of staff, General Walter Bedell Smith who met with Montgomery in late June 1944 says nothing about Montgomery conducting a &quot;holding operation&quot; in the Caen sector, and instead speaks of him seeking a &quot;breakout&quot; into the plains south of the Seine. On 12 June, Montgomery ordered the 7th Armoured Division into an attack against the Panzer Lehr Division that made good progress at first, but ended when the Panzer Lehr was joined by the 2nd Panzer Division. At the Battle of Villers-Bocage on 13 June, the British lost twenty Cromwell tanks to five Tiger tanks led by SS &quot;Obersturmführer&quot; Michael Wittmann, in about five minutes. Despite the setback at Villers Bocage, Montgomery was still optimistic as the Allies were landing more troops and supplies than they were losing in battle, and though the German lines were holding, the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; and &quot;Waffen SS&quot; were suffering considerable attrition. Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder complained that it was impossible to move fighter squadrons to France until Montgomery had captured some airfields, something he asserted that Montgomery appeared incapable of doing. The first V-1 flying bomb attacks on London, which started on 13 June, further increased the pressure on Montgomery from Whitehall to speed up his advance.

On 18 June, Montgomery ordered Bradley to take Cherbourg while the British were to take Caen by 23 June. In Operation Epsom, the British VII Corps commanded by Sir Richard O&#x27;Connor attempted to outflank Caen from the west by breaking through the dividing line between the Panzer Lehr and the 12th SS to take the strategic Hill 112. Epsom began well with O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s assault force (the British 15th Scottish Division) breaking through and with the 11th Armoured Division stopping the counter-attacks of the 12th SS Division. General Friedrich Dollmann of Seventh Army had to commit the newly arrived II SS Corps to stop the British offensive. Dollmann, fearing that Epsom would be a success, committed suicide and was replaced by SS &quot;Oberstegruppenführer&quot; Paul Hausser. O&#x27;Connor, at the cost of about 4,000 men, had won a salient only deep and wide, but placed the Germans in an unviable long-term position. There was a strong sense of crisis in the Allied command, as the Allies had advanced only about inland, at a time when their plans called for them to have already taken Rennes, Alençon and St. Malo. After Epsom, Montgomery had to tell General Harry Crerar that the activation of the First Canadian Army would have to wait as there was only room at present, in the Caen sector, for the newly arrived XII Corps under Lieutenant-General Neil Ritchie, which caused some tension with Crerar, who was anxious to get into the field. Epsom had forced further German forces into Caen but all through June and the first half of July Rommel, Rundstedt, and Hitler were engaged in planning for a great offensive to drive the British into the sea; it was never launched and would have required the commitment of a large number of German forces to the Caen sector.

It was only after several failed attempts to break out in the Caen sector that Montgomery devised what he later called his &quot;master plan&quot; of having the 21st Army Group hold the bulk of the German forces, thus allowing the Americans to break out. The Canadian historians Terry Copp and Robert Vogel wrote about the dispute between the &quot;American school&quot; and &quot;British school&quot; after having suffered several setbacks in June 1944:

Hampered by stormy weather and the bocage terrain, Montgomery had to ensure that Rommel focused on the British in the east rather than the Americans in the west, who had to take the Cotentin Peninsula and Brittany before the Germans could be trapped by a general swing east. Montgomery told General Sir Miles Dempsey, the commander of Second British Army: &quot;Go on hitting, drawing the German strength, especially some of the armour, onto yourself—so as to ease the way for Brad [Bradley].&quot; The Germans had deployed twelve divisions, of which six were Panzer divisions, against the British while deploying eight divisions, of which three were Panzer divisions, against the Americans. By the middle of July Caen had not been taken, as Rommel continued to prioritise prevention of the break-out by British forces rather than the western territories being taken by the Americans. This was broadly as Montgomery had planned, albeit not with the same speed as he outlined at St Paul&#x27;s, although as the American historian Carlo D&#x27;Este pointed out the actual situation in Normandy was &quot;vastly different&quot; from what was envisioned at the St. Paul&#x27;s conference, as only one of four goals outlined in May had been achieved by 10 July.

On 7 July, Montgomery began Operation Charnwood with a carpet bombing offensive that turned much of the French countryside and the city of Caen into a wasteland. The British and Canadians succeeded in advancing into northern Caen before the Germans, who used the ruins to their advantage and stopped the offensive. On 10 July, Montgomery ordered Bradley to take Avranches, after which U.S. Third Army would be activated to drive towards Le Mans and Alençon. On 14 July 1944, Montgomery wrote to his patron Brooke, saying he had chosen on a &quot;real show down on the eastern flanks, and to loose a Corps of three armoured divisions in the open country about the Caen-Falaise road ... The possibilities are immense; with seven hundred tanks loosed to the South-east of Caen, and the armoured cars operating far ahead, anything can happen.&quot; The French Resistance had launched Plan Violet in June 1944 to systematically destroy the telephone system of France, which forced the Germans to use their radios more and more to communicate, and as the code-breakers of Bletchley Park had broken many of the German codes, Montgomery had, thanks to &quot;Ultra&quot; intelligence, a good idea of the German situation. Montgomery thus knew German Army Group B had lost 96,400 men while receiving 5,200 replacements and the Panzer Lehr Division now based at St. Lô was down to only 40 tanks. Montgomery later wrote that he knew he had the Normandy campaign won at this point as the Germans had almost no reserves while he had three armoured divisions in reserve.

An American break-out was achieved with Operation Cobra and the encirclement of German forces in the Falaise pocket at the cost of British losses with the diversionary Operation Goodwood. On the early morning of 18 July 1944, Operation Goodwood began with British heavy bombers beginning carpet bombing attacks that further devastated what was left of Caen and the surrounding countryside. A British tank crewman from the Guards Armoured Division later recalled: &quot;At 0500 hours a distant thunder in the air brought all the sleepy-eyed tank crews out of their blankets. 1,000 Lancasters were flying from the sea in groups of three or four at . Ahead of them the pathfinders were scattering their flares and before long the first bombs were dropping.&quot; A German tankman from the 21st Panzer Division at the receiving end of this bombardment remembered: &quot;We saw little dots detach themselves from the planes, so many of them that the crazy thought occurred to us: are those leaflets? ... Among the thunder of the explosions, we could hear the wounded scream and the insane howling of men who had [been] driven mad.&quot; The British bombing had badly smashed the German front-line units. Initially, the three British armoured divisions assigned to lead the offensive, the 7th, 11th and the Guards, made rapid progress and were soon approaching the Borguebus ridge, which dominated the landscape south of Caen, by noon.

If the British could take the Borguebus Ridge, the way to the plains of northern France would be wide open, and potentially Paris could be taken, which explains the ferocity with which the Germans defended the ridge. One German officer, Lieutenant Baron von Rosen, recalled that to motivate a Luftwaffe officer commanding a battery of four 88 mm guns to fight against the British tanks, he had to hold his handgun to the officer&#x27;s head &quot;and asked him whether he would like to be killed immediately or get a high decoration. He decided for the latter.&quot; The well dug-in 88 mm guns around the Borguebus Ridge began taking a toll on the British Sherman tanks, and the countryside was soon dotted with dozens of burning Shermans. One British officer reported with worry: &quot;I see palls of smoke and tanks brewing up with flames belching forth from their turrets. I see men climbing out, on fire like torches, rolling on the ground to try and douse the flames.&quot; Despite Montgomery&#x27;s orders to try to press on, fierce German counter-attacks stopped the British offensive.

The objectives of Operation Goodwood were all achieved except the complete capture of the Bourgebus Ridge, which was only partially taken. The operation was a strategic Allied success in drawing in the last German reserves in Normandy towards the Caen sector away from the American sector, greatly assisting the American breakout in Operation Cobra. By the end of Goodwood on 25 July 1944, the Canadians had finally taken Caen while the British tanks had reached the plains south of Caen, giving Montgomery the &quot;hinge&quot; he had been seeking, while forcing the Germans to commit the last of their reserves to stop the Anglo-Canadian offensive. &quot;Ultra&quot; decrypts indicated that the Germans now facing Bradley were seriously understrength, with Operation Cobra about to commence. During Operation Goodwood, the British had 400 tanks knocked out, with many recovered returning to service. The casualties were 5,500 with of ground gained. Bradley recognised Montgomery&#x27;s plan to pin down German armour and allow U.S. forces to break out:

The long-running dispute over what Montgomery&#x27;s &quot;master plan&quot; in Normandy led historians to differ greatly about the purpose of Goodwood. The British journalist Mark Urban wrote that the purpose of Goodwood was to draw German troops to their left flank to allow the American forces to break out on the right flank, arguing that Montgomery had to lie to his soldiers about the purpose of Goodwood, as the average British soldier would not have understood why they were being asked to create a diversion to allow the Americans to have the glory of staging the breakout with Operation Cobra. By contrast, the American historian Stephen Power argued that Goodwood was intended to be the &quot;breakout&quot; offensive and not a &quot;holding operation&quot;, writing: &quot;It is unrealistic to assert that an operation which called for the use of 4,500 Allied aircraft, 700 artillery pieces and over 8,000 armored vehicles and trucks and that cost the British over 5,500 casualties was conceived and executed for so limited an objective.&quot; Power noted that Goodwood and Cobra were supposed to take effect on the same day, 18 July 1944, but Cobra was cancelled owing to heavy rain in the American sector, and argued that both operations were meant to be breakout operations to trap the German armies in Normandy. American military writer Drew Middleton wrote that there is no doubt that Montgomery wanted Goodwood to provide a &quot;shield&quot; for Bradley, but at the same time Montgomery was clearly hoping for more than merely diverting German attention away from the American sector. British historian John Keegan pointed out that Montgomery made differing statements before Goodwood about the purpose of the operation. Keegan wrote that Montgomery engaged in what he called a &quot;hedging of his bets&quot; when drafting his plans for Goodwood, with a plan for a &quot;break out if the front collapsed, if not, sound documentary evidence that all he had intended in the first place was a battle of attrition&quot;. Again Bradley confirmed Montgomery&#x27;s plan and that the capture of Caen was only incidental to his mission, not critical. The American magazine &quot;LIFE&quot; quoted Bradley in 1951:
 With Goodwood drawing the Wehrmacht towards the British sector, U.S. First Army enjoyed a two-to-one numerical superiority. Bradley accepted Montgomery&#x27;s advice to begin the offensive by concentrating at one point instead of a &quot;broad front&quot; as Eisenhower would have preferred.

Operation Goodwood almost cost Montgomery his job, as Eisenhower seriously considered sacking him and only chose not to do so because to sack the popular &quot;Monty&quot; would have caused such a political backlash in Britain against the Americans at a critical moment in the war that the resulting strains in the Atlantic alliance were not considered worth it. Montgomery expressed his satisfaction at the results of Goodwood when calling the operation off. Eisenhower was under the impression that Goodwood was to be a break-out operation. Either there was a miscommunication between the two men or Eisenhower did not understand the strategy. Bradley fully understood Montgomery&#x27;s intentions. Both men would not give away to the press the true intentions of their strategy.

Many American officers had found Montgomery a difficult man to work with, and after Goodwood, pressured Eisenhower to fire Montgomery. Although the Eisenhower–Montgomery dispute is sometimes depicted in nationalist terms as being an Anglo-American struggle, it was the British Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder who was pressing Eisenhower most strongly after Goodwood to fire Montgomery. An American officer wrote in his diary that Tedder had come to see Eisenhower to &quot;pursue his current favourite subject, the sacking of Monty&quot;. With Tedder leading the &quot;sack Monty&quot; campaign, it encouraged Montgomery&#x27;s American enemies to press Eisenhower to fire Montgomery. Brooke was sufficiently worried about the &quot;sack Monty&quot; campaign to visit Montgomery at his Tactical Headquarters (TAC) in France and as he wrote in his diary; &quot;warned [Montgomery] of a tendency in the PM [Churchill] to listen to suggestions that Monty played for safety and was not prepared to take risks&quot;. Brooke advised Montgomery to invite Churchill to Normandy, arguing that if the &quot;sack Monty&quot; campaign had won the Prime Minister over, then his career would be over, as having Churchill&#x27;s backing would give Eisenhower the political &quot;cover&quot; to fire Montgomery. On 20 July, Montgomery met Eisenhower and on 21 July, Churchill, at the TAC in France. One of Montgomery&#x27;s staff officers wrote afterwards that it was &quot;common knowledge at Tac that Churchill had come to sack Monty&quot;. No notes were taken at the Eisenhower–Montgomery and Churchill–Montgomery meetings, but Montgomery was able to persuade both men not to sack him.

With the success of Cobra, which was soon followed by unleashing Patton&#x27;s Third Army, Eisenhower wrote to Montgomery: &quot;Am delighted that your basic plan has begun brilliantly to unfold with Bradley&#x27;s initial success.&quot; The success of Cobra was aided by Operation Spring, when the II Canadian Corps under General Guy Simonds (the only Canadian general whose skill Montgomery respected) began an offensive south of Caen that made little headway, but which the Germans regarded as the main offensive. Once Third Army arrived, Bradley was promoted to take command of the newly created 12th Army Group, consisting of U.S. First and Third Armies. Following the American breakout, there followed the Battle of Falaise Gap. British, Canadian, and Polish soldiers of 21st Army Group commanded by Montgomery advanced south, while the American and French soldiers of Bradley&#x27;s 12th Army Group advanced north to encircle the German Army Group B at Falaise, as Montgomery waged what Urban called &quot;a huge battle of annihilation&quot; in August 1944. Montgomery began his offensive into the &quot;Suisse Normande&quot; region with Operation Bluecoat, with Sir Richard O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s VIII Corps and Gerard Bucknall&#x27;s XXX Corps heading south. A dissatisfied Montgomery sacked Bucknall for being insufficiently aggressive and replaced him with General Brian Horrocks. At the same time, Montgomery ordered Patton—whose Third Army was supposed to advance into Brittany—to instead capture Nantes, which was soon taken.

Hitler waited too long to order his soldiers to retreat from Normandy, leading Montgomery to write: &quot;He [Hitler] refused to face the only sound military course. As a result the Allies caused the enemy staggering losses in men and materials.&quot; Knowing via &quot;Ultra&quot; that Hitler was not planning to retreat from Normandy, Montgomery, on 6 August 1944, ordered an envelopment operation against Army Group B—with the First Canadian Army under Harry Crerar to advance towards Falaise, British Second Army under Miles Dempsey to advance towards Argentan, and Patton&#x27;s Third Army to advance to Alençon. On 11 August, Montgomery changed his plan, with the Canadians to take Falaise and to meet the Americans at Argentan. The First Canadian Army launched two operations, Operation Totalize on 7 August, which advanced only in four days in the face of fierce German resistance, and Operation Tractable on 14 August, which finally took Falaise on 17 August. In view of the slow Canadian advance, Patton requested permission to take Falaise, but was refused by Bradley on 13 August. This prompted much controversy, many historians arguing that Bradley lacked aggression and that Montgomery should have overruled Bradley.

The so-called Falaise Gap was closed on 22 August 1944, but several American generals, most notably Patton, accused Montgomery of being insufficiently aggressive in closing it. About 60,000 German soldiers were trapped in Normandy, but before 22 August, about 20,000 Germans had escaped through the Falaise Gap. About 10,000 Germans had been killed in the Battle of the Falaise Gap, which led a stunned Eisenhower, who viewed the battlefield on 24 August, to comment with horror that it was impossible to walk without stepping on corpses. The successful conclusion of the Normandy campaign saw the beginning of the debate between the &quot;American school&quot; and &quot;British school&quot; as both American and British generals started to advance claims about who was most responsible for this victory. Brooke wrote in defence of his protégé Montgomery: &quot;Ike knows nothing about strategy and is &#x27;quite&#x27; unsuited to the post of Supreme Commander. It is no wonder that Monty&#x27;s real high ability is not always realised. Especially so when &#x27;national&#x27; spectacles pervert the perspective of the strategic landscape.&quot; About Montgomery&#x27;s conduct of the Normandy campaign, Badsey wrote:

===Replaced as Ground Forces Commander===

Eisenhower took over Ground Forces Command on 1 September, while continuing as Supreme Commander, with Montgomery continuing to command the 21st Army Group, now consisting mainly of British and Canadian units. Montgomery vehemently opposed this change, although it had been agreed before the D-Day invasion, instead proposing that either he or Bradley should remain in the job of Ground Forces command. He argued that the two roles were fundamentally different and that Eisenhower possessed the skillset for the former but not the latter; as such, he was liable to neglect the duties of one or the other, rendering the force off-balance. Instead, there was a need for a single decisive master plan under a leader free from the more administrative and political duties of the Supreme Commander - Montgomery felt he was the best equipped to deliver this, but was clear that he would also have been willing to work under Bradley. 

Eisenhower and many others failed to grasp this however, and would misinterpret this as Montgomery&#x27;s pride being wounded at having command removed. As such, they would attempt to placate him by reassuring him of the areas remaining under his command, and Winston Churchill had Montgomery promoted to Field Marshal by way of compensation. In addition, the British journalist Mark Urban points out that Montgomery seemed unable to grasp however that as the majority of the 2.2 million Allied soldiers fighting against Germany on the Western Front were now American (the ratio was 3:1) that it was politically unacceptable to American public opinion to have Montgomery remain as Land Forces Commander as: &quot;Politics would not allow him to carry on giving orders to great armies of Americans simply because, in his view, [he was the best man for the job]&quot;.

===Advance to the Rhine===
By September, ports like Cherbourg were too far away from the front line, causing the Allies great logistical problems. Antwerp was the third largest port in Europe. It was a deep water inland port connected to the North Sea via the river Scheldt. The Scheldt was wide enough and dredged deep enough to allow the passage of ocean-going ships.

On 3 September 1944 Hitler ordered Fifteenth Army, which had been stationed in the Pas de Calais region and was withdrawing north into the Low Countries, to hold the mouth of the river Scheldt to deprive the Allies of the use of Antwerp. Von Rundstedt, the German commander of the Western Front, ordered General Gustav-Adolf von Zangen, the commander of 15th Army, that: &quot;The attempt of the enemy to occupy the West Scheldt in order to obtain the free use of the harbor of Antwerp must be &quot;resisted to the utmost&quot;&quot; (emphasis in the original). Rundstedt argued with Hitler that as long as the Allies could not use the port of Antwerp, the Allies would lack the logistical capacity for an invasion of Germany.

The &quot;Witte Brigade&quot; (White Brigade) of the Belgian resistance had captured the Port of Antwerp before the Germans could destroy key port facilities, and on 4 September, Antwerp was captured by Horrocks with its harbour mostly intact. The British declined to immediately advance over the Albert Canal, and an opportunity to destroy the German Fifteenth Army was lost. The Germans had mined the river Scheldt, the mouth of the Scheldt was still in German hands making it impossible for the Royal Navy to clear the mines in the river, and therefore the port of Antwerp was still useless to the Allies.

On 5 September, SHAEF&#x27;s naval commander, Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay, had urged Montgomery to make clearing the mouth of the Scheldt his number-one priority. Alone among the senior commanders, only Ramsay saw opening Antwerp as crucial. Thanks to &quot;Ultra,&quot; Montgomery was aware of Hitler&#x27;s order by 5 September.

On 9 September, Montgomery wrote to Brooke that &quot;one good Pas de Calais port&quot; would be sufficient to meet all the logistical needs of the 21st Army Group, but only the supply needs of the same formation. At the same time, Montgomery noted that &quot;one good Pas de Calais port&quot; would be insufficient for the American armies in France, which would thus force Eisenhower, if for no other reasons than logistics, to favour Montgomery&#x27;s plans for an invasion of northern Germany by the 21st Army Group, whereas if Antwerp were opened up, then all of the Allied armies could be supplied.

The importance of ports closer to Germany was highlighted with the liberation of the city of Le Havre, which was assigned to John Crocker&#x27;s I Corps. To take Le Havre, two infantry divisions, two tank brigades, most of the artillery of the Second British Army, the specialised armoured &quot;gadgets&quot; of Percy Hobart&#x27;s 79th Armoured Division, the battleship and the monitor were all committed. On 10 September 1944, Bomber Command dropped 4,719 tons of bombs on Le Havre, which was the prelude to Operation Astonia, the assault on Le Havre by Crocker&#x27;s men, which was taken two days later. The Canadian historian Terry Copp wrote that the commitment of this much firepower and men to take only one French city might &quot;seem excessive&quot;, but by this point, the Allies desperately needed ports closer to the front line to sustain their advance.

In September 1944, Montgomery ordered Crerar and his First Canadian Army to take the French ports on the English Channel, namely Calais, Boulogne and Dunkirk, and to clear the Scheldt, a task that Crerar stated was impossible as he lacked enough troops to perform both operations at once. Montgomery refused Crerar&#x27;s request to have British XII Corps under Neil Ritchie assigned to help clear the Scheldt as Montgomery stated he needed XII Corps for Operation Market Garden. On 6 September 1944, Montgomery told Crerar that &quot;I want Boulogne badly&quot; and that city should be taken no matter what the cost. On 22 September 1944, Simonds&#x27;s II Canadian Corps took Boulogne, followed up by taking Calais on 1 October 1944. Montgomery was highly impatient with Simonds, complaining that it had taken Crocker&#x27;s I Corps only two days to take Le Havre while it took Simonds two weeks to take Boulogne and Calais, but Simonds noted that at Le Havre, three divisions and two brigades had been employed, whereas at both Boulogne and Calais, only two brigades were sent in to take both cities. After an attempt to storm the Leopold Canal by the 4th Canadian Division had been badly smashed by the German defenders, Simonds ordered a stop to further attempts to clear the river Scheldt until his mission of capturing the French ports on the English Channel had been accomplished; this allowed the German Fifteenth Army ample time to dig into its new home on the Scheldt. The only port that was not captured by the Canadians was Dunkirk, as Montgomery ordered the 2nd Canadian Division on 15 September to hold his flank at Antwerp as a prelude for an advance up the Scheldt.

Montgomery pulled away from the First Canadian Army (temporarily commanded now by Simonds as Crerar was ill), the British 51st Highland Division, 1st Polish Division, British 49th (West Riding) Division and 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade, and sent all of these formations to help the Second British Army to expand the Market Garden salient with Operations Constellation, Aintree, and towards the end of October Pheasant. However, Simonds seems to have regarded the Scheldt campaign as a test of his ability, and he felt he could clear the Scheldt with only three Canadian divisions, despite having to take on the entire Fifteenth Army, which held strongly fortified positions in a landscape that favoured the defence. Simonds never complained about the lack of air support (made worse by the cloudy October weather), shortages of ammunition or having insufficient troops, regarding these problems as challenges for him to overcome, rather than a cause for complaint. As it was, Simonds made only slow progress in October 1944 during the fighting in the Battle of the Scheldt, although he was praised by Copp for imaginative and aggressive leadership who managed to achieve much, despite all of the odds against him. Montgomery had little respect for the Canadian generals, whom he dismissed as mediocre, with the exception of Simonds, whom he consistently praised as Canada&#x27;s only &quot;first-rate&quot; general in the entire war.

Admiral Ramsay, who proved to be a far more articulate and forceful champion of the Canadians than their own generals, starting on 9 October demanded of Eisenhower in a meeting that he either order Montgomery to make supporting the First Canadian Army in the Scheldt fighting his number one priority or sack him. Ramsay in very strong language argued to Eisenhower that the Allies could only invade Germany if Antwerp was opened, and that as long as the three Canadian divisions fighting in the Scheldt had shortages of ammunition and artillery shells because Montgomery made the Arnhem salient his first priority, then Antwerp would not be opened anytime soon. Even Brooke wrote in his diary: &quot;I feel that Monty&#x27;s strategy for once is at fault. Instead of carrying out the advance to Arnhem he ought to have made certain of Antwerp&quot;. On 9 October 1944, at Ramsay&#x27;s urging, Eisenhower sent Montgomery a cable that emphasised the &quot;supreme importance of Antwerp&quot;, that &quot;the Canadian Army will not, repeat not, be able to attack until November unless immediately supplied with adequate ammunition&quot;, and warned that the Allied advance into Germany would totally stop by mid-November unless Antwerp was opened by October. Montgomery replied by accusing Ramsay of making &quot;wild statements&quot; unsupported by the facts, denying the Canadians were having to ration ammunition, and claimed that he would soon take the Ruhr thereby making the Scheldt campaign a sideshow. Montgomery further issued a memo entitled &quot;Notes on Command in Western Europe&quot; demanding that he once again be made Land Forces Commander. This led to an exasperated Eisenhower telling Montgomery that the question was not the command arrangement but rather his (Montgomery&#x27;s) ability and willingness to obey orders. Eisenhower further told Montgomery to either obey orders to immediately clear the mouth of the Scheldt or be sacked.

A chastised Montgomery told Eisenhower on 15 October 1944 that he was now making clearing the Scheldt his &quot;top priority&quot;, and the ammunition shortages in the First Canadian Army, a problem which he denied even existed five days earlier, were now over as supplying the Canadians was henceforth his first concern. Simonds, now reinforced with British troops and Royal Marines, cleared the Scheldt by taking Walcheren island, the last of the German &quot;fortresses&quot; on the Scheldt, on 8 November 1944. With the Scheldt in Allied hands, Royal Navy minesweepers removed the German mines in the river, and Antwerp was finally opened to shipping on 28 November 1944. Reflecting Antwerp&#x27;s importance, the Germans spent the winter of 1944–45 firing V-1 flying bombs and V-2 rockets at it in an attempt to shut down the port, and the German offensive in December 1944 in the Ardennes had as its ultimate objective the capture of Antwerp. Urban wrote that Montgomery&#x27;s most &quot;serious failure&quot; in the entire war was not the well publicised Battle of Arnhem, but rather his lack of interest in opening up Antwerp, as without it the entire Allied advance from the North Sea to the Swiss Alps stalled in the autumn of 1944 for logistical reasons.

===Operation Market Garden===
Montgomery was able to persuade Eisenhower to allow him to test his strategy of a single thrust to the Ruhr with Operation Market Garden in September 1944. The offensive was strategically bold, although Lieutenant General Humfrey Gale, the &quot;senior administrative and logistics officer&quot; for SHAEF (Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force) considered Montgomery&#x27;s narrow-thrust strategy to be &quot;logistically unrealistic&quot;, and is his opinion &quot;a ruse merely to demonstrate later that he had been prevented from winning the war quickly by Eisenhower&#x27;s caution.&quot; At a strategy meeting on 10 September 1944, Montgomery became so belligerent that Eisenhower was propmted into saying &quot;Steady, Monty! You can&#x27;t speak to me like that. I&#x27;m your boss.&quot; Following the Allied breakout from Normandy, Eisenhower favored pursuing the German armies northwards and eastwards to the Rhine on a broad front. Eisenhower relied on speed, which in turn depended on logistics, which were &quot;stretched to the limit&quot;. SHAEF did provide Montgomery with additional resources, principally additional locomotives and rolling stock, and priority for air supply. Eisenhower&#x27;s decision to launch Market Garden was influenced by his desire to keep the retreating Germans under pressure, and by the pressure from the United States to use the First Allied Airborne Army as soon as possible.

Montgomery&#x27;s plan for Operation Market Garden (17–25 September 1944) was to outflank the Siegfried Line and cross the Rhine, setting the stage for later offensives into the Ruhr region. The 21st Army Group would attack north from Belgium, through the Netherlands, across the Rhine and consolidate north of Arnhem on the far side of the Rhine. The risky plan required three Airborne Divisions to capture numerous intact bridges along a single-lane road, on which an entire Corps had to attack and use as its main supply route. The offensive failed to achieve its objectives.

Both Churchill and Montgomery claimed that the operation was nearly or 90% successful, &quot;since they had got nine-tenths of the way to Arnhem&quot;, prompting Air Chief Marshal Tedder to derisively comment that &quot;one jumps off a cliff with an even higher success rate, until the last few inches.&quot; However, in Montgomery&#x27;s equivocal acceptance of responsibility he blames lack of support, and also refers to the Battle of the Scheldt, which was undertaken by Canadian troops not involved in Market Garden. Montgomery later said:

In the aftermath of Market Garden, Montgomery made holding the Arnhem salient his first priority, arguing that the Second British Army might still be able to break through and reach the wide open plains of northern Germany, and that he might be able to take the Ruhr by the end of October. The Germans under &quot;Generalfeldmarschall&quot; Walther Model attempted to retake the Nijmegen salient in early October, but were beaten back. In the meantime, the First Canadian Army finally achieved the task of clearing the mouth of the river Scheldt, despite the fact that, in the words of Copp and Vogel, &quot;Montgomery&#x27;s Directive required the Canadians to continue to fight alone for almost two weeks in a battle which everyone agreed could only be won with the aid of additional divisions&quot;.

===Battle of the Bulge===
On 16 December 1944, at the start of the Battle of the Bulge, Montgomery&#x27;s 21st Army Group was on the northern flank of the allied lines. Bradley&#x27;s US 12th Army Group was to Montgomery&#x27;s south, with William Simpson&#x27;s U.S. Ninth Army adjacent to 21st Army Group, Courtney Hodges&#x27; U.S. First Army, holding the Ardennes and Patton&#x27;s U.S. Third Army further south.

SHAEF believed the Wehrmacht was no longer capable of launching a major offensive, and that no offensive could be launched through such rugged terrain as the Ardennes Forest. Because of this, the area was held by refitting and newly arrived American formations. The Wehrmacht planned to exploit this by making a surprise attack through the Ardennes Forest whilst bad weather grounded Allied air power, splitting the Allied Armies in two. They would then turn north to recapture the port of Antwerp. If the attack were to succeed in capturing Antwerp, the whole of 21st Army Group, along with U.S. Ninth Army and most of U.S. First Army would be trapped without supplies behind German lines.

The attack initially advanced rapidly, splitting U.S. 12th Army Group in two, with all of U.S. Ninth Army and the bulk of U.S. First Army on the northern shoulder of the German &#x27;bulge&#x27;. The 12th Army Group commander, Bradley, was located in Luxembourg, making command of the U.S. forces north of the bulge problematic. As Montgomery was the nearest army group commander on the ground, on 20 December, Eisenhower temporarily transferred command of U.S. Ninth Army and U.S. First Army to Montgomery&#x27;s 21st Army Group. Bradley was &quot;concerned because it might discredit the American command&quot; but that it might mean Montgomery would commit more of his reserves to the battle. In practice the change led to &quot;great resentment on the part of many Americans, particularly at Headquarters, 12th Army Group, and Third Army&quot;.

With the British and American forces under Montgomery&#x27;s command holding the northern flank of the German assault, General Patton&#x27;s Third Army, which was to the south, turned north and fought its way through the severe weather and German opposition to relieve the besieged American forces in Bastogne. Four days after Montgomery took command of the northern flank, the bad weather cleared and the USAAF and RAF resumed operations, inflicting heavy casualties on German troops and vehicles. Six days after Montgomery took command of the northern flank, Patton&#x27;s Third Army relieved the besieged American forces in Bastogne. Unable to advance further, and running out of fuel, the Wehrmacht abandoned the offensive.

Morelock states that Montgomery was preoccupied with leading a &quot;single thrust offensive&quot; to Berlin as the overall commander of Allied ground forces, and that he accordingly treated the Ardennes counteroffensive &quot;as a sideshow, to be finished with the least possible effort and expenditure of resources.&quot;

Montgomery subsequently wrote of his actions:
After the war Hasso von Manteuffel, who commanded the 5th Panzer Army in the Ardennes, was imprisoned awaiting trial for war crimes. During this period he was interviewed by B. H. Liddell Hart, a British author who has since been accused of putting words in the mouths of German generals, and attempting to &quot;rewrite the historical record&quot;. After conducting several interviews via an interpreter, Liddell Hart in a subsequent book attributed to Manteuffel the following statement about Montgomery&#x27;s contribution to the battle in the Ardennes:

However, American historian Stephen Ambrose, writing in 1997, maintained that &quot;Putting Monty in command of the northern flank had no effect on the battle&quot;. Ambrose wrote that: &quot;Far from directing the victory, Montgomery had gotten in everyone&#x27;s way, and had botched the counter-attack.&quot; General Omar Bradley blamed Montgomery&#x27;s &quot;stagnating conservatism&quot; for his failure to counter-attack when ordered to do so by Eisenhower.

Command of U.S. First Army reverted to 12th Army Group on 17 January 1945, whilst command of U.S. Ninth Army remained with 21st Army Group for the coming operations to cross the Rhine.

===Crossing the Rhine===

In February 1945, Montgomery&#x27;s 21st Army Group advanced to the Rhine in Operation Veritable and Operation Grenade. It crossed the Rhine on 24 March 1945, in Operation Plunder, which took place two weeks after U.S. First Army had crossed the Rhine after capturing the Ludendorff Bridge during the Battle of Remagen.

21st Army Group&#x27;s river crossing was followed by the encirclement of the Ruhr Pocket. During this battle, U.S. Ninth Army, which had remained part of 21st Army Group after the Battle of the Bulge, formed the northern arm of the envelopment of German Army Group B, with U.S. First Army forming the southern arm. The two armies linked up on 1 April 1945, encircling 370,000 German troops, and on 4 April 1945, Ninth Army reverted to Omar Bradley&#x27;s 12th Army Group.

By the war&#x27;s end, the remaining formations of 21st Army group, First Canadian Army and British Second Army, had liberated the northern part of the Netherlands and captured much of north-west Germany, occupied Hamburg and Rostock and sealed off the Danish peninsula.

On 4 May 1945, on Lüneburg Heath, Montgomery accepted the surrender of German forces in north-west Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands.

==Casualty conservation policy==
The British high command were not only concerned with winning the war and defeating Germany, but also with ensuring that it retained sufficient influence in the post-war world to govern global policy. Suffering heavy losses in Normandy would diminish British leadership and prestige within its empire and in post-war Europe in particular. Many of Montgomery&#x27;s clashes with Eisenhower were based on his determination to pursue the war &quot;on lines most suitable to Britain&quot;.

The fewer the number of combat-experienced divisions the British had left at the end of the war, the smaller Britain&#x27;s influence in Europe was likely to be, compared to the emerging superpowers of the United States and the Soviet Union. Montgomery was thus caught in a dilemma—the British Army needed to be seen to be pulling at least half the weight in the liberation of Europe, but without incurring the heavy casualties that such a role would inevitably produce. 21st Army Group scarcely possessed sufficient forces to achieve such a military prominence, and the remaining divisions had to be expended sparingly.

In 1944, Britain did not possess the manpower to rebuild shattered divisions and it was imperative for Montgomery to protect the viability of the British army. It was reported to the War Office that &quot;Montgomery has to be very careful of what he does on his eastern flank because on that flank is the only British Army there is left in this part of the world&quot;. The context of British casualties and the shortage of reinforcements, prompted Montgomery to &quot;excessive caution&quot;. Dempsey wrote on 13 June, that Caen could only be taken by a &quot;set piece assault and we did not have the men or the ammunition for that at the time&quot;.

Montgomery&#x27;s solution to the dilemma was to attempt to remain Commander of All Land Forces until the end of the war, so that any victory attained on the Western front—although achieved primarily by American formations—would accrue in part to him and thus to Britain. He would also be able to ensure that British units were spared some of the high-attrition actions, but would be most prominent when the final blows were struck. When that strategy failed, he persuaded Eisenhower to occasionally put some American formations under the control of the 21st Army Group, so as to bolster his resources while still maintaining the outward appearance of successful British effort.

Montgomery initially remained prepared to push Second (British) Army hard to capture the vital strategic town of Caen, and consequently incur heavy losses. In the original Overlord plan, Montgomery was determined to push past Caen to Falaise as quickly as possible. However, after the heavy casualties incurred in capturing Caen, he changed his mind.

==Personality==
Throughout the war, Montgomery was notorious for his lack of tact and diplomacy. Even his &quot;patron&quot;, the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, General Sir Alan Brooke, frequently mentions it in his war diaries: &quot;he is liable to commit untold errors in lack of tact&quot; and &quot;I had to haul him over the coals for his usual lack of tact and egotistical outlook which prevented him from appreciating other people&#x27;s feelings&quot;. Montgomery suffered from &quot;an overbearing conceit and an uncontrollable urge for self-promotion.&quot; General Hastings Ismay, who was at the time Winston Churchill&#x27;s chief staff officer and trusted military adviser, once said of him: &quot;I have come to the conclusion that his love of publicity is a disease, like alcoholism or taking drugs, and that it sends him equally mad.&quot; The psychiatrist Michael Fitzgerald has argued that Montgomery was likely autistic, and it has been speculated that this was the cause of many of apparent behaviours and eccentricities.

A notorious instance of Montgomery&#x27;s behaviour occurred during the North African campaign when he bet Walter Bedell Smith that he could capture Sfax by the middle of April 1943. Smith jokingly replied that if Montgomery could do it he would give him a Flying Fortress complete with crew. Smith promptly forgot all about it, but Montgomery did not, and when Sfax was taken on 10 April, he sent a message to Smith &quot;claiming his winnings&quot;. Smith tried to laugh it off, but Montgomery insisted on his aircraft. The incident was finally resolved by Eisenhower who, with his renowned skill in diplomacy, ensured Montgomery did get his Flying Fortress, though at a great cost in ill feeling.

Antony Beevor, in discussing Montgomery&#x27;s counterproductive lack of tact in the final months of the war, described him as &quot;insufferable&quot;. Beevor says that in January 1945 Montgomery had tried to claim far too much credit for the British (and for himself) in defeating the German counter-attack in the Ardennes in December 1944. This &quot;crass and unpleasant blunder&quot; helped make it impossible for Churchill and Alan Brooke to persuade Eisenhower of the need for an immediate thrust—to be led by Montgomery—through Germany to Berlin. Eisenhower did not accept the viability of the &quot;dagger thrust&quot; approach, it had already been agreed that Berlin would fall into the future Soviet occupation zone, and he was not willing to accept heavy casualties for no gain, so Eisenhower disregarded the British suggestions and continued with his conservative broad front strategy, and the Red Army reached Berlin well ahead of the Western Allies.

In August 1945, while Brooke, Sir Andrew Cunningham and Sir Charles Portal were discussing their possible successors as &quot;Chiefs of Staff&quot;, they concluded that Montgomery would be very efficient as CIGS from the Army&#x27;s point of view but that he was also very unpopular with a large proportion of the Army. Despite this, Cunningham and Portal were strongly in favour of Montgomery succeeding Brooke after his retirement. Churchill, by all accounts a faithful friend, is quoted as saying of Montgomery, &quot;In defeat, unbeatable; in victory, unbearable.&quot;

==Later life==
===Post-war military career===
After the war, Montgomery became the C-in-C of the British Army of the Rhine (BAOR), the name given to the British Occupation Forces, and was the British member of the Allied Control Council.

====Chief of the Imperial General Staff====
Montgomery was Chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS) from 1946 to 1948, succeeding Alan Brooke.

As CIGS, Montgomery toured Africa in 1947 and in a secret 1948 report to Prime Minister Clement Attlee&#x27;s government proposed a &quot;master plan&quot; to amalgamate British Africa territories and to exploit the raw materials of Africa, thereby counteracting the loss of British influence in Asia. Montgomery sought to strengthen white rule to serve as a bulwark against communism. He described Africans as uncivilized, stating &quot;he is a complete savage and is quite incapable of developing the country himself.&quot; His statements were publicized in 1999. After learning of Montgomery&#x27;s remarks, one of his biographers, Lord Chalfont, said his reputation had been &quot;irredeemably damaged... I find it very disappointing and depressing.&quot;

However, Montgomery was barely on speaking terms with his fellow service chiefs, sending his deputy Kenneth Crawford to attend their meetings and he clashed particularly with Sir Arthur Tedder, who was by now Chief of the Air Staff (CAS).

When Montgomery&#x27;s term of office expired, Prime Minister Attlee appointed Sir William Slim from retirement with the rank of field marshal as his successor. When Montgomery protested that he had told his protégé, General Sir John Crocker, former commander of I Corps in the 1944–45 North-West Europe Campaign, that the job was to be his, Attlee is said to have retorted &quot;Untell him.&quot;

====Western Union Defence Organization====

Montgomery was then appointed Chairman of the Western Union Defence Organization&#x27;s C-in-C committee. Volume 3 of Nigel Hamilton&#x27;s &quot;Life of Montgomery of Alamein&quot; gives an account of the bickering between Montgomery and his land forces chief, French General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny, which created splits through the Union headquarters.

====NATO====
On the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation&#x27;s Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe in 1951, Montgomery became Eisenhower&#x27;s deputy. He would continue to serve under Eisenhower&#x27;s successors, Generals Matthew Ridgway and Al Gruenther, until his retirement, aged nearly 71, in 1958.

===Personal===
Montgomery was created 1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein in 1946.

Montgomery&#x27;s mother, Maude Montgomery, died in 1949. Montgomery did not attend the funeral, claiming he was &quot;too busy&quot;.

Montgomery was an Honorary Member of the Winkle Club, a charity in Hastings, East Sussex, and introduced Winston Churchill to the club in 1955.

He was chairman of the governing body of St. John&#x27;s School in Leatherhead, Surrey, from 1951 to 1966, and a generous supporter.

He was also President of Portsmouth Football Club between 1944 and 1961.

In the mid-1950s, the &quot;Illustrated London News&quot; published sets of photographs taken by Montgomery while flying over the Swiss Alps. In February 1957, views of Mount Toedi taken with a Rolleiflex camera were reproduced.

===Opinions===
====Memoirs====

Montgomery&#x27;s memoirs (1958) criticised many of his wartime comrades in harsh terms, including Eisenhower. He was threatened with legal action by Field Marshal Auchinleck for suggesting that Auchinleck had intended to retreat from the Alamein position if attacked again, and had to give a radio broadcast (20 November 1958) expressing his gratitude to Auchinleck for having stabilised the front at the First Battle of Alamein.

The 1960 paperback edition of Montgomery&#x27;s memoirs contains a publisher&#x27;s note drawing attention to that broadcast, and stating that although the reader might assume from Montgomery&#x27;s text that Auchinleck had been planning to retreat &quot;into the Nile Delta or beyond&quot; in the publisher&#x27;s view it had been Auchinleck&#x27;s intention to launch an offensive as soon as the Eighth Army was &quot;rested and regrouped&quot;. Montgomery was stripped of his honorary citizenship of Montgomery, Alabama, and was challenged to a duel by an Italian lawyer.

Montgomery mentioned to the American journalist John Gunther in April 1944 that (like Alanbrooke) he kept a secret diary. Gunther remarked that it would surely be an essential source for historians. When Montgomery asked whether it would be worth money one day, Gunther suggested &quot;at least $100,000.&quot; This was converted into pounds sterling, and he is supposed to have grinned and said &quot;Well, I guess I won&#x27;t die in the poor house after all.&quot;

====Military opinions====
Montgomery twice met Israeli general Moshe Dayan. After an initial meeting in the early 1950s, Montgomery met Dayan again in the 1960s to discuss the Vietnam War, which Dayan was studying. Montgomery was harshly critical of US strategy in Vietnam, which involved deploying large numbers of combat troops, aggressive bombing attacks, and uprooting entire village populations and forcing them into strategic hamlets. Montgomery said that the Americans&#x27; most important problem was that they had no clear objective, and allowed local commanders to set military policy. At the end of their meeting, Montgomery asked Dayan to tell the Americans, in his name, that they were &quot;insane&quot;.

During a visit to the Alamein battlefields in May 1967, he bluntly told high-ranking Egyptian Army officers that they would lose any war with Israel, a warning that was shown to be justified only a few weeks later in the Six-Day War.

====Social opinions====
In retirement, Montgomery publicly supported apartheid after a visit to South Africa in 1962, and after a visit to China declared himself impressed by the Chinese leadership led by Chairman Mao Tse-tung. He spoke out against the legalisation of homosexuality in the United Kingdom, arguing that the Sexual Offences Act 1967 was a &quot;charter for buggery&quot; and that &quot;this sort of thing may be tolerated by the French, but we&#x27;re British—thank God&quot;.

Montgomery was a non-smoking teetotaller, a vegetarian, and a Christian.

==Death==
Montgomery died in 1976 at his home Isington Mill in Isington, Hampshire, aged 88. After a funeral at St George&#x27;s Chapel, Windsor, his body was buried in Holy Cross churchyard, in Binsted, Hampshire.
==Legacy==
*His Garter banner, which had hung in St. George&#x27;s Chapel in Windsor during his lifetime, is now on display in St Mary&#x27;s, Warwick.
* Montgomery&#x27;s portrait by Frank O. Salisbury (1945) hangs in the National Portrait Gallery.
* A statue of Montgomery by Oscar Nemon stands outside the Ministry of Defence in Whitehall, alongside those of Field Marshal Lord Slim and Field Marshal Lord Alanbrooke.
* Montgomery gave his name to the French commune Colleville-Montgomery in Normandy.
* The Imperial War Museum holds a variety of material relating to Montgomery in its collections. These include Montgomery&#x27;s Grant command tank (on display in the atrium at the museum&#x27;s London branch), his command caravans as used in North West Europe (on display at IWM Duxford), and his papers are held by the museum&#x27;s Department of Documents. The museum maintains a permanent exhibition about Montgomery, entitled &quot;Monty: Master of the Battlefield&quot;.
* The World Champion Field Marshal Montgomery Pipe Band from Northern Ireland is named after him.
* Montgomery&#x27;s Rolls-Royce staff car is on display at the Royal Logistic Corps Museum, Worthy Down, Hampshire.
* The Montgomery cocktail is a martini mixed at a ratio of 15 parts gin to 1 part vermouth, and popular with Ernest Hemingway at Harry&#x27;s Bar in Venice. The drink was facetiously named for Montgomery&#x27;s supposed refusal to go into battle unless his numerical advantage was at least fifteen to one, and it appeared in Hemingway&#x27;s 1950 novel &quot;Across the River and into the Trees&quot;. Ironically, following severe internal injuries received in the First World War, Montgomery himself could neither smoke nor drink.

==Honours and awards==

* Viscountcy as &quot;Montgomery of Alamein&quot; (UK, January 1946)
* Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter (UK, 1946)
* Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath (UK, 1945) KCB – 11 November 1942, CB – 11 July 1940
* Companion of the Distinguished Service Order (UK, 1914)
* Mentioned in Despatches (UK, 17 February 1915, 4 January 1917, 11 December 1917, 20 May 1918, 20 December 1918, 5 July 1919, 15 July 1939, 24 June 1943, 13 January 1944)
* Croix de Guerre 1914-1918 (France, 1919)
* Grand Cross of the Légion d&#x27;honneur (France, May 1945)
* Médaille militaire (France, 9 September 1958)
* Distinguished Service Medal (US, 1947)
* Chief Commander of the Legion of Merit (US, 10 August 1943)
* Member of the Order of Victory (USSR, 21 June 1945)
* Knight of the Order of the Elephant (Denmark, 2 August 1945)
* Grand Commander of the Order of George I (Greece, 20 June 1944)
* Silver Cross (V Class) of the Virtuti Militari (Poland, 31 October 1944)
* Grand Cross of the Military Order of the White Lion (Czechoslovakia, 1947)
* Grand Cordon of the Seal of Solomon (Ethiopia, 1949)
* Grand Officer with Palm of the Order of Leopold II (Belgium, 1947)
* Croix de Guerre 1940 with Palm (Belgium)
* Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion (Netherlands, 16 January 1947)
* Grand Cross of the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav (Norway) (1951)


==See also==

* Afrika Korps
* M. E. Clifton James (Montgomery&#x27;s double during the Second World War)
* Tex Banwell (another double)
* Irish military diaspora
* Panzer Army Africa
* &quot;I Was Monty&#x27;s Double&quot;, 1958 film adapted from the autobiography of M. E. Clifton James

==References==

===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


====Primary sources====
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* British Army Officers 1939–1945
* Generals of World War II
* Montgomery and Anglo Polish relations during WWII
* Biography of Montgomery, Jewish Virtual Library website. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
* Profile, desertwar.net. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
* Viscount Montgomery of Alamein interview on BBC Radio 4 &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot;, 20 December 1969</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="0" end="13" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="14" end="72" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Law Montgomery, 1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="127" end="132" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Monty"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="153" end="165" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="166" end="173" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="192" end="207" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="213" end="238" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="247" end="263" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725651" start="344" end="371" title="Royal Warwickshire Regiment" label="Royal Warwickshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162988" start="376" end="383" title="Méteren" label="Méteren"/>
<link wikidata="Q332310" start="412" end="420" title="Bailleul, Nord" label="Bailleul"/>
<link wikidata="Q853976" start="481" end="502" title="First Battle of Ypres" label="First Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="524" end="537" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q239255" start="586" end="601" title="Battle of Arras (1917)" label="Battle of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="645" end="668" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="Battle of Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="710" end="724" title="chief of staff" label="chief of staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638515" start="732" end="758" title="47th (1/2nd London) Division" label="47th (2nd London) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="767" end="782" title="Interwar period" label="inter-war years"/>
<link wikidata="Q248220" start="826" end="841" title="Royal Fusiliers" label="Royal Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646574" start="934" end="954" title="9th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="9th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496240" start="964" end="990" title="general officer commanding" label="general officer commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645378" start="998" end="1019" title="8th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="8th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q625798" start="1033" end="1056" title="Western Desert campaign" label="Western Desert campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="1107" end="1126" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="British Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="1206" end="1231" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q714777" start="1240" end="1264" title="Allied invasion of Italy" label="Allied invasion of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="1323" end="1341" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Battle of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="1343" end="1361" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="1369" end="1374" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="1450" end="1465" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1486" end="1512" title="Western Front (World War II)#1944–1945: The Second Front" label="North West Europe campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="1569" end="1592" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="1671" end="1690" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q161693" start="1830" end="1856" title="First Allied Airborne Army" label="First Allied Airborne Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q697403" start="1879" end="1896" title="Operation Plunder" label="Operation Plunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q699093" start="2016" end="2027" title="Ruhr Pocket" label="Ruhr Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459610" start="2194" end="2208" title="German surrender at Lüneburg Heath" label="Lüneburg Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="2219" end="2226" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="2331" end="2356" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="2384" end="2419" title="Chief of the General Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Imperial General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988404" start="2518" end="2531" title="Western Union (alliance)" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2551" end="2555" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640949" start="2570" end="2601" title="Supreme Allied Commander Europe" label="Supreme Allied Commander Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q146696" start="2671" end="2681" title="Kennington" label="Kennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="2731" end="2748" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725966" start="2759" end="2775" title="Henry Montgomery (bishop)" label="Henry Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="2841" end="2853" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777934" start="2860" end="2870" title="Protestant Ascendancy" label="Ascendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="2877" end="2883" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="2901" end="2915" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964935" start="2930" end="2945" title="Clan Montgomery" label="Clan Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q841594" start="2947" end="2955" title="The Reverend" label="The Rev."/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="2987" end="2992" title="Vicar" label="Vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594154" start="2996" end="3017" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Church, Kennington" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158285" start="3053" end="3074" title="Sir Robert Montgomery" label="Sir Robert Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432599" start="3088" end="3097" title="Inishowen" label="Inishowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="3137" end="3143" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="3183" end="3196" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719689" start="3287" end="3315" title="Alexander Montgomery (1686–1729)" label="Colonel Alexander Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q288986" start="3366" end="3395" title="Frederic William Farrar" label="Frederic William Canon Farrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q915423" start="3573" end="3580" title="Moville, County Donegal" label="Moville"/>
<link wikidata="Q202156" start="3663" end="3671" title="Provinces of Ireland" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3675" end="3682" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="3720" end="3728" title="Mortgage loan" label="mortgage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="3818" end="3826" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151232" start="3885" end="3893" title="townland" label="townland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314643" start="3940" end="3951" title="Lough Foyle" label="Lough Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105979203" start="4144" end="4162" title="Anglican Bishop of Tasmania" label="Bishop of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="4177" end="4191" title="British colony" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="4238" end="4244" title="Bishop" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148519" start="4335" end="4343" title="Colony of Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594801" start="4834" end="4869" title="St Michael&amp;#x27;s Collegiate School" label="St Michael&amp;#x27;s Collegiate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175730" start="5126" end="5131" title="David Montgomery, 2nd Viscount Montgomery of Alamein" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167252" start="5263" end="5281" title="Lambeth Conference" label="Lambeth Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360332" start="5343" end="5377" title="The King&amp;#x27;s School, Canterbury" label="The King&amp;#x27;s School, Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330427" start="5430" end="5471" title="Society for the Propagation of the Gospel" label="Society for the Propagation of the Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227526" start="5528" end="5549" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s School (London)" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020147" start="5563" end="5596" title="Royal Military College, Sandhurst" label="Royal Military College, Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725651" start="5739" end="5766" title="Royal Warwickshire Regiment" label="Royal Warwickshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="5772" end="5789" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996284" start="5867" end="5877" title="Lieutenant (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900107" start="5955" end="5976" title="Shorncliffe Army Camp" label="Shorncliffe Army Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6003" end="6012" title="World War I" label="Great War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547067" start="6130" end="6151" title="10th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="10th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709225" start="6159" end="6171" title="4th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="4th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q919272" start="6179" end="6206" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War I)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q85805565" start="6233" end="6242" title="Temporary gentlemen" label="temporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="6243" end="6250" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003949" start="6289" end="6308" title="Battle of Le Cateau" label="Battle of Le Cateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417205" start="6348" end="6352" title="Battle of Mons" label="Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162988" start="6357" end="6364" title="Méteren" label="Méteren"/>
<link wikidata="Q332310" start="6393" end="6401" title="Bailleul, Nord" label="Bailleul"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="6432" end="6438" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="6488" end="6492" title="human lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="7540" end="7567" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137581" start="7670" end="7688" title="The London Gazette" label="The London Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967158" start="7769" end="7782" title="brigade major" label="brigade major"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547378" start="7797" end="7819" title="112th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="112th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546528" start="7835" end="7857" title="104th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="104th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="7876" end="7886" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="7907" end="7920" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="7987" end="8006" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="8063" end="8093" title="Staff (military)" label="general staff officer, grade 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635252" start="8110" end="8123" title="33rd Division (United Kingdom)" label="33rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q239255" start="8145" end="8160" title="Battle of Arras (1917)" label="Battle of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281542" start="8215" end="8223" title="IX Corps (United Kingdom)" label="IX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="8233" end="8240" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q336040" start="8241" end="8259" title="Herbert Plumer, 1st Viscount Plumer" label="Sir Herbert Plumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209514" start="8267" end="8278" title="Second Army (United Kingdom)" label="Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="8331" end="8354" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="Battle of Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="8427" end="8432" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="8535" end="8549" title="chief of staff" label="chief of staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638515" start="8558" end="8584" title="47th (1/2nd London) Division" label="47th (2nd London) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="8837" end="8854" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446566" start="8865" end="8886" title="Minister of Munitions" label="Minister of Munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="8930" end="8935" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q248220" start="9264" end="9279" title="Royal Fusiliers" label="Royal Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="9300" end="9325" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="9371" end="9378" title="captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="9380" end="9386" title="Brevet (military)" label="brevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="9387" end="9392" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596549" start="9454" end="9480" title="Staff College, Camberley" label="Staff College in Camberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="9562" end="9569" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="9599" end="9617" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="9662" end="9675" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q438200" start="9676" end="9697" title="Sir William Robertson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir William Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553617" start="9808" end="9829" title="17th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="17th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="9876" end="9887" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="9970" end="9995" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="10200" end="10216" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="10232" end="10247" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="10269" end="10276" title="Colonel (British Army)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19175" start="10277" end="10299" title="Arthur Percival" label="Arthur Ernest Percival"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057290" start="10307" end="10321" title="Essex Regiment" label="Essex Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002636" start="10439" end="10446" title="Macroom" label="Macroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q927379" start="11597" end="11633" title="49th (West Riding) Infantry Division" label="49th (West Riding) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="11637" end="11653" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="11745" end="11762" title="company commander" label="company commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q966007" start="12510" end="12526" title="Percy Hobart" label="Sir Percy Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997065" start="12618" end="12631" title="Oswald Carver" label="Oswald Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247822" start="12834" end="12848" title="Burnham-on-Sea" label="Burnham-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="12852" end="12860" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="12968" end="12979" title="septicaemia" label="septicaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="12990" end="13000" title="amputation" label="amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q393829" start="14077" end="14089" title="Mersa Matruh" label="Mersa Matruh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="14192" end="14201" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q352630" start="14329" end="14350" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="14422" end="14457" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Italy&amp;#x27;s departure from the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="14847" end="14857" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="14995" end="15013" title="Commanding officer" label="Commanding officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="15088" end="15097" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="15102" end="15115" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="15136" end="15143" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="15256" end="15267" title="British Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218660" start="15291" end="15325" title="Pakistan Command and Staff College" label="Pakistan Command and Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="15330" end="15336" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646574" start="15471" end="15491" title="9th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="9th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967182" start="15519" end="15528" title="Brigadier (United Kingdom)" label="brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="15581" end="15591" title="Amphibious warfare" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q149543" start="15592" end="15611" title="combined operations" label="combined operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080919" start="15662" end="15678" title="Southern Command (United Kingdom)" label="Southern Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q315540" start="15688" end="15717" title="Archibald Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell" label="Sir Archibald Percival Wavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645378" start="15795" end="15816" title="8th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="8th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q46057" start="15910" end="15921" title="1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine" label="Arab revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="15962" end="15979" title="Aliyah" label="Jewish emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q223165" start="16073" end="16094" title="3rd Division (United Kingdom)" label="3rd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496240" start="16441" end="16467" title="General Officer Commanding" label="General Officer Commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="16513" end="16540" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q334984" start="16569" end="16578" title="John Vereker, 6th Viscount Gort" label="Lord Gort"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="16697" end="16707" title="Clergy" label="the clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335889" start="16824" end="16835" title="Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke" label="Alan Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971489" start="16850" end="16858" title="II Corps (United Kingdom)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="17041" end="17058" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17063" end="17077" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208762" start="17085" end="17093" title="chaplain" label="chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644069" start="17385" end="17397" title="7th Infantry Brigade and Headquarters East" label="7th (Guards)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645374" start="17407" end="17410" title="8th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="8th"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="17610" end="17616" title="Wehrmacht" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001676" start="17694" end="17703" title="Offensive (military)" label="offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q357104" start="17732" end="17740" title="Military exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="18205" end="18211" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608382" start="18226" end="18232" title="French war planning 1920–1940" label="Plan D"/>
<link wikidata="Q934226" start="18306" end="18316" title="Dyle (river)" label="River Dyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283371" start="18584" end="18599" title="Maneuver warfare" label="war of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="18692" end="18721" title="Battle of France" label="invasion of the Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="18817" end="18824" title="Leuven" label="Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479665" start="18942" end="18961" title="Fallschirmjäger" label="German paratroopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="19588" end="19607" title="Battle of Dunkirk" label="retreat into France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257572" start="19629" end="19641" title="Belgian Land Component" label="Belgian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="20163" end="20181" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="Dunkirk evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q259769" start="20227" end="20243" title="Kenneth Anderson (British Army officer)" label="Kenneth Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="20821" end="20855" title="Companion of the Order of the Bath" label="Companion of the Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="20945" end="20951" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="21104" end="21114" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="21296" end="21300" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q733093" start="21302" end="21306" title="Cobh" label="Cobh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806566" start="21526" end="21539" title="James Gammell" label="James Gammell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907724" start="21569" end="21576" title="V Corps (United Kingdom)" label="V Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="21609" end="21618" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="21623" end="21629" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q312685" start="21743" end="21760" title="Claude Auchinleck" label="Claude Auchinleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353530" start="21801" end="21810" title="XII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="21842" end="21846" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="22157" end="22163" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="22168" end="22174" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713726" start="22220" end="22241" title="Aldershot Command" label="South-Eastern Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420048" start="22421" end="22435" title="Exercise Tiger (1942)" label="Exercise Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263826" start="22697" end="22716" title="Middle East Command" label="Middle East Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="22731" end="22742" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q162250" start="22789" end="22815" title="First Battle of El Alamein" label="First Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q39168" start="22926" end="22946" title="Harold Alexander, 1st Earl Alexander of Tunis" label="Sir Harold Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q984342" start="22951" end="22963" title="William Gott" label="William Gott"/>
<link wikidata="Q625798" start="23003" end="23017" title="Western Desert Campaign" label="Western Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="23065" end="23070" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="23128" end="23163" title="Chief of the General Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Imperial General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q161719" start="23270" end="23288" title="First Army (United Kingdom)" label="British First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="23293" end="23308" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q352061" start="23326" end="23345" title="French North Africa" label="French North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="23682" end="23688" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996864" start="23915" end="23922" title="X Corps (United Kingdom)" label="X Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487699" start="23987" end="23996" title="XXX Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XXX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132571" start="24355" end="24371" title="Correlli Barnett" label="Correlli Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438997" start="24728" end="24741" title="51st (Highland) Division" label="51st Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000545" start="24746" end="24764" title="44th (Home Counties) Division" label="44th Home Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750832" start="26116" end="26133" title="slouch hat" label="broad-brimmed hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421600" start="26201" end="26220" title="Royal Tank Regiment" label="Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975547" start="26260" end="26269" title="cap badge" label="cap badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="26769" end="26773" title="Anthony Eden" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q214321" start="27156" end="27161" title="Jan Smuts" label="Smuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q541997" start="27264" end="27287" title="Battle of Alam el Halfa" label="Battle of Alam el Halfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="27975" end="27980" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="28660" end="28672" title="Sherman tank" label="Sherman tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q696796" start="28678" end="28687" title="M7 Priest" label="M7 Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="28912" end="28939" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="Second Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="29437" end="29453" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q60566" start="29506" end="29523" title="Ritter von Thoma" label="General von Thoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="29610" end="29613" title="Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath" label="KCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q846653" start="29847" end="29855" title="Medenine" label="Medenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q372958" start="29857" end="29872" title="Operation Capri" label="Operation Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q702360" start="29972" end="29983" title="Mareth Line" label="Mareth Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="30166" end="30169" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="30242" end="30257" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="30375" end="30400" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="30523" end="30530" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="30531" end="30551" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050792" start="30557" end="30581" title="Supreme Allied Commander" label="Supreme Allied Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421453" start="30582" end="30608" title="Allied Forces Headquarters" label="Allied Forces Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513628" start="30637" end="30652" title="15th Army Group" label="15th Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046665" start="30795" end="30813" title="Lieutenant general (United States)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="30814" end="30827" title="George S. Patton" label="George Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457752" start="30835" end="30850" title="Seventh United States Army" label="US Seventh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="30935" end="30943" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="30990" end="30997" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="31097" end="31109" title="Omar Bradley" label="Omar Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465238" start="31127" end="31138" title="II Corps (United States)" label="US II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q714777" start="31599" end="31623" title="Allied invasion of Italy" label="Allied invasion of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="31700" end="31714" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q540593" start="31746" end="31759" title="Miles Dempsey" label="Miles Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572890" start="31825" end="31842" title="Operation Baytown" label="Operation Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933674" start="32209" end="32222" title="Italian roads" label="Italian roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q161891" start="32326" end="32355" title="1st Airborne Division (United Kingdom)" label="British 1st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="32382" end="32389" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q934889" start="32422" end="32441" title="Operation Slapstick" label="Operation Slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q203491" start="32493" end="32508" title="United States Army North" label="U.S. Fifth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q34339" start="32534" end="32547" title="Mark W. Clark" label="Mark W. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="32618" end="32625" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="32632" end="32638" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447505" start="32651" end="32670" title="Operation Avalanche" label="Operation Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="33204" end="33222" title="Apennine Mountains" label="Apennine Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083329" start="33265" end="33280" title="Charles Walter Allfrey" label="Charles Allfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685186" start="33377" end="33393" title="Foggia Airfield Complex" label="Foggia airfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q118642" start="33477" end="33484" title="Termoli" label="Termoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q727618" start="33489" end="33496" title="Biferno" label="Biferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q71621" start="33666" end="33678" title="Sangro" label="River Sangro"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="34054" end="34078" title="Italian campaign (World War II)" label="Allied campaign in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="34330" end="34345" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="34402" end="34420" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="34458" end="34466" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="35165" end="35170" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="35215" end="35219" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q463529" start="35429" end="35447" title="Cotentin Peninsula" label="Cotentin Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="35452" end="35460" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="35551" end="35569" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Battle of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713768" start="35952" end="35989" title="50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division" label="50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q213379" start="36058" end="36078" title="21st Panzer Division" label="21st Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q158277" start="36083" end="36131" title="12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend" label="12th SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Hitlerjugend&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="36322" end="36334" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q155435" start="36375" end="36388" title="Brigadeführer" label="Brigadeführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57220" start="36395" end="36405" title="Kurt Meyer" label="Kurt Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210387" start="36485" end="36504" title="2nd Panzer Division" label="2nd Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="36533" end="36551" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q156970" start="36602" end="36666" title="1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler" label="1st SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q160133" start="36671" end="36715" title="2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich" label="2nd SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Das Reich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="37865" end="37872" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="37889" end="37893" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667188" start="38499" end="38508" title="Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q333365" start="38611" end="38630" title="Walter Bedell Smith" label="Walter Bedell Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q233763" start="38943" end="38963" title="Panzer Lehr Division" label="Panzer Lehr Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q700710" start="39075" end="39099" title="Battle of Villers-Bocage" label="Battle of Villers-Bocage"/>
<link wikidata="Q304303" start="39136" end="39144" title="Cromwell tank" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q151221" start="39159" end="39164" title="Tiger I" label="Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="39178" end="39180" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q161112" start="39187" end="39202" title="Obersturmführer" label="Obersturmführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57201" start="39209" end="39225" title="Michael Wittmann" label="Michael Wittmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="39458" end="39467" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="39484" end="39493" title="Waffen SS" label="Waffen SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="39539" end="39556" title="Air Chief Marshal" label="Air Chief Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q334980" start="39557" end="39574" title="Arthur Tedder, 1st Baron Tedder" label="Sir Arthur Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="39768" end="39783" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q57457" start="40461" end="40479" title="Friedrich Dollmann" label="Friedrich Dollmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q57181" start="40694" end="40706" title="Paul Hausser" label="Paul Hausser"/>
<link wikidata="Q647" start="41020" end="41026" title="Rennes" label="Rennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181269" start="41028" end="41035" title="Alençon" label="Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163108" start="41040" end="41048" title="St. Malo" label="St. Malo"/>
<link wikidata="Q718465" start="41094" end="41106" title="Harry Crerar" label="Harry Crerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q472143" start="41285" end="41297" title="Neil Ritchie" label="Neil Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704255" start="41982" end="41992" title="Terry Copp" label="Terry Copp"/>
<link wikidata="Q888961" start="42194" end="42200" title="bocage" label="bocage"/>
<link wikidata="Q838364" start="43472" end="43486" title="carpet bombing" label="carpet bombing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44266" end="44308" title="French Resistance#Role in the liberation of France and casualties" label="French Resistance had launched Plan Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="44567" end="44572" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q700674" start="45014" end="45029" title="Operation Cobra" label="Operation Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q602744" start="45075" end="45089" title="Falaise pocket" label="Falaise pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427503" start="45142" end="45160" title="Operation Goodwood" label="Operation Goodwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770113" start="48731" end="48741" title="Mark Urban" label="Mark Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q363722" start="50177" end="50188" title="John Keegan" label="John Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345095" start="53867" end="53878" title="Guy Simonds" label="Guy Simonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q714293" start="54681" end="54699" title="Operation Bluecoat" label="Operation Bluecoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493517" start="54754" end="54769" title="Gerard Bucknall" label="Gerard Bucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q434110" start="54910" end="54924" title="Brian Horrocks" label="Brian Horrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="55044" end="55050" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207622" start="55631" end="55639" title="Argentan" label="Argentan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181269" start="55684" end="55691" title="Alençon" label="Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q602744" start="56321" end="56332" title="Falaise pocket" label="Falaise Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q37620" start="59635" end="59642" title="Scheldt" label="Scheldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q61403" start="60052" end="60075" title="Gustav-Adolf von Zangen" label="Gustav-Adolf von Zangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165974" start="60479" end="60492" title="Witte Brigade" label="Witte Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q662529" start="60558" end="60573" title="Port of Antwerp" label="Port of Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q835090" start="60766" end="60778" title="Albert Canal" label="Albert Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q710439" start="61137" end="61151" title="Bertram Ramsay" label="Bertram Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361104" start="62140" end="62152" title="John Crocker" label="John Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054171" start="62526" end="62543" title="Operation Astonia" label="Operation Astonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704255" start="62647" end="62657" title="Terry Copp" label="Terry Copp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001706" start="64019" end="64032" title="Leopold Canal (Belgium)" label="Leopold Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332237" start="64939" end="64946" title="Operation Aintree" label="Aintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069862" start="64979" end="64987" title="Operation Pheasant" label="Pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q697022" start="65621" end="65642" title="Battle of the Scheldt" label="Battle of the Scheldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q738237" start="68377" end="68386" title="Walcheren" label="Walcheren"/>
<link wikidata="Q387093" start="69025" end="69041" title="Battle of Arnhem" label="Battle of Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="69363" end="69367" title="Ruhr Area" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="69373" end="69396" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="69463" end="69481" title="Lieutenant General" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940761" start="69482" end="69494" title="Humfrey Gale" label="Humfrey Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="69567" end="69614" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force" label="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="70190" end="70195" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="70405" end="70415" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414135" start="70421" end="70434" title="rolling stock" label="rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q161693" start="70646" end="70672" title="First Allied Airborne Army" label="First Allied Airborne Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154504" start="70789" end="70803" title="Siegfried Line" label="Siegfried Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q697022" start="71703" end="71724" title="Battle of the Scheldt" label="Battle of the Scheldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820253" start="72135" end="72155" title="Generalfeldmarschall" label="Generalfeldmarschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q70536" start="72162" end="72175" title="Walther Model" label="Walther Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q107751208" start="72189" end="72216" title="Battle of the Nijmegen salient" label="retake the Nijmegen salient"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="72692" end="72711" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703383" start="72809" end="72827" title="Twelfth United States Army Group" label="US 12th Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q924898" start="72865" end="72880" title="William Hood Simpson" label="William Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q275885" start="72888" end="72903" title="Ninth United States Army" label="U.S. Ninth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q44400" start="72933" end="72948" title="Courtney Hodges" label="Courtney Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q163646" start="72955" end="72970" title="First United States Army" label="U.S. First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="73043" end="73048" title="SHAEF" label="SHAEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q34021" start="74886" end="74894" title="Bastogne" label="Bastogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="74991" end="74996" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q57211" start="75699" end="75719" title="Hasso von Manteuffel" label="Hasso von Manteuffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q240048" start="75739" end="75754" title="5th Panzer Army" label="5th Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q299431" start="75859" end="75877" title="B. H. Liddell Hart" label="B. H. Liddell Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q443953" start="76271" end="76286" title="Stephen E. Ambrose" label="Stephen Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q708235" start="76998" end="77017" title="Operation Veritable" label="Operation Veritable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635355" start="77022" end="77039" title="Operation Grenade" label="Operation Grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q697403" start="77083" end="77100" title="Operation Plunder" label="Operation Plunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q163646" start="77135" end="77150" title="U.S. First Army" label="U.S. First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q677754" start="77193" end="77210" title="Ludendorff Bridge" label="Ludendorff Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694984" start="77222" end="77239" title="Battle of Remagen" label="Battle of Remagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q699093" start="77320" end="77331" title="Ruhr Pocket" label="Ruhr Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q157572" start="77497" end="77509" title="Army Group B" label="Army Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="77930" end="77937" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861" start="77942" end="77949" title="Rostock" label="Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q311124" start="78006" end="78020" title="Lüneburg Heath" label="Lüneburg Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459610" start="78046" end="78123" title="German surrender at Lüneburg Heath" label="surrender of German forces in north-west Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q335004" start="81529" end="81551" title="Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay" label="General Hastings Ismay"/>
<link wikidata="Q677407" start="81834" end="81852" title="Michael Fitzgerald (psychiatrist)" label="Michael Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="81891" end="81899" title="Autism" label="autistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q333365" start="82111" end="82130" title="Walter Bedell Smith" label="Walter Bedell Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q46325" start="82153" end="82157" title="Sfax" label="Sfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="82261" end="82276" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q380229" start="82705" end="82718" title="Antony Beevor" label="Antony Beevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39940" start="83701" end="83722" title="Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope" label="Sir Andrew Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q663070" start="83727" end="83745" title="Charles Portal, 1st Viscount Portal of Hungerford" label="Sir Charles Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="83878" end="83882" title="Chief of the General Staff (United Kingdom)" label="CIGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="84343" end="84368" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55306" start="84399" end="84424" title="British Occupation zone in Germany" label="British Occupation Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="84460" end="84482" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="84719" end="84733" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q336837" start="85266" end="85279" title="Lord Chalfont" label="Lord Chalfont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390004" start="85492" end="85508" title="Kenneth Crawford" label="Kenneth Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q334980" start="85567" end="85584" title="Sir Arthur Tedder" label="Sir Arthur Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q776938" start="85601" end="85623" title="Chief of the Air Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q335033" start="85711" end="85727" title="William Slim, 1st Viscount Slim" label="Sir William Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="85761" end="85774" title="Field Marshal (United Kingdom)" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q519313" start="85895" end="85902" title="I Corps (United Kingdom)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057252" start="85918" end="85944" title="North-West Europe Campaign" label="North-West Europe Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841667" start="86121" end="86155" title="Western Union Defence Organization" label="Western Union Defence Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072642" start="86193" end="86207" title="Nigel Hamilton (author)" label="Nigel Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q81114" start="86352" end="86378" title="Jean de Lattre de Tassigny" label="Jean de Lattre de Tassigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="86470" end="86504" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432908" start="86512" end="86553" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe" label="Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q494930" start="86679" end="86694" title="Matthew Ridgway" label="Matthew Ridgway"/>
<link wikidata="Q507130" start="86699" end="86711" title="Alfred Gruenther" label="Al Gruenther"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931194" start="86803" end="86833" title="Viscount Montgomery of Alamein" label="Viscount Montgomery of Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875971" start="86837" end="86841" title="1946 New Year Honours" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025480" start="87021" end="87032" title="Winkle Club" label="Winkle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q29245" start="87047" end="87055" title="Hastings" label="Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593614" start="87166" end="87188" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s School, Leatherhead" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810766" start="87192" end="87203" title="Leatherhead" label="Leatherhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="87284" end="87308" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q856192" start="87361" end="87384" title="Illustrated London News" label="Illustrated London News"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220" start="87463" end="87473" title="Swiss Alps" label="Swiss Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q686349" start="87527" end="87537" title="Rolleiflex" label="Rolleiflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="88530" end="88549" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q929597" start="88651" end="88663" title="John Gunther" label="John Gunther"/>
<link wikidata="Q188783" start="89135" end="89146" title="Moshe Dayan" label="Moshe Dayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="89248" end="89259" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164077" start="89494" end="89511" title="Strategic Hamlet Program" label="strategic hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479134" start="89877" end="89890" title="Egyptian Army" label="Egyptian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="90013" end="90024" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="90096" end="90105" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="90241" end="90253" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Tse-tung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458681" start="90350" end="90374" title="Sexual Offences Act 1967" label="Sexual Offences Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="90549" end="90560" title="teetotaller" label="teetotaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="90564" end="90574" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="90582" end="90591" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081142" start="90657" end="90665" title="Isington" label="Isington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449634" start="90706" end="90738" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457852" start="90789" end="90796" title="Binsted" label="Binsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="90825" end="90838" title="Order of the Garter" label="Garter banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146959" start="90936" end="90959" title="Collegiate Church of St Mary, Warwick" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s, Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q129331" start="90993" end="91011" title="Frank O. Salisbury" label="Frank O. Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="91032" end="91057" title="National Portrait Gallery (London)" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966976" start="91087" end="91098" title="Oscar Nemon" label="Oscar Nemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="91118" end="91137" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="91141" end="91150" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q335033" start="91171" end="91194" title="William Slim" label="Field Marshal Lord Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q335889" start="91199" end="91228" title="Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke" label="Field Marshal Lord Alanbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="91271" end="91278" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q838576" start="91279" end="91300" title="Colleville-Montgomery" label="Colleville-Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q749808" start="91320" end="91339" title="Imperial War Museum" label="Imperial War Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223184" start="91443" end="91448" title="M3 Lee" label="Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954009" start="91797" end="91811" title="World Pipe Band Championships" label="World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982393" start="91812" end="91846" title="Field Marshal Montgomery Pipe Band" label="Field Marshal Montgomery Pipe Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="91852" end="91868" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996556" start="91909" end="91920" title="List of Rolls-Royce motor cars" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374410" start="91952" end="91979" title="Royal Logistic Corps Museum" label="Royal Logistic Corps Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037269" start="91981" end="91992" title="Worthy Down" label="Worthy Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q273027" start="92036" end="92043" title="Martini (cocktail)" label="martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="92114" end="92130" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586965" start="92134" end="92150" title="Harry&amp;#x27;s Bar (Venice)" label="Harry&amp;#x27;s Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q330996" start="92364" end="92399" title="Across the River and into the Trees" label="Across the River and into the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q185902" start="92564" end="92574" title="Viscountcy" label="Viscountcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931194" start="92584" end="92605" title="Viscount Montgomery of Alamein" label="Montgomery of Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="92633" end="92687" title="Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter" label="Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="92701" end="92760" title="Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="92816" end="92860" title="Companion of the Distinguished Service Order" label="Companion of the Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809982" start="92874" end="92897" title="Mentioned in Despatches" label="Mentioned in Despatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727598" start="93046" end="93071" title="Croix de guerre 1914–1918 (France)" label="Croix de Guerre 1914-1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="93089" end="93129" title="Legion of Honour" label="Grand Cross of the Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465214" start="93151" end="93169" title="Médaille militaire" label="Médaille militaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774648" start="93199" end="93226" title="Distinguished Service Medal (U.S. Army)" label="Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="93263" end="93278" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q465316" start="93316" end="93332" title="Order of Victory" label="Order of Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="93334" end="93338" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="93370" end="93391" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Order of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q943283" start="93442" end="93459" title="Order of George I" label="Order of George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q944955" start="93515" end="93531" title="Virtuti Militari" label="Virtuti Militari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487707" start="93579" end="93611" title="Military Order of the White Lion" label="Military Order of the White Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48599" start="93723" end="93742" title="Order of Leopold II" label="Order of Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48915" start="93761" end="93791" title="War Cross (Belgium)" label="Croix de Guerre 1940 with Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471215" start="93823" end="93852" title="Order of the Netherlands Lion" label="Order of the Netherlands Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q94345" start="93905" end="93938" title="Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav" label="Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="93973" end="93985" title="Afrika Korps" label="Afrika Korps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072694" start="93988" end="94007" title="M. E. Clifton James" label="M. E. Clifton James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707239" start="94065" end="94076" title="Tex Banwell" label="Tex Banwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071671" start="94096" end="94119" title="Irish military diaspora" label="Irish military diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q175346" start="94122" end="94140" title="Panzer Army Africa" label="Panzer Army Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995882" start="94143" end="94180" title="I Was Monty&amp;#x27;s Double (film)" label="&amp;quot;I Was Monty&amp;#x27;s Double&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="94755" end="94774" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3874" wikidata="Q313093" url="?curid=3874" title="Herman Boerhaave">
<text>Herman Boerhaave (, 31 December 1668 – 23 September 1738) was a Dutch chemist, botanist, Christian humanist, and physician of European fame. He is regarded as the founder of clinical teaching and of the modern academic hospital and is sometimes referred to as &quot;the father of physiology,&quot; along with Venetian physician Santorio Santorio (1561–1636). Boerhaave introduced the quantitative approach into medicine, along with his pupil Albrecht von Haller (1708–1777) and is best known for demonstrating the relation of symptoms to lesions. He was the first to isolate the chemical urea from urine. He was the first physician to put thermometer measurements to clinical practice. His motto was &quot;Simplex veri sigillum&quot;: &#x27;Simplicity is the sign of the truth&#x27;. He is often hailed as the &quot;Dutch Hippocrates&quot;.

==Biography==
Boerhaave was born at Voorhout near Leiden. The son of a Protestant pastor, in his youth Boerhaave studied for a divinity degree and wanted to become a preacher. After the death of his father, however, he was offered a scholarship and he entered the University of Leiden, where he took his master&#x27;s degree in philosophy in 1690, with a dissertation titled &quot;De distinctione mentis a corpore&quot; (&quot;On the Difference of the Mind from the Body&quot;). There he attacked the doctrines of Epicurus, Thomas Hobbes and Baruch Spinoza. He then turned to the study of medicine. He earned his medical doctorate from the University of Harderwijk (present-day Gelderland) in 1693, with a dissertation titled &quot;De utilitate explorandorum in aegris excrementorum ut signorum&quot; (&quot;The Utility of Examining Signs of Disease in the Excrement of the Sick&quot;).

In 1701 he was appointed lecturer on the institutes of medicine at Leiden; in his inaugural discourse, &quot;De commendando Hippocratis studio&quot;, he recommended to his pupils that great physician as their model. In 1709 he became professor of botany and medicine, and in that capacity he did good service, not only to his own university, but also to botanical science, by his improvements and additions to the botanic garden of Leiden, and by the publication of numerous works descriptive of new species of plants.

On 14 September 1710, Boerhaave married Maria Drolenvaux, the daughter of the rich merchant, Alderman Abraham Drolenvaux. They had four children, of whom one daughter, Maria Joanna, lived to adulthood. In 1722, he began to suffer from an extreme case of gout, recovering the next year.

In 1714, when he was appointed rector of the university, he succeeded Govert Bidloo in the chair of practical medicine, and in this capacity he introduced the modern system of clinical instruction. Four years later he was appointed to the chair of chemistry as well. In 1728 he was elected into the French Academy of Sciences, and two years later into the Royal Society of London. In 1729 declining health obliged him to resign the chairs of chemistry and botany; and he died, after a lingering and painful illness, at Leiden.

==Legacy==
His reputation so increased the fame of the University of Leiden, especially as a school of medicine, that it became popular with visitors from every part of Europe. All the princes of Europe sent him pupils, who found in this skilful professor not only an indefatigable teacher, but an affectionate guardian. When Peter the Great went to Holland in 1716 (he had been in Holland before in 1697 to instruct himself in maritime affairs), he also took lessons from Boerhaave. Voltaire travelled to see him, as did Carl Linnaeus, who became a close friend and named the genus &quot;Boerhavia&quot; for him. His reputation was not confined to Europe; a Chinese mandarin sent him a letter addressed to &quot;the illustrious Boerhaave, physician in Europe,&quot; and it reached him in due course.

The operating theatre of the University of Leiden in which he once worked as an anatomist is now at the centre of a museum named after him; the Boerhaave Museum. Asteroid 8175 Boerhaave is named after Boerhaave. From 1955 to 1961 Boerhaave&#x27;s image was printed on Dutch 20-guilder banknotes. The Leiden University Medical Centre organises medical trainings called &quot;Boerhaave-courses&quot;.

He had a prodigious influence on the development of medicine and chemistry in Scotland. British medical schools credit Boerhaave for developing the system of medical education upon which their current institutions are based. Every founding member of the Edinburgh Medical School had studied at Leyden and attended Boerhaave&#x27;s lectures on chemistry including John Rutherford and Francis Home. Boerhaave&#x27;s &quot;Elementa Chemiae (1732)&quot; is recognised as the first text on chemistry. 
Boerhaave first described Boerhaave syndrome, which involves tearing of the oesophagus, usually a consequence of vigorous vomiting. Notoriously, in 1724 he described the case of Baron Jan van Wassenaer, a Dutch admiral who died of this condition following a gluttonous feast and subsequent regurgitation. The condition was uniformly fatal prior to modern surgical techniques allowing repair of the oesophagus.

Boerhaave was critical of his Dutch contemporary Baruch Spinoza, attacking him in his 1688 dissertation. At the same time, he admired Isaac Newton and was a devout Christian who often wrote about God in his works. A collection of his religious thoughts on medicine, translated from Latin to English, has been compiled by the &quot;Sir Thomas Browne Instituut Leiden&quot; under the name &quot;Boerhaave&#x27;s Orations&quot; (meaning &quot;Boerhaave&#x27;s Prayers&quot;). Among other things, he considered nature as God&#x27;s Creation, and he used to say that the poor were his best patients because God was their paymaster.

==Medical contributions==
Boerhaave devoted himself intensively to the study of the human body. He was strongly influenced by the mechanistic theories of René Descartes, and those of the 17th-century astronomer and mathematician Giovanni Borelli, who described animal movements in terms of mechanical motion. On such premises Boerhaave proposed a hydraulic model of human physiology. His writings refer to simple machines such as levers and pulleys and similar mechanisms, and he saw the bodily organs and members as being assembled from pipe-like structures. The physiology of veins, for example, he compared to the operation of pipes. He asserted the importance of a proper balance of fluid pressure, noting that fluids should be able to move around the body freely, without obstacles. For its well-being the body needed to be self-regulating, so as to maintain a healthy state of equilibrium. Boerhaave&#x27;s concept of the body as apparatus centred his medical attention on material problems rather than upon ontological or esoteric explanations of illness.

Boerhaave&#x27;s teaching of his knowledge and philosophy drew many students to the University of Leiden. He emphasised the importance of anatomical research based on practical observation and scientific experiment. His concept of the bodily system took hold throughout Europe, and helped to transform medical education in the European schools. His insights aroused great interest among other critical medical thinkers, not least in Friedrich Hoffmann, who strongly advocated the importance of physico-mechanical principles for the preservation or indeed the restoration of health. As a professor at Leiden, Boerhaave influenced many students. Some in their experiments upheld and furthered his philosophy, while others rejected it and proposed alternative theories of human physiology. He produced a great many textbooks and writings through which the digested brilliance of his lectures at Leiden was circulated widely in Europe. In 1708 his publication of the &quot;Institutiones Medicae&quot; was issued in over five languages, and went into approximately ten editions. His &quot;Elementa Chemia&quot;, a world-renowned chemistry textbook, was published in 1732.

The mechanistic concept of the human body departed from the age-old precepts laid down by Galen and Aristotle. In place of a servile dependence upon teachings handed down from antiquity, Boerhaave understood the importance of establishing definitive findings through his own investigation, and by the direct application of his own methods of testing. This new reasoning expanded the field of Renaissance anatomy: it opened the way to reforms of medical practice and understanding in the field of iatrochemistry.

== Works ==
*&quot;Oratio academica qua probatur, bene intellectam a Cicerone et confutatam esse sententiam Epicuri de summo bono&quot; (Leiden, 1688)
*&quot;Het Nut der Mechanistische Methode in de Geneeskunde&quot; (Leiden, 1703)
*&quot;Institutiones medicae&quot; (Leiden, 1708)
*&quot;Aphorismi de cognoscendis et curandis morbis&quot; (Leiden, 1709), on which his pupil and assistant, Gerard van Swieten (1700–1772) published a commentary in 5 vols.
* 
** 
*&quot;Institutiones et Experimenta chemiae&quot; (Paris, 1724) (unauthorised). (Digital edition by the University and State Library Düsseldorf)
* 
** Translated from the original Latin by Timothy Dallowe, MD.
* 


==References==
* Guggenheim, K. Y. &quot;Herman Boerhaave on nutrition.&quot; &quot;The Journal of Nutrition&quot; 118, no. 2 (1988): 141–143. 
* Mendelsohn, Everett (2003). &quot;Transformation and Tradition in the Sciences&quot;. Cambridge University Press. 
* Rina Knoeff (2002), &quot;Herman Boerhaave (1668–1783): Calvinist chemist and physician.&quot; History of Science and Scholarship in the Netherlands, Volume 3. Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.
* Underwood, E. Ashworth. &quot;Boerhaave After Three Hundred Years.&quot; &quot;The British Medical Journal&quot; 4, no. 5634 (1968): 820–25. 

==Further reading==
* Ducheyne, Steffen (2017) &quot;Different Shades of Newton: Herman Boerhaave on Isaac Newton &quot;mathematicus&quot;, &quot;philosophus&quot;, and &quot;opto-chemicus&quot;&quot;, &quot;Annals of Science&quot; 74(2): 108–125. 

==External links==
* 
*Samuel Johnson&#x27;s 1739 biography of him online: Life of Herman Boerhaave
*Museum Boerhaave in Leiden, National Museum of the History of Science and Medicine
*A recent discussion of Boerhaave&#x27;s Syndrome in the New England Journal of Medicine (subscription required)
* 
*Works at Open Library
*&quot;Aphorismi de Cognoscendis et Curandis Morbis&quot; (1709; “Aphorisms on the Recognition and Treatment of Diseases”)
*&quot;Elementa Chemiae&quot; (1733) (&quot;Elements of Chemistry&quot;)
*&quot;A New Method of Chemistry&quot; (1741 &amp; 1753) (&quot;English Translation of &quot;Elementa Chemiae&quot; by Peter Shaw&quot;)
*Javed Chaudhry Article about Herman Boerhaave</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="0" end="16" title="Herman Boerhaave" label="Herman Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="70" end="77" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="79" end="87" title="Botany" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327432" start="89" end="107" title="Christian humanism" label="Christian humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="113" end="122" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q361108" start="328" end="345" title="Santorio Santorio" label="Santorio Santorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q123225" start="442" end="461" title="Albrecht von Haller" label="Albrecht von Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="588" end="592" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="822" end="833" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q923574" start="878" end="886" title="Voorhout" label="Voorhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="892" end="898" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="913" end="923" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="924" end="930" title="pastor" label="pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002247" start="969" end="977" title="Divinity (academic discipline)" label="divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="1106" end="1126" title="University of Leiden" label="University of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="1146" end="1166" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1170" end="1180" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43216" start="1356" end="1364" title="Epicurus" label="Epicurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="1366" end="1379" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="1384" end="1398" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="1455" end="1472" title="medical doctorate" label="medical doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816221" start="1482" end="1506" title="University of Harderwijk" label="University of Harderwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q775" start="1520" end="1530" title="Gelderland" label="Gelderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="1854" end="1865" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocratis"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="1977" end="1983" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468128" start="2144" end="2168" title="Hortus Botanicus Leiden" label="botanic garden of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364526" start="2343" end="2351" title="Alderman" label="Alderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="2504" end="2508" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397888" start="2607" end="2620" title="Govert Bidloo" label="Govert Bidloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="2836" end="2862" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="2893" end="2906" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="3391" end="3406" title="Peter I of Russia" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="3549" end="3557" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="3587" end="3600" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q311180" start="3654" end="3663" title="Boerhavia" label="Boerhavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q759169" start="4011" end="4027" title="Boerhaave Museum" label="Boerhaave Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="4029" end="4037" title="Asteroid" label="Asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458246" start="4038" end="4052" title="8175 Boerhaave" label="8175 Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="4144" end="4151" title="guilder" label="guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406409" start="4167" end="4199" title="Leiden University Medical Centre" label="Leiden University Medical Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635089" start="4521" end="4545" title="Edinburgh Medical School" label="Edinburgh Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701631" start="4630" end="4645" title="John Rutherford (physician)" label="John Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481311" start="4650" end="4662" title="Francis Home" label="Francis Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q535425" start="4790" end="4808" title="Boerhaave syndrome" label="Boerhaave syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5205" end="5210" title="Netherlands (terminology)#Dutch" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="5224" end="5238" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="5309" end="5321" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q376438" start="5933" end="5944" title="Iatrophysics" label="mechanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="5957" end="5971" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q311814" start="6032" end="6048" title="Giovanni Borelli" label="Giovanni Borelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="6817" end="6828" title="ontological" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="6832" end="6840" title="Western esotericism" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="6951" end="6971" title="University of Leiden" label="University of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q76607" start="7300" end="7318" title="Friedrich Hoffmann" label="Friedrich Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="8125" end="8130" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="8135" end="8144" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q898906" start="8531" end="8545" title="iatrochemistry" label="iatrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q711132" start="8938" end="8956" title="Gerard van Swieten" label="Gerard van Swieten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496254" start="9114" end="9153" title="University and State Library Düsseldorf" label="University and State Library Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q27490425" start="9698" end="9720" title="Edgar Ashworth Underwood" label="Underwood, E. Ashworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q282682" start="10049" end="10066" title="Annals of Science" label="Annals of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="10114" end="10128" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3875" wikidata="Q82006" url="?curid=3875" title="Benjamin Disraeli">
<text>Benjamin Disraeli, 1st Earl of Beaconsfield (21 December 1804 – 19 April 1881) was a British statesman, Conservative politician and writer who twice served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. He played a central role in the creation of the modern Conservative Party, defining its policies and its broad outreach. Disraeli is remembered for his influential voice in world affairs, his political battles with the Liberal Party leader William Ewart Gladstone, and his one-nation conservatism or &quot;Tory democracy&quot;. He made the Conservatives the party most identified with the British Empire and military action to expand it, both of which were popular among British voters. He is the only British prime minister to have been born Jewish.

Disraeli was born in Bloomsbury, at that time a part of Middlesex. His father left Judaism after a dispute at his synagogue; Benjamin became an Anglican at the age of 12. After several unsuccessful attempts, Disraeli entered the House of Commons in 1837. In 1846, Prime Minister Robert Peel split the party over his proposal to repeal the Corn Laws, which involved ending the tariff on imported grain. Disraeli clashed with Peel in the House of Commons, becoming a major figure in the party. When Lord Derby, the party leader, thrice formed governments in the 1850s and 1860s, Disraeli served as Chancellor of the Exchequer and Leader of the House of Commons.

Upon Derby&#x27;s retirement in 1868, Disraeli became prime minister briefly before losing that year&#x27;s general election. He returned to the Opposition before leading the party to a majority in the 1874 general election. He maintained a close friendship with Queen Victoria who, in 1876, elevated him to the peerage as Earl of Beaconsfield. Disraeli&#x27;s second term was dominated by the Eastern question—the slow decay of the Ottoman Empire and the desire of other European powers, such as Russia, to gain at its expense. Disraeli arranged for the British to purchase a major interest in the Suez Canal Company in Egypt. In 1878, faced with Russian victories against the Ottomans, he worked at the Congress of Berlin to obtain peace in the Balkans at terms favourable to Britain and unfavourable to Russia, its longstanding enemy. This diplomatic victory established Disraeli as one of Europe&#x27;s leading statesmen.

World events thereafter moved against the Conservatives. Controversial wars in Afghanistan and South Africa undermined his public support. He angered farmers by refusing to reinstitute the Corn Laws in response to poor harvests and cheap imported grain. With Gladstone conducting a massive speaking campaign, the Liberals defeated Disraeli&#x27;s Conservatives at the 1880 general election. In his final months, Disraeli led the Conservatives in Opposition. Disraeli wrote novels throughout his career, beginning in 1826, and published his last completed novel, &quot;Endymion&quot;, shortly before he died at the age of 76.

==Early life==

===Childhood===
Disraeli was born on 21 December 1804 at 6 King&#x27;s Road, Bedford Row, Bloomsbury, London, the second child and eldest son of Isaac D&#x27;Israeli, a literary critic and historian, and Maria (Miriam), &quot;née&quot; Basevi. The family was mostly from Italy, of Sephardic Jewish mercantile background. He also had some Ashkenazi Jewish ancestors. He later romanticised his origins, claiming his father&#x27;s family was of grand Iberian and Venetian descent; in fact, Isaac&#x27;s family was of no great distinction, but on Disraeli&#x27;s mother&#x27;s side, in which he took no interest, there were some distinguished forebears, including Isaac Cardoso, as well as members of the Goldsmids, the Mocattas and the Montefiores. Historians differ on Disraeli&#x27;s motives for rewriting his family history: Bernard Glassman argues that it was intended to give him status comparable to that of England&#x27;s ruling elite; Sarah Bradford believes &quot;his dislike of the commonplace would not allow him to accept the facts of his birth as being as middle-class and undramatic as they really were&quot;.
Disraeli&#x27;s siblings were Sarah, Naphtali (born and died 1807), Ralph and James (&quot;Jem&quot;). He was close to his sister and on affectionate but more distant terms with his surviving brothers. Details of his schooling are sketchy. From the age of about six he was a day boy at a dame school in Islington, which one of his biographers described as &quot;for those days a very high-class establishment&quot;. Two years later or so—the exact date has not been ascertained—he was sent as a boarder to Rev John Potticary&#x27;s school at Blackheath.

Following a quarrel in 1813 with the Bevis Marks Synagogue, his father renounced Judaism and had the four children baptised into the Church of England in July and August 1817. Isaac D&#x27;Israeli had never taken religion very seriously but had remained a conforming member of the synagogue. His father Benjamin was a prominent and devout member; it was probably out of respect for him that Isaac did not leave when he fell out with the synagogue authorities in 1813. After Benjamin senior died in 1816, Isaac felt free to leave the congregation following a second dispute. Isaac&#x27;s friend Sharon Turner, a solicitor, convinced him that although he could comfortably remain unattached to any formal religion it would be disadvantageous to the children if they did so. Turner stood as godfather when Benjamin was baptised, aged twelve, on 31 July 1817.
Conversion enabled Disraeli to contemplate a career in politics. There had been Members of Parliament (MPs) from Jewish families since Sampson Gideon in 1770. However, until the Jews Relief Act 1858, MPs were required to take the oath of allegiance &quot;on the true faith of a Christian&quot;, necessitating at least nominal conversion. It is not known whether Disraeli formed any ambition for a parliamentary career at the time of his baptism, but there is no doubt that he bitterly regretted his parents&#x27; decision not to send him to Winchester College, one of the great public schools which consistently provided recruits to the political elite. His two younger brothers were sent there, and it is not clear why Isaac chose to send his eldest son to a much less prestigious school. The boy evidently held his mother responsible for the decision; Bradford speculates that &quot;Benjamin&#x27;s delicate health and his obviously Jewish appearance may have had something to do with it.&quot; The school chosen for him was run by Eliezer Cogan at Higham Hill in Walthamstow. He began there in the autumn term of 1817; he later recalled his education:
===1820s===
In November 1821, shortly before his seventeenth birthday, Disraeli was articled as a clerk to a firm of solicitors—Swain, Stevens, Maples, Pearse and Hunt—in the City of London. T F Maples was not only the young Disraeli&#x27;s employer and a friend of his father, but also his prospective father-in-law: Isaac and Maples considered that the latter&#x27;s only daughter might be a suitable match for Benjamin. A friendship developed, but there was no romance. The firm had a large and profitable business, and as the biographer R W Davis observes, the clerkship was &quot;the kind of secure, respectable position that many fathers dream of for their children&quot;. Although biographers including Robert Blake and Bradford comment that such a post was incompatible with Disraeli&#x27;s romantic and ambitious nature, he reportedly gave his employers satisfactory service, and later professed to have learned much there. He recalled: I had some scruples, for even then I dreamed of Parliament. My father&#x27;s refrain always was &#x27;Philip Carteret Webb&#x27;, who was the most eminent solicitor of his boyhood and who was an MP. It would be a mistake to suppose that the two years and more that I was in the office of our friend were wasted. I have often thought, though I have often regretted the University, that it was much the reverse.
The year after joining Maples&#x27; firm, Benjamin changed his surname from D&#x27;Israeli to Disraeli. His reasons are unknown, but the biographer Bernard Glassman surmises that it was to avoid being confused with his father. Disraeli&#x27;s sister and brothers adopted the new version of the name; Isaac and his wife retained the older form.

Disraeli toured Belgium and the Rhine Valley with his father in the summer of 1824. He later wrote that while travelling on the Rhine he decided to abandon his position: &quot;I determined when descending those magical waters that I would not be a lawyer.&quot; On their return to England he left the solicitors, at the suggestion of Maples, with the aim of qualifying as a barrister. He enrolled as a student at Lincoln&#x27;s Inn and joined the chambers of his uncle, Nathaniel Basevy, and then those of Benjamin Austen, who persuaded Isaac that Disraeli would never make a barrister and should be allowed to pursue a literary career. He had made a tentative start: in May 1824 he submitted a manuscript to his father&#x27;s friend, the publisher John Murray, but withdrew it before Murray could decide whether to publish it.

Released from the law, Disraeli did some work for Murray, but turned most of his attention to speculative dealing on the stock exchange. There was at the time a boom in shares in South American mining companies. Spain was losing its South American colonies in the face of rebellions. At the urging of George Canning the British government recognised the new independent governments of Argentina (1824), Colombia and Mexico (both 1825). With no money of his own, Disraeli borrowed money to invest. He became involved with the financier J. D. Powles, who was prominent among those encouraging the mining boom. In 1825, Disraeli wrote three anonymous pamphlets for Powles, promoting the companies. The pamphlets were published by John Murray, who invested heavily in the boom.
Murray had ambitions to establish a new morning paper to compete with &quot;The Times&quot;. In 1825 Disraeli convinced him that he should proceed. The new paper, &quot;The Representative&quot;, promoted the mines and those politicians who supported them, particularly Canning. Disraeli impressed Murray with his energy and commitment to the project, but he failed in his key task of persuading the eminent writer John Gibson Lockhart to edit the paper. After that, Disraeli&#x27;s influence on Murray waned, and to his resentment he was sidelined in the affairs of &quot;The Representative&quot;. The paper survived only six months, partly because the mining bubble burst in late 1825, and partly because, according to Blake, the paper was &quot;atrociously edited&quot;.

The bursting of the mining bubble was ruinous for Disraeli. By June 1825 he and his business partners had lost £7,000. Disraeli could not pay off the last of his debts from this debacle until 1849. He turned to writing, motivated partly by his desperate need for money, and partly by a wish for revenge on Murray and others by whom he felt slighted. There was a vogue for what was called &quot;silver-fork fiction&quot;—novels depicting aristocratic life, usually by anonymous authors, read by the aspirational middle classes. Disraeli&#x27;s first novel, &quot;Vivian Grey&quot;, published anonymously in four volumes in 1826–27, was a thinly veiled re-telling of the affair of &quot;The Representative&quot;. It sold well, but caused much offence in influential circles when the authorship was discovered. Disraeli, then just 23, did not move in high society, as the numerous solecisms in his book made obvious. Reviewers were sharply critical on these grounds of both the author and the book. Murray and Lockhart, men of great influence in literary circles, believed that Disraeli had caricatured them and abused their confidence—an accusation denied by the author but repeated by many of his biographers. In later editions Disraeli made many changes, softening his satire, but the damage to his reputation proved long-lasting.

Disraeli&#x27;s biographer Jonathan Parry writes that the financial failure and personal criticism that Disraeli suffered in 1825 and 1826 were probably the trigger for a serious nervous crisis affecting him over the next four years: &quot;He had always been moody, sensitive, and solitary by nature, but now became seriously depressed and lethargic.&quot; He was still living with his parents in London, but in search of the &quot;change of air&quot; recommended by the family&#x27;s doctors, Isaac took a succession of houses in the country and on the coast, before Disraeli sought wider horizons.

===1830–1837===
Together with his sister&#x27;s fiancé, William Meredith, Disraeli travelled widely in southern Europe and beyond in 1830–31. The trip was financed partly by another high society novel, &quot;The Young Duke&quot;, written in 1829–30. The tour was cut short suddenly by Meredith&#x27;s death from smallpox in Cairo in July 1831. Despite this tragedy, and the need for treatment for a sexually transmitted disease on his return, Disraeli felt enriched by his experiences. He became, in Parry&#x27;s words, &quot;aware of values that seemed denied to his insular countrymen. The journey encouraged his self-consciousness, his moral relativism, and his interest in Eastern racial and religious attitudes.&quot; Blake regards the tour as one of the formative experiences of Disraeli&#x27;s career: &quot;[T]he impressions that it made on him were life-lasting. They conditioned his attitude toward some of the most important political problems which faced him in his later years—especially the Eastern Question; they also coloured many of his novels.&quot;

Disraeli wrote two novels in the aftermath of the tour. &quot;Contarini Fleming&quot; (1832) was avowedly a self-portrait. It is subtitled &quot;a psychological autobiography&quot; and depicts the conflicting elements of its hero&#x27;s character: the duality of northern and Mediterranean ancestry, the dreaming artist and the bold man of action. As Parry observes, the book ends on a political note, setting out Europe&#x27;s progress &quot;from feudal to federal principles&quot;. &quot;The Wondrous Tale of Alroy&quot; the following year portrayed the problems of a medieval Jew in deciding between a small, exclusively Jewish state and a large empire embracing all.
After these novels were published, Disraeli declared that he would &quot;write no more about myself&quot;. He had already turned his attention to politics in 1832, during the great crisis over the Reform Bill. He contributed to an anti-Whig pamphlet edited by John Wilson Croker and published by Murray entitled &quot;England and France: or a cure for Ministerial Gallomania&quot;. The choice of a Tory publication was regarded as strange by Disraeli&#x27;s friends and relatives, who thought him more of a Radical. Indeed, he had objected to Murray about Croker&#x27;s inserting &quot;high Tory&quot; sentiment: Disraeli remarked, &quot;it is quite impossible that anything adverse to the general measure of Reform can issue from my pen.&quot; Moreover, at the time &quot;Gallomania&quot; was published, Disraeli was electioneering in High Wycombe in the Radical interest.

Disraeli&#x27;s politics at the time were influenced both by his rebellious streak and his desire to make his mark. At that time, British politics were dominated by the aristocracy, with a few powerful commoners. The Whigs derived from the coalition of Lords who had forced through the Bill of Rights 1689 and in some cases were their descendants. The Tories tended to support King and Church and sought to thwart political change. A small number of Radicals, generally from northern constituencies, were the strongest advocates of continuing reform. In the early 1830s the Tories and the interests they represented appeared to be a lost cause. The other great party, the Whigs, were anathema to Disraeli: &quot;Toryism is worn out &amp; I cannot condescend to be a Whig.&quot; There was a by-election and a general election in 1832; Disraeli unsuccessfully stood as a Radical at High Wycombe in each.

Disraeli&#x27;s political views embraced certain Radical policies, particularly electoral reform, and also some Tory ones, including protectionism. He began to move in Tory circles. In 1834 he was introduced to the former Lord Chancellor, Lord Lyndhurst, by Henrietta Sykes, wife of Sir Francis Sykes. She was having an affair with Lyndhurst and began another with Disraeli. Disraeli and Lyndhurst took an immediate liking to each other. Lyndhurst was an indiscreet gossip with a fondness for intrigue; this appealed greatly to Disraeli, who became his secretary and go-between. In 1835 Disraeli stood for the last time as a Radical, again unsuccessfully contesting High Wycombe.
In April 1835, Disraeli fought a by-election at Taunton as a Tory candidate. The Irish MP Daniel O&#x27;Connell, misled by inaccurate press reports, thought Disraeli had slandered him while electioneering at Taunton; he launched an outspoken attack, referring to Disraeli as:
Disraeli&#x27;s public exchanges with O&#x27;Connell, extensively reproduced in &quot;The Times&quot;, included a demand for a duel with the 60-year-old O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s son (which resulted in Disraeli&#x27;s temporary detention by the authorities), a reference to &quot;the inextinguishable hatred with which [he] shall pursue [O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s] existence&quot;, and the accusation that O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s supporters had a &quot;princely revenue wrung from a starving race of fanatical slaves&quot;. Disraeli was highly gratified by the dispute, which propelled him to general public notice for the first time. He did not defeat the incumbent Whig member, Henry Labouchere, but the Taunton constituency was regarded as unwinnable by the Tories. Disraeli kept Labouchere&#x27;s majority down to 170, a good showing that put him in line for a winnable seat in the near future.

With Lyndhurst&#x27;s encouragement Disraeli turned to writing propaganda for his newly adopted party. His &quot;Vindication of the English Constitution&quot;, was published in December 1835. It was couched in the form of an open letter to Lyndhurst, and in Bradford&#x27;s view encapsulates a political philosophy that Disraeli adhered to for the rest of his life: the value of benevolent aristocratic government, a loathing of political dogma, and the modernisation of Tory policies. The following year he wrote a series of satires on politicians of the day, which he published in &quot;The Times&quot; under the pen-name &quot;Runnymede&quot;. His targets included the Whigs, collectively and individually, Irish nationalists, and political corruption. One essay ended:

Disraeli was elected to the exclusively Tory Carlton Club in 1836, and was also taken up by the party&#x27;s leading hostess, Lady Londonderry. In June 1837 William IV died, the young Queen Victoria succeeded him, and parliament was dissolved. On the recommendation of the Carlton Club, Disraeli was adopted as a Tory parliamentary candidate at the ensuing general election.

==Parliament==

===Back-bencher===
In the election in July 1837, Disraeli won a seat in the House of Commons as one of two members, both Tory, for the constituency of Maidstone. The other was Wyndham Lewis, who helped finance Disraeli&#x27;s election campaign, and who died the following year. In the same year Disraeli published a novel, &quot;Henrietta Temple&quot;, which was a love story and social comedy, drawing on his affair with Henrietta Sykes. He had broken off the relationship in late 1836, distraught that she had taken yet another lover. His other novel of this period is &quot;Venetia&quot;, a romance based on the characters of Shelley and Byron, written quickly to raise much-needed money.

Disraeli made his maiden speech in Parliament on 7 December 1837. He followed O&#x27;Connell, whom he sharply criticised for the latter&#x27;s &quot;long, rambling, jumbling, speech&quot;. He was shouted down by O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s supporters. After this unpromising start Disraeli kept a low profile for the rest of the parliamentary session. He was a loyal supporter of the party leader Sir Robert Peel and his policies, with the exception of a personal sympathy for the Chartist movement that most Tories did not share.
In 1839 Disraeli married Mary Anne Lewis, the widow of Wyndham Lewis. Twelve years Disraeli&#x27;s senior, Mary Lewis had a substantial income of £5,000 a year. His motives were generally assumed to be mercenary, but the couple came to cherish one another, remaining close until she died more than three decades later. &quot;Dizzy married me for my money&quot;, his wife said later, &quot;But, if he had the chance again, he would marry me for love.&quot;

Finding the financial demands of his Maidstone seat too much, Disraeli secured a Tory nomination for Shrewsbury, winning one of the constituency&#x27;s two seats at the 1841 general election, despite serious opposition, and heavy debts which opponents seized on. The election was a massive defeat for the Whigs across the country, and Peel became prime minister. Disraeli hoped, unrealistically, for ministerial office. Though disappointed at being left on the back benches, he continued his support for Peel in 1842 and 1843, seeking to establish himself as an expert on foreign affairs and international trade.

Although a Tory (or Conservative, as some in the party now called themselves) Disraeli was sympathetic to some of the aims of Chartism, and argued for an alliance between the landed aristocracy and the working class against the increasing power of the merchants and new industrialists in the middle class. After Disraeli won widespread acclaim in March 1842 for worsting Lord Palmerston in debate, he was taken up by a small group of idealistic new Tory MPs, with whom he formed the Young England group. They held that the landed interests should use their power to protect the poor from exploitation by middle-class businessmen.

Disraeli hoped to forge a paternalistic Tory-Radical alliance, but he was unsuccessful. Before the Reform Act 1867, the working class did not possess the vote and therefore had little political power. Although Disraeli forged a personal friendship with John Bright, a leading Radical, Disraeli was unable to persuade Bright to sacrifice his distinct position for parliamentary advancement. When Disraeli attempted to secure a Tory-Radical cabinet in 1852, Bright refused.

Disraeli gradually became a sharp critic of Peel&#x27;s government, often deliberately taking contrary positions. The young MP attacked his leader as early as 1843. However, the best known of these stances were over the Maynooth Grant in 1845 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. The President of the Board of Trade, William Gladstone, resigned from the cabinet over the Maynooth Grant. The Corn Laws imposed a tariff on imported wheat, protecting British farmers from foreign competition, but making the cost of bread artificially high. Peel hoped that the repeal of the Corn Laws and the resultant influx of cheaper wheat into Britain would relieve the condition of the poor, and in particular the Great Famine caused by successive failure of potato crops in Ireland.

The first months of 1846 were dominated by a battle in Parliament between the free traders and the protectionists over the repeal of the Corn Laws, with the latter rallying around Disraeli and Lord George Bentinck. An alliance of free-trade Conservatives (the &quot;Peelites&quot;), Radicals, and Whigs carried repeal, and the Conservative Party split: the Peelites moved towards the Whigs, while a &quot;new&quot; Conservative Party formed around the protectionists, led by Disraeli, Bentinck, and Lord Stanley (later Lord Derby).

The split in the Tory party over the repeal of the Corn Laws had profound implications for Disraeli&#x27;s political career: almost every Tory politician with experience of office followed Peel, leaving the rump bereft of leadership. In Blake&#x27;s words, &quot;[Disraeli] found himself almost the only figure on his side capable of putting up the oratorical display essential for a parliamentary leader.&quot; The Duke of Argyll wrote that Disraeli &quot;was like a subaltern in a great battle where every superior officer was killed or wounded&quot;. If the Tory Party could muster the electoral support necessary to form a government, then Disraeli now seemed to be guaranteed high office, but with a group of men who possessed little or no official experience and who, as a group, remained personally hostile to Disraeli. In the event the Tory split soon had the party out of office, not regaining power until 1852. The Conservatives would not again have a majority in the House of Commons until 1874.

===Bentinck and the leadership===
Peel successfully steered the repeal of the Corn Laws through Parliament and was then defeated by an alliance of his enemies on the issue of Irish law and order; he resigned in June 1846. The Tories remained split, and the Queen sent for Lord John Russell, the Whig leader. In the 1847 general election, Disraeli stood, successfully, for the Buckinghamshire constituency. The new House of Commons had more Conservative than Whig members, but the depth of the Tory schism enabled Russell to continue to govern. The Conservatives were led by Bentinck in the Commons and Stanley in the Lords.
In 1847 a small political crisis removed Bentinck from the leadership and highlighted Disraeli&#x27;s differences with his own party. In that year&#x27;s general election, Lionel de Rothschild had been returned for the City of London. As a practising Jew he could not take the oath of allegiance in the prescribed Christian form, and therefore could not take his seat. Lord John Russell, the Whig leader who had succeeded Peel as prime minister, proposed in the Commons that the oath should be amended to permit Jews to enter Parliament.

Disraeli spoke in favour of the measure, arguing that Christianity was &quot;completed Judaism&quot;, and asking the House of Commons &quot;Where is your Christianity if you do not believe in their Judaism?&quot; Russell and Disraeli&#x27;s future rival Gladstone thought this brave; the speech was badly received by his own party. The Tories and the Anglican establishment were hostile to the bill. With the exception of Disraeli, every member of the future protectionist cabinet then in Parliament voted against the measure. The measure was voted down. In the aftermath of the debate Bentinck resigned the leadership and was succeeded by Lord Granby; Disraeli&#x27;s speech, thought by many of his own party to be blasphemous, ruled him out for the time being.

While these intrigues played out, Disraeli was working with the Bentinck family to secure the necessary financing to purchase Hughenden Manor, in Buckinghamshire. The possession of a country house and incumbency of a county constituency were regarded as essential for a Tory with leadership ambitions. Disraeli and his wife alternated between Hughenden and several homes in London for the rest of their marriage. The negotiations were complicated by Bentinck&#x27;s sudden death on 21 September 1848, but Disraeli obtained a loan of £25,000 from Bentinck&#x27;s brothers Lord Henry Bentinck and Lord Titchfield.
Within a month of his appointment Granby resigned the leadership in the Commons and the party functioned without a leader in the Commons for the rest of the session. At the start of the next session, affairs were handled by a triumvirate of Granby, Disraeli, and John Charles Herries—indicative of the tension between Disraeli and the rest of the party, who needed his talents but mistrusted him. This confused arrangement ended with Granby&#x27;s resignation in 1851; Disraeli effectively ignored the two men regardless.

== Chancellor of the Exchequer ==

===First Derby government===

In March 1851, Lord John Russell&#x27;s government was defeated over a bill to equalise the county and borough franchises, mostly because of divisions among his supporters. He resigned, and the Queen sent for Stanley, who felt that a minority government could do little and would not last long, so Russell remained in office. Disraeli regretted this, hoping for an opportunity, however brief, to show himself capable in office. Stanley, in contrast, deprecated his inexperienced followers as a reason for not assuming office: &quot;These are not names I can put before the Queen.&quot;

At the end of June 1851, Stanley succeeded to the title of Earl of Derby. The Whigs were wracked by internal dissensions during the second half of 1851, much of which Parliament spent in recess. Russell dismissed Lord Palmerston from the cabinet, leaving the latter determined to deprive the Prime Minister of office. Palmerston did so within weeks of Parliament&#x27;s reassembly on 4 February 1852, his followers combining with Disraeli&#x27;s Tories to defeat the government on a Militia Bill, and Russell resigned. Derby had either to take office or risk damage to his reputation, and he accepted the Queen&#x27;s commission as prime minister. Palmerston declined any office; Derby had hoped to have him as Chancellor of the Exchequer. Disraeli, his closest ally, was his second choice and accepted, though disclaiming any great knowledge in the financial field. Gladstone refused to join the government. Disraeli may have been attracted to the office by the £5,000 annual salary, which would help pay his debts. Few of the new cabinet had held office before; when Derby tried to inform the Duke of Wellington of the names of the ministers, the old Duke, who was somewhat deaf, inadvertently branded the new government by incredulously repeating &quot;Who? Who?&quot;

In the following weeks, Disraeli served as Leader of the House (with Derby as prime minister in the Lords) and as Chancellor. He wrote regular reports on proceedings in the Commons to Victoria, who described them as &quot;very curious&quot; and &quot;much in the style of his books&quot;. Parliament was prorogued on 1 July 1852 as the Tories could not govern for long as a minority; Disraeli hoped that they would gain a majority of about 40. Instead, the election later that month had no clear winner, and the Derby government held to power pending the meeting of Parliament.

=== Budget ===

Disraeli&#x27;s task as Chancellor was to devise a budget which would satisfy the protectionist elements who supported the Tories, without uniting the free-traders against it. His proposed budget, which he presented to the Commons on 3 December, lowered the taxes on malt and tea, provisions designed to appeal to the working class. To make his budget revenue-neutral, as funds were needed to provide defences against the French, he doubled the house tax and continued the income tax. Disraeli&#x27;s overall purpose was to enact policies which would benefit the working classes, making his party more attractive to them. Although the budget did not contain protectionist features, the Opposition was prepared to destroy it—and Disraeli&#x27;s career as Chancellor—in part out of revenge for his actions against Peel in 1846. MP Sidney Herbert predicted that the budget would fail because &quot;Jews make no converts&quot;.
Disraeli delivered the budget on 3 December 1852, and prepared to wind up the debate for the government on 16 December—it was customary for the Chancellor to have the last word. A massive defeat for the government was predicted. Disraeli attacked his opponents individually, and then as a force: &quot;I face a Coalition ... This, too, I know, that England does not love coalitions.&quot; His speech of three hours was quickly seen as a parliamentary masterpiece. As MPs prepared to divide, Gladstone rose to his feet and began an angry speech, despite the efforts of Tory MPs to shout him down. The interruptions were fewer, as Gladstone gained control of the House, and in the next two hours painted a picture of Disraeli as frivolous and his budget as subversive. The government was defeated by 19 votes, and Derby resigned four days later. He was replaced by the Peelite Earl of Aberdeen, with Gladstone as his Chancellor. Because of Disraeli&#x27;s unpopularity among the Peelites, no party reconciliation was possible while he remained Tory leader in the Commons.

=== Opposition ===
With the fall of the government, Disraeli and the Conservatives returned to the Opposition benches. Disraeli would spend three-quarters of his 44-year parliamentary career in Opposition. Derby was reluctant to seek to unseat the government, fearing a repetition of the Who? Who? Ministry and knowing that shared dislike of Disraeli was part of what had formed the governing coalition. Disraeli, on the other hand, was anxious to return to office. In the interim, Disraeli, as Conservative leader in the Commons, opposed the government on all major measures.

In June 1853 Disraeli was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Oxford. He had been recommended for it by Lord Derby, the university&#x27;s Chancellor. The start of the Crimean War in 1854 caused a lull in party politics; Disraeli spoke patriotically in support. The British military efforts were marked by bungling, and in 1855 a restive Parliament considered a resolution to establish a committee on the conduct of the war. The Aberdeen government made this a motion of confidence; Disraeli led the Opposition to defeat the government, 305 to 148. Aberdeen resigned, and the Queen sent for Derby, who to Disraeli&#x27;s frustration refused to take office. Palmerston was deemed essential to any Whig ministry, and he would not join any he did not head. The Queen reluctantly asked Palmerston to form a government. Under Palmerston, the war went better, and was ended by the Treaty of Paris in early 1856. Disraeli was early to call for peace but had little influence on events.

When a rebellion broke out in India in 1857, Disraeli took a keen interest, having been a member of a select committee in 1852 which considered how best to rule the subcontinent, and had proposed eliminating the governing role of the British East India Company. After peace was restored, and Palmerston in early 1858 brought in legislation for direct rule of India by the Crown, Disraeli opposed it. Many Conservative MPs refused to follow him, and the bill passed the Commons easily.

Palmerston&#x27;s grip on the premiership was weakened by his response to the Orsini affair, in which an attempt was made to assassinate the French Emperor Napoleon III by an Italian revolutionary with a bomb made in Birmingham. At the request of the French ambassador, Palmerston proposed amending the conspiracy to murder statute to make creating an infernal device a felony. He was defeated by 19 votes on the second reading, with many Liberals crossing the aisle against him. He immediately resigned, and Lord Derby returned to office.

===Second Derby government===
Derby took office at the head of a purely &quot;Conservative&quot; administration, not in coalition. He again offered a place to Gladstone, who declined. Disraeli was once more leader of the House of Commons and returned to the Exchequer. As in 1852, Derby led a minority government, dependent on the division of its opponents for survival. As Leader of the House, Disraeli resumed his regular reports to Queen Victoria, who had requested that he include what she &quot;could not meet in newspapers&quot;.

During its brief life of just over a year, the Derby government proved moderately progressive. The Government of India Act 1858 ended the role of the East India Company in governing the subcontinent. The Thames Purification Bill funded the construction of much larger sewers for London. Disraeli had supported efforts to allow Jews to sit in Parliament with a bill passed through the Commons allowing each house of Parliament to determine what oaths its members should take. This was grudgingly agreed to by the House of Lords, with a minority of Conservatives joining with the Opposition to pass it. In 1858, Baron Lionel de Rothschild became the first MP to profess the Jewish faith.

Faced with a vacancy, Disraeli and Derby tried yet again to bring Gladstone, still nominally a Conservative MP, into the government, hoping to strengthen it. Disraeli wrote a personal letter to Gladstone, asking him to place the good of the party above personal animosity: &quot;Every man performs his office, and there is a Power, greater than ourselves, that disposes of all this.&quot; In response, Gladstone denied that personal feelings played any role in his decisions then and previously whether to accept office, while acknowledging that there were differences between him and Derby &quot;broader than you may have supposed&quot;.

The Tories pursued a Reform Bill in 1859, which would have resulted in a modest increase to the franchise. The Liberals were healing the breaches between those who favoured Russell and the Palmerston loyalists, and in late March 1859, the government was defeated on a Russell-sponsored amendment. Derby dissolved Parliament, and the ensuing general election resulted in modest Tory gains, but not enough to control the Commons. When Parliament assembled, Derby&#x27;s government was defeated by 13 votes on an amendment to the Address from the Throne. He resigned, and the Queen reluctantly sent for Palmerston again.

===Opposition and third term as Chancellor===

After Derby&#x27;s second ejection from office, Disraeli faced dissension within Conservative ranks from those who blamed him for the defeat, or who felt he was disloyal to Derby—the former prime minister warned Disraeli of some MPs seeking his removal from the front bench. Among the conspirators were Lord Robert Cecil, a Conservative MP who would a quarter century later become prime minister as Lord Salisbury; he wrote that having Disraeli as leader in the Commons decreased the Conservatives&#x27; chance of holding office. When Cecil&#x27;s father objected, Lord Robert stated, &quot;I have merely put into print what all the country gentlemen were saying in private.&quot;
Disraeli led a toothless Opposition in the Commons—seeing no way of unseating Palmerston, Derby privately agreed not to seek the government&#x27;s defeat. Disraeli kept himself informed on foreign affairs, and on what was going on in cabinet, thanks to a source within it. When the American Civil War began in 1861, Disraeli said little publicly, but like most Englishmen expected the South to win. Less reticent were Palmerston, Gladstone, and Russell, whose statements in support of the South contributed to years of hard feelings in the United States. In 1862, Disraeli met Prussian Count Otto von Bismarck and said of him, &quot;be careful about that man, he means what he says&quot;.

The party truce ended in 1864, with Tories outraged over Palmerston&#x27;s handling of the territorial dispute between the German Confederation and Denmark known as the Schleswig-Holstein Question. Disraeli had little help from Derby, who was ill, but he united the party enough on a no-confidence vote to limit the government to a majority of 18—Tory defections and absentees kept Palmerston in office. Despite rumours about Palmerston&#x27;s health as he turned 80, he remained personally popular, and the Liberals increased their margin in the July 1865 general election. In the wake of the poor election results, Derby predicted to Disraeli that neither of them would ever hold office again.

Political plans were thrown into disarray by Palmerston&#x27;s death on 18 October 1865. Russell became prime minister again, with Gladstone clearly the Liberal Party&#x27;s leader-in-waiting, and as Leader of the House Disraeli&#x27;s direct opponent. One of Russell&#x27;s early priorities was a Reform Bill, but the proposed legislation that Gladstone announced on 12 March 1866 divided his party. The Conservatives and the dissident Liberals repeatedly attacked Gladstone&#x27;s bill, and in June finally defeated the government; Russell resigned on 26 June. The dissidents were unwilling to serve under Disraeli in the House of Commons, and Derby formed a third Conservative minority government, with Disraeli again as Chancellor.

===Tory Democrat: the 1867 Reform Act===
It was Disraeli&#x27;s belief that if given the vote British people would use it instinctively to put their natural and traditional rulers, the gentlemen of the Conservative Party, into power. Responding to renewed agitation for popular suffrage, Disraeli persuaded a majority of the cabinet to agree to a Reform bill. With what Derby cautioned was &quot;a leap in the dark&quot;, Disraeli had outflanked the Liberals who, as the supposed champions of Reform, dared not oppose him. In the absence of a credible party rival and for fear of having an election called on the issue, Conservatives felt obliged to support Disraeli despite their misgivings.

There were Tory dissenters, most notably Lord Cranborne (as Robert Cecil was by then known) who resigned from the government and spoke against the bill, accusing Disraeli of &quot;a political betrayal which has no parallel in our Parliamentary annals&quot;. Even as Disraeli accepted Liberal amendments (although pointedly refusing those moved by Gladstone) that further lowered the property qualification, Cranborne was unable to lead an effective rebellion. Disraeli gained wide acclaim and became a hero to his party for the &quot;marvellous parliamentary skill&quot; with which he secured the passage of Reform in the Commons.

From the Liberal benches too there was admiration. MP for Nottingham Bernal Ostborne declared:

The Reform Act 1867 passed that August. It extended the franchise by 938,427 men—an increase of 88%—by giving the vote to male householders and male lodgers paying at least £10 for rooms. It eliminated rotten boroughs with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants, and granted constituencies to 15 unrepresented towns, with extra representation to large municipalities such as Liverpool and Manchester.

==Prime Minister (1868)==
=== First term ===

Derby had long had attacks of gout which left him bedbound, unable to deal with politics. As the new session of Parliament approached in February 1868, he was unable to leave his home but was reluctant to resign, as at 68 he was much younger than either Palmerston or Russell at the end of their premierships. Derby knew that his &quot;attacks of illness would, at no distant period, incapacitate me from the discharge of my public duties&quot;; doctors had warned him that his health required his resignation. In late February, with Parliament in session and Derby absent, he wrote to Disraeli asking for confirmation that &quot;you will not shrink from the additional heavy responsibility&quot;. Reassured, he wrote to the Queen, resigning and recommending Disraeli as &quot;only he could command the cordial support, en masse, of his present colleagues&quot;. Disraeli went to Osborne House on the Isle of Wight, where the Queen asked him to form a government. The monarch wrote to her daughter, Prussian Crown Princess Victoria, &quot;Mr. Disraeli is Prime Minister! A proud thing for a man &#x27;risen from the people&#x27; to have obtained!&quot; The new prime minister told those who came to congratulate him, &quot;I have climbed to the top of the greasy pole.&quot;

===First government, February–December 1868===

The Conservatives remained a minority in the House of Commons and the passage of the Reform Bill required the calling of a new election once the new voting register had been compiled. Disraeli&#x27;s term as prime minister, which began in February 1868, would therefore be short unless the Conservatives won the general election. He made only two major changes in the cabinet: he replaced Lord Chelmsford as Lord Chancellor with Lord Cairns and brought in George Ward Hunt as Chancellor of the Exchequer. Derby had intended to replace Chelmsford once a vacancy in a suitable sinecure developed. Disraeli was unwilling to wait, and Cairns, in his view, was a far stronger minister.

Disraeli&#x27;s first premiership was dominated by the heated debate over the Church of Ireland. Although Ireland was largely Roman Catholic, the Church of England represented most landowners. It remained the established church and was funded by direct taxation, which was greatly resented by the Catholics and Presbyterians. An initial attempt by Disraeli to negotiate with Archbishop Manning the establishment of a Catholic university in Dublin foundered in March when Gladstone moved resolutions to disestablish the Irish Church altogether. The proposal united the Liberals under Gladstone&#x27;s leadership, while causing divisions among the Conservatives.

The Conservatives remained in office because the new electoral register was not yet ready; neither party wished a poll under the old roll. Gladstone began using the Liberal majority in the Commons to push through resolutions and legislation. Disraeli&#x27;s government survived until the December general election, at which the Liberals were returned to power with a majority.

In its short life, the first Disraeli government passed noncontroversial laws. It ended public executions, and the Corrupt Practices Act did much to end electoral bribery. It authorised an early version of nationalisation, having the Post Office buy up the telegraph companies. Amendments to the school law, the Scottish legal system, and the railway laws were passed. In addition, the Public Health (Scotland) Act instituted sanitary inspectors and medical officers. According to one study, &quot;better sanitation was enforced throughout Scotland.&quot; Disraeli sent the successful expedition against Tewodros II of Ethiopia under Sir Robert Napier.

===Opposition leader; 1874 election===

Given Gladstone&#x27;s majority in the Commons, Disraeli could do little but protest as the government advanced legislation; he chose to await Liberal mistakes. He used this leisure time to write a new novel, &quot;Lothair&quot; (1870). A work of fiction by a former prime minister was a novelty for Britain, and the book became a bestseller.

By 1872 there was dissent in the Conservative ranks over the failure to challenge Gladstone. This was quieted as Disraeli took steps to assert his leadership, and as divisions among the Liberals became clear. Public support for Disraeli was shown by cheering at a thanksgiving service in 1872 on the recovery of the Prince of Wales from illness, while Gladstone was met with silence. Disraeli had supported the efforts of party manager John Eldon Gorst to put the administration of the Conservative Party on a modern basis. On Gorst&#x27;s advice, Disraeli gave a speech to a mass meeting in Manchester that year. To roaring approval, he compared the Liberal front bench to &quot;a range of exhausted volcanoes... But the situation is still dangerous. There are occasional earthquakes and ever and again the dark rumbling of the sea.&quot; Gladstone, Disraeli stated, dominated the scene and &quot;alternated between a menace and a sigh&quot;.

At his first departure from 10 Downing Street in 1868, Disraeli had Victoria make his wife Mary Anne Viscountess Beaconsfield in her own right in lieu of a peerage for himself. Through 1872 the eighty-year-old peeress had stomach cancer. She died on 15 December. Urged by a clergyman to turn her thoughts to Jesus Christ in her final days, she said she could not: &quot;You know Dizzy is my J.C.&quot;

In 1873, Gladstone brought forward legislation to establish a Catholic university in Dublin. This divided the Liberals, and on 12 March an alliance of Conservatives and Irish Catholics defeated the government by three votes. Gladstone resigned, and the Queen sent for Disraeli, who refused to take office. Without a general election, a Conservative government would be another minority; Disraeli wanted the power a majority would bring and felt he could gain it later by leaving the Liberals in office now. Gladstone&#x27;s government struggled on, beset by scandal and unimproved by a reshuffle. As part of that change, Gladstone took on the office of Chancellor, leading to questions as to whether he had to stand for re-election on taking on a second ministry—until the 1920s, MPs becoming ministers had to seek re-election.

In January 1874, Gladstone called a general election, convinced that if he waited longer, he would do worse at the polls. Balloting was spread over two weeks, beginning on 1 February. As the constituencies voted, it became clear that the result would be a Conservative majority, the first since 1841. In Scotland, where the Conservatives were perennially weak, they increased from seven seats to nineteen. Overall, they won 350 seats to 245 for the Liberals and 57 for the Irish Home Rule League. Disraeli became prime minister for the second time.

==Prime Minister (1874–1880)==
=== Second term ===
Disraeli&#x27;s cabinet of twelve, with six peers and six commoners, was the smallest since Reform. Of the peers, five of them had been in Disraeli&#x27;s 1868 cabinet; the sixth, Lord Salisbury, was reconciled to Disraeli after negotiation and became Secretary of State for India. Lord Stanley (who had succeeded his father, the former prime minister, as Earl of Derby) became Foreign Secretary and Sir Stafford Northcote the Chancellor.

In August 1876, Disraeli was elevated to the House of Lords as Earl of Beaconsfield and Viscount Hughenden. The Queen had offered to ennoble him as early as 1868; he had then declined. She did so again in 1874, when he fell ill at Balmoral, but he was reluctant to leave the Commons for a house in which he had no experience. Continued ill health during his second premiership caused him to contemplate resignation, but his lieutenant, Derby, was unwilling, feeling that he could not manage the Queen. For Disraeli, the Lords, where the debate was less intense, was the alternative to resignation. Five days before the end of the 1876 session of Parliament, on 11 August, Disraeli was seen to linger and look around the chamber before departing. Newspapers reported his ennoblement the following morning.

In addition to the viscounty bestowed on Mary Anne Disraeli, the earldom of Beaconsfield was to have been bestowed on Edmund Burke in 1797, but he had died before receiving it. The name Beaconsfield, a town near Hughenden, was given to a minor character in &quot;Vivian Grey&quot;. Disraeli made various statements about his elevation, writing to Selina, Lady Bradford on 8 August 1876, &quot;I am quite tired of that place [the Commons]&quot; but when asked by a friend how he liked the Lords, replied, &quot;I am dead; dead but in the Elysian fields.&quot;

===Domestic policy===

====Legislation====
Under the stewardship of Richard Assheton Cross, the Home Secretary, Disraeli&#x27;s new government enacted many reforms, including the Artisans&#x27; and Labourers&#x27; Dwellings Improvement Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 36), which made inexpensive loans available to towns and cities to construct working-class housing. Also enacted were the Public Health Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 55), modernising sanitary codes, the Sale of Food and Drugs Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 63), and the Elementary Education Act 1876 (39 &amp; 40 Vict. c. 70). Disraeli&#x27;s government introduced a new Factory Act meant to protect workers, the Conspiracy, and Protection of Property Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 86), which allowed peaceful picketing, and the Employers and Workmen Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 90) to enable workers to sue employers in the civil courts if they broke legal contracts.

The Sale of Food and Drugs Act 1875 prohibited the mixing of injurious ingredients with articles of food or with drugs, and provision was made for the appointment of analysts; all tea &quot;had to be examined by a customs official on importation, and when in the opinion of the analyst it was unfit for food, the tea had to be destroyed&quot;. The Employers and Workmen Act 1875, according to one study, &quot;finally placed employers and employed on an equal footing before the law&quot;. The Conspiracy, and Protection of Property Act 1875 established the right to strike by providing that &quot;an agreement or combination by one or more persons to do, or procure to be done, any act in contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute between employers and workmen, shall not be indictable as a conspiracy if such act committed by one person would not be punishable as a crime&quot;.

As a result of these social reforms the Liberal-Labour MP Alexander Macdonald told his constituents in 1879, &quot;The Conservative party have done more for the working classes in five years than the Liberals have in fifty.&quot;

====Civil Service====

Gladstone in 1870 had sponsored an Order in Council, introducing competitive examination into the Civil Service, diminishing the political aspects of government hiring. Disraeli did not agree, and while he did not seek to reverse the order, his actions often frustrated its intent. For example, Disraeli made political appointments to positions previously given to career civil servants. He was backed by his party, hungry for office and its emoluments after almost thirty years with only brief spells in government. Disraeli gave positions to hard-up Conservative leaders, even—to Gladstone&#x27;s outrage—creating one office at £2,000 per year. Nevertheless, Disraeli made fewer peers (only 22, including one of Victoria&#x27;s sons) than had Gladstone (37 during his just over five years in office).

As he had in government posts, Disraeli rewarded old friends with clerical positions, making Sydney Turner, son of a good friend of Isaac D&#x27;Israeli, Dean of Ripon. He favoured Low church clergymen in promotion, disliking other movements in Anglicanism for political reasons. In this, he came into disagreement with the Queen, who out of loyalty to her late husband Albert preferred Broad church teachings. One controversial appointment had occurred shortly before the 1868 election. When the position of Archbishop of Canterbury fell vacant, Disraeli reluctantly agreed to the Queen&#x27;s preferred candidate, Archibald Tait, the Bishop of London. To fill Tait&#x27;s vacant see, Disraeli was urged by many people to appoint Samuel Wilberforce, the former Bishop of Winchester. Disraeli disliked Wilberforce and instead appointed John Jackson, the Bishop of Lincoln. Blake suggested that, on balance, these appointments cost Disraeli more votes than they gained him.

===Foreign policy===
Disraeli always considered foreign affairs to be the most critical and interesting part of statesmanship. Nevertheless, his biographer Robert Blake doubts that his subject had specific ideas about foreign policy when he took office in 1874. He had rarely travelled abroad; since his youthful tour of the Middle East in 1830–1831, he had left Britain only for his honeymoon and three visits to Paris, the last of which was in 1856. As he had criticised Gladstone for a do-nothing foreign policy, he most probably contemplated what actions would reassert Britain&#x27;s place in Europe. His brief first premiership, and the first year of his second, gave him little opportunity to make his mark in foreign affairs.

====Suez====

The Suez Canal, opened in 1869, cut weeks and thousands of miles off the sea journey between Britain and India; in 1875, approximately 80% of the ships using the canal were British. In the event of another rebellion in India or a Russian invasion, the time saved at Suez might be crucial. Built by French interests, 56% of the stocks in the canal remained in their hands, while 44% of the stock belonged to Isma&#x27;il Pasha, the Khedive of Egypt. He was notorious for his profligate spending. The canal was losing money, and an attempt by Ferdinand de Lesseps, builder of the canal, to raise the tolls had fallen through when the Khedive had threatened military force to prevent it, and had also attracted Disraeli&#x27;s attention. The Khedive governed Egypt under the Ottoman Empire; as in the Crimea, the issue of the Canal raised the Eastern Question of what to do about the decaying empire governed from Constantinople. With much of the pre-canal trade and communications between Britain and India passing through the Ottoman Empire, Britain had done its best to prop up the Ottomans against the threat that Russia would take Constantinople, cutting those communications, and giving Russian ships unfettered access to the Mediterranean. The French might also threaten those lines. Britain had had the opportunity to purchase shares in the canal but had declined to do so.

Disraeli sent the Liberal MP Nathan Rothschild to Paris to enquire about buying de Lesseps&#x27;s shares. On 14 November 1875, the editor of the &quot;Pall Mall Gazette&quot;, Frederick Greenwood, learned from London banker Henry Oppenheim that the Khedive was seeking to sell his shares in the Suez Canal Company to a French firm. Greenwood quickly told Lord Derby, the Foreign Secretary, who notified Disraeli. The Prime Minister moved immediately to secure the shares. On 23 November, the Khedive offered to sell the shares for 100,000,000 francs. Rather than seek the aid of the Bank of England, Disraeli borrowed funds from Lionel de Rothschild, who took a commission on the deal. The banker&#x27;s capital was at risk as Parliament could have refused to ratify the transaction. The contract for purchase was signed at Cairo on 25 November and the shares deposited at the British consulate the following day.

Disraeli told the Queen, &quot;it is settled; you have it, madam!&quot; The public saw the venture as a daring statement of British dominance of the seas. Sir Ian Malcolm described the Suez Canal share purchase as &quot;the greatest romance of Mr. Disraeli&#x27;s romantic career&quot;. In the following decades, the security of the Suez Canal became a major concern of British foreign policy. Under Gladstone, Britain took control of Egypt in 1882. A later Foreign Secretary, Lord Curzon, described the canal in 1909 as &quot;the determining influence of every considerable movement of British power to the east and south of the Mediterranean&quot;.

====Royal Titles Act====

Although initially curious about Disraeli when he entered Parliament in 1837, Victoria came to detest him over his treatment of Peel. Over time, her dislike softened, especially as Disraeli took pains to cultivate her. He told Matthew Arnold, &quot;Everybody likes flattery; and, when you come to royalty, you should lay it on with a trowel&quot;. Disraeli&#x27;s biographer, Adam Kirsch, suggests that Disraeli&#x27;s obsequious treatment of his queen was part flattery, part belief that this was how a queen should be addressed by a loyal subject, and part awe that a middle-class man of Jewish birth should be the companion of a monarch. By the time of his second premiership, Disraeli had built a strong relationship with Victoria, probably closer to her than any of her prime ministers except her first, Lord Melbourne. When Disraeli returned as prime minister in 1874 and went to kiss hands, he did so literally, on one knee; according to Richard Aldous in his book on the rivalry between Disraeli and Gladstone, &quot;Victoria and Disraeli would exploit their closeness for mutual advantage.&quot;

Victoria had long wished to have an imperial title, reflecting Britain&#x27;s expanding domain. She was irked when Tsar Alexander II held a higher rank than her as an emperor, and was appalled that her daughter, the Prussian Crown Princess, would outrank her when her husband came to the throne. She also saw an imperial title as proclaiming Britain&#x27;s increased stature in the world. The title &quot;Empress of India&quot; had been used informally for some time and she wished to have that title formally bestowed on her. The Queen prevailed upon Disraeli to introduce a Royal Titles Bill, and also told of her intent to open Parliament in person, which during this time she did only when she wanted something from legislators. Disraeli was cautious in response, as careful soundings of MPs brought a negative reaction, and he declined to place such a proposal in the Queen&#x27;s Speech.

Once the desired bill was finally prepared, Disraeli&#x27;s handling of it was not adept. He neglected to notify either the Prince of Wales or the Opposition and was met by irritation from the prince and a full-scale attack from the Liberals. An old enemy of Disraeli, former Liberal Chancellor Robert Lowe, alleged during the debate in the Commons that two previous prime ministers had refused to introduce such legislation for the Queen. Gladstone immediately stated that he was not one of them, and the Queen gave Disraeli leave to quote her saying she had never approached a prime minister with such a proposal. According to Blake, Disraeli &quot;in a brilliant oration of withering invective proceeded to destroy Lowe&quot;, who apologised and never held office again. Disraeli said of Lowe that he was the only person in London with whom he would not shake hands: &quot;he is in the mud and there I leave him.&quot;

Fearful of losing, Disraeli was reluctant to bring the bill to a vote in the Commons, but when he did it passed with a majority of 75. Once the bill was formally enacted, Victoria began signing her letters &quot;Victoria R &amp; I&quot; (, Queen and Empress). According to Aldous, the bill &quot;shattered Disraeli&#x27;s authority in the House of Commons&quot;.

====Balkans and Bulgaria====

In July 1875 Serb populations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, then provinces of the Ottoman Empire, revolted against the Turks, alleging religious persecution and poor administration. The following January, Sultan Abdülaziz agreed to reforms proposed by Hungarian statesman Julius Andrássy, but the rebels, suspecting they might win their freedom, continued their uprising, joined by militants in Serbia and Bulgaria. The Turks suppressed the Bulgarian uprising harshly, and when reports of these actions escaped, Disraeli and Derby stated in Parliament that they did not believe them. Disraeli called them &quot;coffee-house babble&quot; and dismissed allegations of torture by the Ottomans since &quot;Oriental people usually terminate their connections with culprits in a more expeditious fashion&quot;.

Gladstone, who had left the Liberal leadership and retired from public life, was appalled by reports of atrocities in Bulgaria, and in August 1876, penned a hastily written pamphlet arguing that the Turks should be deprived of Bulgaria because of what they had done there. He sent a copy to Disraeli, who called it &quot;vindictive and ill-written ... of all the Bulgarian horrors perhaps the greatest&quot;. Gladstone&#x27;s pamphlet became an immense best-seller and rallied the Liberals to urge that the Ottoman Empire should no longer be a British ally. Disraeli wrote to Lord Salisbury on 3 September, &quot;Had it not been for these unhappy &#x27;atrocities&#x27;, we should have settled a peace very honourable to England and satisfactory to Europe. Now we are obliged to work from a new point of departure, and dictate to Turkey, who has forfeited all sympathy.&quot; In spite of this, Disraeli&#x27;s policy favoured Constantinople and Ottoman territorial integrity.
Disraeli and the cabinet sent Salisbury as lead British representative to the Constantinople Conference, which met in December 1876 and January 1877. In advance of the conference, Disraeli sent Salisbury private word to seek British military occupation of Bulgaria and Bosnia, and British control of the Ottoman Army. Salisbury ignored these instructions, which his biographer, Andrew Roberts deemed &quot;ludicrous&quot;. The conference failed to reach agreement with the Turks.

Parliament opened in February 1877, with Disraeli now in the Lords as Earl of Beaconsfield. He spoke only once there in the 1877 session on the Eastern Question, stating on 20 February that there was a need for stability in the Balkans, and that forcing Turkey into territorial concessions would not secure it. The Prime Minister wanted a deal with the Ottomans whereby Britain would temporarily occupy strategic areas to deter the Russians from war, to be returned on the signing of a peace treaty, but found little support in his cabinet, which favoured partition of the Ottoman Empire. As Disraeli, by then in poor health, continued to battle within the cabinet, Russia invaded Turkey on 21 April, beginning the Russo-Turkish War.

====Congress of Berlin====
The Russians pushed through Ottoman territory and by December 1877 had captured the strategic Bulgarian town of Plevna. The war divided the British, but the Russian success caused some to forget the atrocities and call for intervention on the Turkish side. Others hoped for further Russian successes. The fall of Plevna was a major story for weeks, and Disraeli&#x27;s warnings that Russia was a threat to British interests in the eastern Mediterranean were deemed prophetic. The jingoistic attitude of many Britons increased Disraeli&#x27;s political support, and the Queen showed her favour by visiting him at Hughenden—the first time she had visited the country home of her prime minister since the Melbourne ministry. At the end of January 1878, the Ottoman Sultan appealed to Britain to save Constantinople. Amid war fever in Britain, the government asked Parliament to vote £6,000,000 to prepare the Army and Navy for war. Gladstone opposed the measure, but less than half his party voted with him. Popular opinion was with Disraeli, though some thought him too soft for not immediately declaring war on Russia.
With the Russians close to Constantinople, the Turks yielded and in March 1878, signed the Treaty of San Stefano, conceding a Bulgarian state covering a large part of the Balkans. It would be initially Russian-occupied and many feared that it would give them a client state close to Constantinople. Other Ottoman possessions in Europe would become independent; additional territory was to be ceded directly to Russia. This was unacceptable to the British, who protested, hoping to get the Russians to agree to attend an international conference which German Chancellor Bismarck proposed to hold at Berlin. The cabinet discussed Disraeli&#x27;s proposal to position Indian troops at Malta for possible transit to the Balkans and call out reserves. Derby resigned in protest, and Disraeli appointed Salisbury as Foreign Secretary. Amid British preparations for war, the Russians and Turks agreed to discussions at Berlin.

In advance of the meeting, confidential negotiations took place between Britain and Russia in April and May 1878. The Russians were willing to make changes to the big Bulgaria, but were determined to retain their new possessions, Bessarabia in Europe and Batum and Kars on the east coast of the Black Sea. To counterbalance this, Britain required a possession in the Eastern Mediterranean where it might base ships and troops and negotiated with the Ottomans for the cession of Cyprus. Once this was secretly agreed, Disraeli was prepared to allow Russia&#x27;s territorial gains.

The Congress of Berlin was held in June and July 1878, the central relationship in it that between Disraeli and Bismarck. In later years, the German chancellor would show visitors to his office three pictures on the wall: &quot;the portrait of my Sovereign, there on the right that of my wife, and on the left, there, that of Lord Beaconsfield&quot;. Disraeli caused an uproar in the congress by making his opening address in English, rather than in French, hitherto accepted as the international language of diplomacy. By one account, the British ambassador in Berlin, Lord Odo Russell, hoping to spare the delegates Disraeli&#x27;s very poor French accent, told Disraeli that the congress was hoping to hear a speech in English by one of its masters.

Disraeli left much of the detailed work to Salisbury, concentrating his efforts on making it as difficult as possible for the broken-up big Bulgaria to reunite. Disraeli intended that Batum be demilitarised, but the Russians obtained their preferred language, and in 1886, fortified the town. Nevertheless, the Cyprus Convention ceding the island to Britain was announced during the congress, and again made Disraeli a sensation.

Disraeli gained agreement that Turkey should retain enough of its European possessions to safeguard the Dardanelles. By one account, when met with Russian intransigence, Disraeli told his secretary to order a special train to return them home to begin the war. Czar Alexander II later described the congress as &quot;a European coalition against Russia, under Bismarck&quot;.

The Treaty of Berlin was signed on 13 July 1878 at the Radziwill Palace in Berlin. Disraeli and Salisbury returned home to heroes&#x27; receptions. At the door of 10 Downing Street, Disraeli received flowers sent by the Queen. There, he told the gathered crowd, &quot;Lord Salisbury and I have brought you back peace—but a peace I hope with honour.&quot; The Queen offered him a dukedom, which he declined, though accepting the Garter, as long as Salisbury also received it. In Berlin, word spread of Bismarck&#x27;s admiring description of Disraeli, &quot;&quot;Der alte Jude, das ist der Mann!&quot; &quot;
In the weeks after Berlin, Disraeli and the cabinet considered calling a general election to capitalise on the public applause he and Salisbury had received. Parliaments were then for a seven-year term, and it was the custom not to go to the country until the sixth year unless forced to by events. Only four and a half years had passed and they did not see any clouds on the horizon that might forecast Conservative defeat if they waited. This decision not to seek re-election has often been cited as a great mistake by Disraeli. Blake, however, pointed out that results in local elections had been moving against the Conservatives, and doubted if Disraeli missed any great opportunity by waiting.

====Afghanistan to Zululand====

As successful invasions of India generally came through Afghanistan, the British had observed and sometimes intervened there since the 1830s, hoping to keep the Russians out. In 1878 the Russians sent a mission to Kabul; it was not rejected by the Afghans, as the British had hoped. The British proposed to send their own mission, insisting that the Russians be sent away. The Viceroy of India Lord Lytton concealed his plans to issue this ultimatum from Disraeli, and when the Prime Minister insisted he take no action, went ahead anyway. When the Afghans made no answer, Lord Cranbrook as Secretary of State for War, ordered the advance against them in the Second Anglo-Afghan War. Under Lord Roberts, the British easily defeated them and installed a new ruler, leaving a mission and garrison in Kabul.

British policy in South Africa was to encourage federation between the British-run Cape Colony and Natal, and the Boer republics, the Transvaal (annexed by Britain in 1877) and the Orange Free State. The governor of Cape Colony, Sir Bartle Frere, believing that the federation could not be accomplished until the native tribes acknowledged British rule, made demands on the Zulu and their king, Cetewayo, which they were certain to reject. As Zulu troops could not marry until they had washed their spears in blood, they were eager for combat. Frere did not send word to the cabinet of what he had done until the ultimatum was about to expire. Disraeli and the cabinet reluctantly backed him, and in early January 1879 resolved to send reinforcements. Before they could arrive, on 22 January, a Zulu &quot;impi&quot; (army), moving with great speed and endurance, destroyed a British encampment in South Africa in the Battle of Isandlwana. Over a thousand British and colonial troops were killed. Word of the defeat did not reach London until 12 February. Disraeli wrote the next day, &quot;the terrible disaster has shaken me to the centre&quot;. He reprimanded Frere, but left him in charge, attracting fire from all sides. Disraeli sent General Sir Garnet Wolseley as High Commissioner and Commander in Chief, and Cetewayo and the Zulus were crushed at the Battle of Ulundi on 4 July 1879.

On 8 September 1879 Sir Louis Cavagnari, in charge of the mission in Kabul, was killed with his entire staff by rebelling Afghan soldiers. Roberts undertook a successful punitive expedition against the Afghans over the next six weeks.

===1880 election===

In December 1878, Gladstone was offered the Liberal nomination for Edinburghshire, a constituency popularly known as Midlothian. The small Scottish electorate was dominated by two noblemen, the Conservative Duke of Buccleuch and the Liberal Earl of Rosebery. The Earl, a friend of both Disraeli and Gladstone who would succeed the latter after his final term as prime minister, had journeyed to the United States to view politics there, and was convinced that aspects of American electioneering techniques could be translated to Britain. On his advice, Gladstone accepted the offer in January 1879, and later that year began his Midlothian campaign, speaking not only in Edinburgh, but across Britain, attacking Disraeli, to huge crowds.

Conservative chances of re-election were damaged by the poor weather, and consequent effects on agriculture. Four consecutive wet summers through 1879 had led to poor harvests. In the past, the farmer had the consolation of higher prices at such times, but with bumper crops cheaply transported from the United States, grain prices remained low. Other European nations, faced with similar circumstances, opted for protection, and Disraeli was urged to reinstitute the Corn Laws. He declined, stating that he regarded the matter as settled. Protection would have been highly unpopular among the newly enfranchised urban working classes, as it would raise their cost of living. Amid an economic slump generally, the Conservatives lost support among farmers.

Disraeli&#x27;s health continued to fail through 1879. Owing to his infirmities, Disraeli was 45 minutes late for the Lord Mayor&#x27;s Dinner at the Guildhall in November, at which it is customary that the Prime Minister speaks. Though many commented on how healthy he looked, it took him great effort to appear so, and when he told the audience he expected to speak to the dinner again the following year, attendees chuckled. Gladstone was then in the midst of his campaign. Despite his public confidence, Disraeli recognised that the Conservatives would probably lose the next election and was already contemplating his Resignation Honours.

Despite this pessimism, Conservatives hopes were buoyed in early 1880 with successes in by-elections the Liberals had expected to win, concluding with victory in Southwark, normally a Liberal stronghold. The cabinet had resolved to wait before dissolving Parliament; in early March they reconsidered, agreeing to go to the country as soon as possible. Parliament was dissolved on 24 March; the first borough constituencies began voting a week later.

Disraeli took no public part in the electioneering, it being deemed improper for peers to make speeches to influence Commons elections. This meant that the chief Conservatives—Disraeli, Salisbury, and India Secretary Lord Cranbrook—would not be heard from. The election was thought likely to be close. Once returns began to be announced, it became clear that the Conservatives were decisively beaten. The final result gave the Liberals an absolute majority of about 50.

==Final months, death, and memorials==
Disraeli refused to cast blame for the defeat, which he understood was likely to be final for him. He wrote to Lady Bradford that it was just as much work to end a government as to form one, without any of the fun. Queen Victoria was bitter at his departure. Among the honours he arranged before resigning as Prime Minister on 21 April 1880 was one for his private secretary, Montagu Corry, who became Baron Rowton.
Returning to Hughenden, Disraeli brooded over his electoral dismissal, but also resumed work on &quot;Endymion&quot;, which he had begun in 1872 and laid aside before the 1874 election. The work was rapidly completed and published by November 1880. He carried on a correspondence with Victoria, with letters passed through intermediaries. When Parliament met in January 1881, he served as Conservative leader in the Lords, attempting to serve as a moderating influence on Gladstone&#x27;s legislation.

Because of his asthma and gout, Disraeli went out as little as possible, fearing more serious episodes of illness. In March, he fell ill with bronchitis, and emerged from bed only for a meeting with Salisbury and other Conservative leaders on the 26th. As it became clear that this might be his final sickness, friends and opponents alike came to call. Disraeli declined a visit from the Queen, saying, &quot;She would only ask me to take a message to Albert.&quot; Almost blind, when he received the last letter from Victoria of which he was aware on 5 April, he held it momentarily, then had it read to him by Lord Barrington, a Privy Councillor. One card, signed &quot;A Workman&quot;, delighted its recipient: &quot;Don&#x27;t die yet, we can&#x27;t do without you.&quot;

Despite the gravity of Disraeli&#x27;s condition, the doctors concocted optimistic bulletins for public consumption. Prime Minister Gladstone called several times to enquire about his rival&#x27;s condition, and wrote in his diary, &quot;May the Almighty be near his pillow.&quot; There was intense public interest in Disraeli&#x27;s struggles for life. Disraeli had customarily taken the sacrament at Easter; when this day was observed on 17 April, there was discussion among his friends and family if he should be given the opportunity, but those against, fearing that he would lose hope, prevailed. On the morning of the following day, Easter Monday, he became incoherent, then comatose. Disraeli&#x27;s last confirmed words before dying at his home at 19 Curzon Street in the early morning of 19 April were &quot;I had rather live but I am not afraid to die&quot;. The anniversary of Disraeli&#x27;s death was for some years commemorated in the United Kingdom as Primrose Day.

Despite having been offered a state funeral by Queen Victoria, Disraeli&#x27;s executors decided against a public procession and funeral, fearing that too large crowds would gather to do him honour. The chief mourners at the service at Hughenden on 26 April were his brother Ralph and nephew Coningsby, to whom Hughenden would eventually pass; Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, Viscount Cranbrook, despite most of Disraeli&#x27;s former cabinet being present, was notably absent in Italy. Queen Victoria was prostrated with grief, and considered ennobling Ralph or Coningsby as a memorial to Disraeli (without children, his titles became extinct with his death), but decided against it on the ground that their means were too small for a peerage. Protocol forbade her attending Disraeli&#x27;s funeral (this would not be changed until 1965, when Elizabeth II attended the rites for the former prime minister Sir Winston Churchill) but she sent primroses (&quot;his favourite flowers&quot;) to the funeral and visited the burial vault to place a wreath four days later.

Disraeli is buried with his wife in a vault beneath the Church of St Michael and All Angels which stands in the grounds of his home, Hughenden Manor. There is also a memorial to him in the chancel in the church, erected in his honour by Queen Victoria. His literary executor was his private secretary, Lord Rowton. The Disraeli vault also contains the body of Sarah Brydges Willyams, the wife of James Brydges Willyams of St Mawgan. Disraeli carried on a long correspondence with Mrs. Willyams, writing frankly about political affairs. At her death in 1865, she left him a large legacy, which helped clear his debts. His will was proved in April 1882 at £84,019 18 s. 7 d. (roughly equivalent to £ in ).

Disraeli has a memorial in Westminster Abbey, erected by the nation on the motion of Gladstone in his memorial speech on Disraeli in the House of Commons. Gladstone had absented himself from the funeral, with his plea of the press of public business met with public mockery. His speech was widely anticipated, if only because his dislike for Disraeli was well known. In the event, the speech was a model of its kind, in which he avoided comment on Disraeli&#x27;s politics while praising his personal qualities.

==Legacy==
Disraeli&#x27;s literary and political career interacted over his lifetime and fascinated Victorian Britain, making him &quot;one of the most eminent figures in Victorian public life&quot;, and occasioned a large output of commentary. Critic Shane Leslie noted three decades after his death that &quot;Disraeli&#x27;s career was a romance such as no Eastern vizier or Western plutocrat could tell. He began as a pioneer in dress and an aesthete of words ... Disraeli actually made his novels come true.&quot;

===Literary===

Disraeli&#x27;s novels are his main literary achievement. They have from the outset divided critical opinion. The writer R. W. Stewart observed that there have always been two criteria for judging Disraeli&#x27;s novels—political and artistic. The critic Robert O&#x27;Kell, concurring, writes, &quot;It is after all, even if you are a Tory of the staunchest blue, impossible to make Disraeli into a first-rate novelist. And it is equally impossible, no matter how much you deplore the extravagances and improprieties of his works, to make him into an insignificant one.&quot;

Disraeli&#x27;s early &quot;silver fork&quot; novels &quot;Vivian Grey&quot; (1826) and &quot;The Young Duke&quot; (1831) featured romanticised depictions of aristocratic life (despite his ignorance of it) with character sketches of well-known public figures lightly disguised. In some of his early fiction Disraeli also portrayed himself and what he felt to be his Byronic dual nature: the poet and the man of action. His most autobiographical novel was &quot;Contarini Fleming&quot; (1832), an avowedly serious work that did not sell well. The critic William Kuhn suggests that Disraeli&#x27;s fiction can be read as &quot;the memoirs he never wrote&quot;, revealing the inner life of a politician for whom the norms of Victorian public life appeared to represent a social straitjacket—particularly with regard to what Kuhn sees as the author&#x27;s &quot;ambiguous sexuality&quot;.

Of the other novels of the early 1830s, &quot;Alroy&quot; is described by Blake as &quot;profitable but unreadable&quot;, and &quot;The Rise of Iskander&quot; (1833) and &quot;The Infernal Marriage&quot; and &quot;Ixion in Heaven&quot; (1834) made little impact. &quot;Henrietta Temple&quot; (1837) was Disraeli&#x27;s next major success. It draws on the events of his affair with Henrietta Sykes to tell the story of a debt-ridden young man torn between a mercenary loveless marriage and a passionate love at first sight for the eponymous heroine. &quot;Venetia&quot; (1837) was a minor work, written to raise much-needed cash.

In the 1840s Disraeli wrote a trilogy of novels with political themes. &quot;Coningsby&quot; attacks the evils of the Whig Reform Bill of 1832 and castigates the leaderless conservatives for not responding. &quot;Sybil; or, The Two Nations&quot; (1845) reveals Peel&#x27;s betrayal over the Corn Laws. These themes are expanded in &quot;Tancred&quot; (1847). With &quot;Coningsby; or, The New Generation&quot; (1844), Disraeli, in Blake&#x27;s view, &quot;infused the novel genre with political sensibility, espousing the belief that England&#x27;s future as a world power depended not on the complacent old guard, but on youthful, idealistic politicians.&quot; &quot;Sybil; or, The Two Nations&quot; was less idealistic than &quot;Coningsby&quot;; the &quot;two nations&quot; of its sub-title referred to the huge economic and social gap between the privileged few and the deprived working classes. The last was &quot;Tancred; or, The New Crusade&quot; (1847), promoting the Church of England&#x27;s role in reviving Britain&#x27;s flagging spirituality. Disraeli often wrote about religion, for he was a strong promoter of the Church of England. He was troubled by the growth of elaborate rituals in the late 19th century, such as the use of incense and vestments, and heard warnings to the effect that the ritualists were going to turn control of the Church of England over to the Pope. He consequently was a strong supporter of the Public Worship Regulation Act 1874 which allowed the archbishops to go to court to stop the ritualists.

&quot;Lothair&quot; was &quot;Disraeli&#x27;s ideological &quot;Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot;&quot;, It tells a story of political life with particular regard to the roles of the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches. It reflected anti-Catholicism of the sort that was popular in Britain, and which fueled support for Italian unification (&quot;Risorgimento&quot;). &quot;Endymion&quot;, despite having a Whig as hero, is a last exposition of the author&#x27;s economic policies and political beliefs. Disraeli continued to the last to pillory his enemies in barely disguised caricatures: the character St Barbe in &quot;Endymion&quot; is widely seen as a parody of Thackeray, who had offended Disraeli more than thirty years earlier by lampooning him in &quot;Punch&quot; as &quot;Codlingsby&quot;. Disraeli left an unfinished novel in which the priggish central character, Falconet, is unmistakably a caricature of Gladstone.

Blake commented that Disraeli &quot;produced an epic poem, unbelievably bad, and a five-act blank verse tragedy, if possible worse. Further he wrote a discourse on political theory and a political biography, the &quot;Life of Lord George Bentinck&quot;, which is excellent ... remarkably fair and accurate.&quot;

===Political===

In the years after Disraeli&#x27;s death, as Salisbury began his reign of more than twenty years over the Conservatives, the party emphasised the late leader&#x27;s &quot;One Nation&quot; views, that the Conservatives at root shared the beliefs of the working classes, with the Liberals the party of the urban élite. The memory of Disraeli was used by the Conservatives to appeal to the working classes, with whom he was said to have had a rapport. This aspect of his policies has been re-evaluated by historians in the 20th and 21st centuries. In 1972 B. H. Abbott stressed that it was not Disraeli but Lord Randolph Churchill who invented the term &quot;Tory democracy&quot;, though it was Disraeli who made it an essential part of Conservative policy and philosophy. In 2007 Parry wrote, &quot;The tory democrat myth did not survive detailed scrutiny by professional historical writing of the 1960s [which] demonstrated that Disraeli had very little interest in a programme of social legislation and was very flexible in handling parliamentary reform in 1867.&quot; Despite this, Parry sees Disraeli, rather than Peel, as the founder of the modern Conservative party. The Conservative politician and writer Douglas Hurd wrote in 2013, &quot;[Disraeli] was not a one-nation Conservative—and this was not simply because he never used the phrase. He rejected the concept in its entirety.&quot;

Disraeli&#x27;s enthusiastic propagation of the British Empire has also been seen as appealing to working-class voters. Before his leadership of the Conservative Party, imperialism was the province of the Liberals, most notably Palmerston. Disraeli made the Conservatives the party that most loudly supported both the Empire and military action to assert its primacy. This came about in part because Disraeli&#x27;s own views stemmed that way, in part because he saw advantage for the Conservatives, and partially in reaction against Gladstone, who disliked the expense of empire. Blake argued that Disraeli&#x27;s imperialism &quot;decisively orientated the Conservative party for many years to come, and the tradition which he started was probably a bigger electoral asset in winning working-class support during the last quarter of the century than anything else&quot;. Some historians have commented on a romantic impulse behind Disraeli&#x27;s approach to Empire and foreign affairs: Abbott writes, &quot;To the mystical Tory concepts of Throne, Church, Aristocracy and People, Disraeli added Empire.&quot; Others have identified a strongly pragmatic aspect to his policies. Gladstone&#x27;s biographer Philip Magnus contrasted Disraeli&#x27;s grasp of foreign affairs with that of Gladstone, who &quot;never understood that high moral principles, in their application to foreign policy, are more often destructive of political stability than motives of national self-interest.&quot; In Parry&#x27;s view, Disraeli&#x27;s foreign policy &quot;can be seen as a gigantic castle in the air (as it was by Gladstone), or as an overdue attempt to force the British commercial classes to awaken to the realities of European politics.&quot;

During his lifetime, Disraeli&#x27;s opponents, and sometimes even his friends and allies, questioned whether he sincerely held the views he propounded, or whether they were adopted by him as politically essential and lacked conviction. Lord John Manners, in 1843 at the time of Young England, wrote, &quot;could I only satisfy myself that D&#x27;Israeli believed all that he said, I should be more happy: his historical views are quite mine, but does he believe them?&quot; Paul Smith, in his journal article on Disraeli&#x27;s politics, argues that Disraeli&#x27;s ideas were coherently argued over a political career of nearly half a century, and &quot;it is impossible to sweep them aside as a mere bag of burglar&#x27;s tools for effecting felonious entry to the British political pantheon.&quot;

Stanley Weintraub, in his biography of Disraeli, points out that his subject did much to advance Britain towards the 20th century, carrying one of the two great Reform Acts of the 19th despite the opposition of his Liberal rival, Gladstone. He helped preserve constitutional monarchy by drawing the Queen out of mourning into a new symbolic national role and created the climate for what became &#x27;Tory democracy&#x27;. He articulated an imperial role for Britain that would last into World War II and brought an intermittently self-isolated Britain into the concert of Europe.

Frances Walsh comments on Disraeli&#x27;s multifaceted public life:
Historian Llewellyn Woodward has evaluated Disraeli:

Historical writers have often played Disraeli and Gladstone against each other as great rivals. Roland Quinault, however, cautions not to exaggerate the confrontation:

===Role of Jewishness===

By 1882, 46,000 Jews lived in England, and by 1890 Jewish emancipation was complete. Since 1858, Parliament has never been without practicing Jewish members. The first Jewish Lord Mayor of London, Sir David Salomons, was elected in 1855, followed by the 1858 emancipation of the Jews. On 26 July 1858, Lionel de Rothschild was allowed to sit in the House of Commons when the hitherto specifically Christian oath of office was changed. Disraeli, a baptised Christian of Jewish parentage, was already an MP, as the mandated oath of office presented no barrier to him. In 1884 Nathan Mayer Rothschild, 1st Baron Rothschild, became the first Jewish member of the British House of Lords; Disraeli was already a member.

Disraeli as a leader of the Conservative Party, with its ties to the landed aristocracy, used his Jewish ancestry to claim an aristocratic heritage of his own. His biographer Jonathan Parry argues:

Todd Endelman points out that &quot;The link between Jews and old clothes was so fixed in the popular imagination that Victorian political cartoonists regularly drew Benjamin Disraeli as an old clothes man in order to stress his Jewishness.&quot; He adds, &quot;Before the 1990s...few biographers of Disraeli or historians of Victorian politics acknowledged the prominence of the antisemitism that accompanied his climb up the greasy pole or its role in shaping his own singular sense of Jewishness.&quot;

According to Michael Ragussis: 

==Popular culture==
Historian Michael Diamond asserts that for British music hall patrons in the 1880s and 1890s, &quot;xenophobia and pride in empire&quot; were reflected in the halls&#x27; most popular political heroes: all were Conservatives and Disraeli stood out above all, even decades after his death, while Gladstone was used as a villain. Film historian Roy Armes has argued that historical films helped maintain the political status quo in Britain in the 1920s and 1930s by imposing an establishment viewpoint that emphasized the greatness of monarchy, empire, and tradition. The films created &quot;a facsimile world where existing values were invariably validated by events in the film and where all discord could be turned into harmony by an acceptance of the status quo&quot;.

Steven Fielding has argued that Disraeli was an especially popular film hero: &quot;historical dramas favoured Disraeli over Gladstone and, more substantively, promulgated an essentially deferential view of democratic leadership.&quot; Stage and screen actor George Arliss was known for his portrayals of Disraeli, winning the Academy Award for Best Actor for 1929&#x27;s &quot;Disraeli&quot;. Fielding says Arliss &quot;personified the kind of paternalistic, kindly, homely statesmanship that appealed to a significant proportion of the cinema audience ... Even workers attending Labour party meetings deferred to leaders with an elevated social background who showed they cared.&quot;

John Gielgud portrayed Disraeli in 1941, in Thorold Dickinson&#x27;s morale-boosting film &quot;The Prime Minister&quot;, which followed the politician from the age of 30 to that of 70.

Alec Guinness portrayed him in &quot;The Mudlark&quot; (1950).
Ian McShane starred in the four-part 1978 ATV miniseries &quot;&quot;, written by David Butler. Presented in the U.S. on PBS&#x27;s &quot;Masterpiece Theatre&quot; in 1980, it was nominated for the Emmy Award for Outstanding Limited Series.

Richard Pasco played Disraeli in the ITV series &quot;Number 10&quot; in 1983.

In the 1997 film &quot;Mrs Brown&quot;, Disraeli was played by Antony Sher.

==Works==
===Novels===
* &quot;Vivian Grey&quot; (1826, revised 1853)
* &quot;Popanilla&quot; (1828)
* &quot;The Young Duke&quot; (1831, revised 1853)
* &quot;Contarini Fleming&quot; (1832)
* &quot;Ixion in Heaven&quot; (1832-33)
* &quot;The Wondrous Tale of Alroy&quot; (1833) – heavily revised as &quot;Alroy: A Romance&quot; (1846 and 1871)
* &quot;The Rise of Iskander&quot; (1833)
* &quot;The Infernal Marriage&quot; (unfinished; 1834)
* &quot;A Year at Hartlebury, or The Election&quot; – with Sarah Disraeli (1834)
* &quot;Henrietta Temple&quot; (1837)
* &quot;Venetia&quot; (1837)

* &quot;Lothair&quot; (1870)
* &quot;Endymion&quot; (1880)
* &quot;Falconet&quot; (unfinished, 1881; posthumously published in 1905)

====Young England Trilogy====
# &quot;Coningsby, or the New Generation&quot; (1844)
# &quot;Sybil, or The Two Nations&quot; (1845)
# &quot;Tancred, or the New Crusade&quot; (1847)

=== Poetry ===
* &quot;The Revolutionary Epick&quot; (1834)

=== Drama ===
* &quot;The Tragedy of Count Alarcos&quot; (1839)

===Non-fiction===
* &quot;An Inquiry into the Plans, Progress, and Policy of the American Mining Companies&quot; (1825)
* &quot;Lawyers and Legislators: or, Notes, on the American Mining Companies&quot; (1825)
* &quot;The present state of Mexico&quot; (1825)
* &quot;England and France, or a Cure for the Ministerial Gallomania&quot; (1832)
* &quot;What Is He?&quot; (1833)
* &quot;The Vindication of the English Constitution&quot; (1835)
* &quot;The Letters of Runnymede&quot; (1836)
* &quot;Lord George Bentinck&quot; (1852)

==Arms==
==Notes and references==

Notes

References
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Text also available online at Oxford Dictionary of National Biography
* 
* 
* 
* Woodward, Llewellyn. (1962) &quot;The Age of Reform, 1815-1870&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1938; 2nd ed. 1962) online.
==Further reading==

* Braun, Thom. &quot;Disraeli the Novelist&quot; (Routledge, 2016).
* Bright, J. Franck. &quot;A History of England. Period 4: Growth of Democracy: Victoria 1837–1880&quot; (1893)online 608pp; highly detailed political narrative
* Cesarani, David. &quot;Disraeli: The Novel Politician&quot; (Yale UP, 2016).
* Clausson, Nils. &quot;Benjamin Disraeli, Sybil, or The Two.&quot; in &quot;Handbook of the English Novel, 1830–1900&quot; ed. by Martin Middeke and Monika Pietrzak-Franger (2020) pp 189–204. online
* Davis, Richard W. &quot;Disraeli, the Rothschilds, and anti-Semitism.&quot; &quot;Jewish History&quot; (1996): 9-19 online.
* 
* Kalmar, Ivan Davidson. &quot;Benjamin Disraeli, romantic orientalist.&quot; &quot;Comparative studies in society and history&quot; 47.2 (2005): 348–371. online
* 
* Malchow, Howard LeRoy. &quot;Agitators and Promoters in the Age of Gladstone and Disraeli: A Biographical Dictionary of the Leaders of British Pressure Groups founded between 1865 and 1886&quot; (2 vol 1983), includes thousands of activists.
* (translated by Hamish Miles)
* Miller, Henry. &quot;Disraeli, Gladstone and the personification of party, 1868–80.&quot; in Miller, &quot;Politics personified&quot; (Manchester University Press, 2016).
* Monypenny, William Flavelle and George Earle Buckle, &quot;The Life of Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of Beaconsfield&quot; (2 vol. London: John Murray, 1929); contains vol 1–4 and vol 5–6 of the original edition &quot;Life of Benjamin Disraeli&quot; volume 1 1804–1837, Volume 2 1837–1846, Volume 3 1846–1855, Volume 4 1855–1868, Volume 5 1868–1876, Volume 6 1876–1881. Vol 1 to 6 are available free from Google books: vol 1; vol 2; vol 3; vol 4; vol 5; and vol 6
* Napton, Dani. &quot;Historical Romance and the Mythology of Charles I in D&#x27;Israeli, Scott and Disraeli.&quot; &quot;English Studies&quot; 99.2 (2018): 148–165.
* Nicolay, Claire. &quot;The anxiety of &#x27;Mosaic&#x27; influence: Thackeray, Disraeli, and Anglo-Jewish assimilation in the 1840s.&quot; &quot;Nineteenth-Century Contexts&quot; 25.2 (2003): 119–145.
* looks at close links between his fiction and his politics.
* Parry, J. P. &quot;Disraeli, the East and religion: Tancred in context.&quot; &quot;English Historical Review&quot; 132.556 (2017): 570–604.
* Saab, Ann Pottinger. &quot;Disraeli, Judaism, and the Eastern Question.&quot; &quot;International History Review&quot; 10.4 (1988): 559–578.
* Schwarz, Daniel R. &quot;&quot; Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin&quot;: Jewish Perspectives in Disraeli&#x27;s Fiction.&quot; &quot;Jewish History&quot; (1996): 37-55. online
* Seton-Watson, R.W. &quot;Britain in Europe, 1789–1914&quot; (1938); comprehensive history online
* Shannon, Richard. &quot;The crisis of imperialism, 1865–1915&quot; (1976), pp. 101–141.
* Spevack, Marvin. &quot;In the Shadow of the Son: Isaac D&#x27;Israeli and Benjamin Disraeli.&quot; &quot;Jewish Culture and History&quot; 8.2 (2006): 73–92.

===Primary sources===
* &quot;Letters of Benjamin Disraeli&quot;, 10 vols., edited by Michael W. Pharand, et al. (1982 to 2014), ending in 1868. online
* Hicks, Geoff, et al. eds. &quot;Documents on Conservative Foreign Policy, 1852-1878&quot; (2013), 550 documents excerpt
* Partridge, Michael, and Richard Gaunt. &quot;Lives of Victorian Political Figures Part 1: Palmerston, Disraeli and Gladstone&quot; (4 vol. Pickering &amp; Chatto. 2006) reprints 32 original pamphlets on Disraeli.
* Temperley, Harold and L.M. Penson, eds. &quot;Foundations of British Foreign Policy: From Pitt (1792) to Salisbury (1902)&quot; (1938), primary sources online

===Historiography===
* Diniejko, Andrzej. &quot;Benjamin Disraeli and the Jewish Question in Victorian England&quot;, &quot;The Victorian Web&quot; (2020) online
* Parry, Jonathan P. &quot;Disraeli and England&quot;, &quot;Historical Journal&quot; (2000): 699-728 online.
* Quinault, Roland. &quot;Gladstone and Disraeli: A Reappraisal of their Relationship&quot;, &quot;History&quot; 91.304 (2006): 557–576.
* St. John, Ian. &quot;The Historiography of Gladstone and Disraeli&quot; (Anthem Press, 2016) 402 pp. excerpt
==External links==

* Disraeli as the inventor of modern conservatism at &quot;The Weekly Standard&quot;
* John Prescott interview with Andrew Neill.
* BBC Radio 4 series &quot;The Prime Ministers&quot;
* Bodleian Library Disraeli bicentenary exhibition, 2004
* What Disraeli Can Teach Us by Geoffrey Wheatcroft from &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;
* , the holdings in numerous British archives 

===Electronic editions===
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="0" end="43" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli, 1st Earl of Beaconsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="104" end="116" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="159" end="195" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869155" start="245" end="270" title="History of the Conservative Party (UK)" label="modern Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="416" end="429" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="437" end="460" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728959" start="470" end="493" title="one-nation conservatism" label="one-nation conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="586" end="600" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q702718" start="735" end="746" title="British Jews" label="born Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150120" start="770" end="780" title="Bloomsbury" label="Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="805" end="814" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="863" end="872" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="893" end="901" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="978" end="994" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="1028" end="1039" title="Robert Peel" label="Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="1088" end="1097" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q237829" start="1246" end="1256" title="Lord Derby" label="Lord Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="1345" end="1372" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636053" start="1377" end="1407" title="Leader of the House of Commons" label="Leader of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215622" start="1501" end="1534" title="United Kingdom general election" label="that year&amp;#x27;s general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918351" start="1612" end="1633" title="1874 United Kingdom general election" label="1874 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="1673" end="1687" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326207" start="1733" end="1753" title="Earl of Beaconsfield" label="Earl of Beaconsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q735165" start="1804" end="1820" title="Eastern question" label="Eastern question"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1843" end="1857" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q959814" start="2009" end="2027" title="Suez Canal Company" label="Suez Canal Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="2058" end="2096" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russian victories against the Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="2115" end="2133" title="Congress of Berlin" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q233507" start="2416" end="2427" title="Second Anglo-Afghan War" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q228911" start="2432" end="2444" title="Anglo-Zulu War" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="2526" end="2535" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842599" start="2617" end="2644" title="Midlothian campaign" label="a massive speaking campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074515" start="2701" end="2726" title="1880 United Kingdom general election" label="the 1880 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376697" start="2905" end="2913" title="Endymion (Disraeli novel)" label="Endymion"/>
<link wikidata="Q150120" start="3069" end="3079" title="Bloomsbury" label="Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q983351" start="3124" end="3144" title="Isaac D&amp;#x27;Israeli" label="Isaac D&amp;#x27;Israeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="3260" end="3276" title="Sephardic Jewish" label="Sephardic Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="3317" end="3333" title="Ashkenazi Jewish" label="Ashkenazi Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="3427" end="3434" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="3439" end="3447" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203493" start="3639" end="3652" title="Isaac Cardoso" label="Isaac Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580311" start="3680" end="3689" title="Goldsmid family" label="Goldsmids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887482" start="3695" end="3702" title="Mocatta" label="Mocatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q21430989" start="3712" end="3722" title="Montefiore (surname)" label="Montefiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422123" start="3919" end="3933" title="Sarah Bradford" label="Sarah Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="4375" end="4382" title="day pupil" label="day boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012674" start="4388" end="4399" title="dame school" label="dame school"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="4403" end="4412" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591549" start="4606" end="4638" title="St Piran&amp;#x27;s (school)" label="Rev John Potticary&amp;#x27;s school"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="4642" end="4652" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q851924" start="4692" end="4713" title="Bevis Marks Synagogue" label="Bevis Marks Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="4736" end="4743" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="4770" end="4778" title="baptised" label="baptised"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="4788" end="4805" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888455" start="4958" end="4966" title="Benjamin D&amp;#x27;Israeli (merchant)" label="Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481531" start="5249" end="5262" title="Sharon Turner" label="Sharon Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q814999" start="5511" end="5521" title="Conversion to Christianity" label="Conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="5591" end="5612" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q702718" start="5624" end="5630" title="British Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410214" start="5646" end="5660" title="Sampson Eardley, 1st Baron Eardley" label="Sampson Gideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190191" start="5689" end="5709" title="Jews Relief Act 1858" label="Jews Relief Act 1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="6052" end="6070" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="6089" end="6103" title="Public school (United Kingdom)" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360750" start="6545" end="6558" title="Eliezer Cogan" label="Eliezer Cogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321784" start="6562" end="6573" title="Higham Hill" label="Higham Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321784" start="6577" end="6588" title="Walthamstow" label="Walthamstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800911" start="6750" end="6758" title="Articled clerk" label="articled"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="6783" end="6792" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="6841" end="6855" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342148" start="7376" end="7388" title="Robert Blake, Baron Blake" label="Robert Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183335" start="7714" end="7734" title="Philip Carteret Webb" label="Philip Carteret Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="8399" end="8411" title="Rhine" label="Rhine Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="8495" end="8500" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="8741" end="8750" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q69482" start="8780" end="8798" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069627" start="8814" end="8822" title="barrister&amp;#x27;s chambers" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310130" start="9116" end="9127" title="John Murray (1778–1843)" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="9317" end="9331" title="stock exchange" label="stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q219731" start="9497" end="9511" title="George Canning" label="George Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065791" start="9731" end="9743" title="J. D. Powles" label="J. D. Powles"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="10046" end="10055" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760224" start="10139" end="10157" title="The Representative (newspaper)" label="The Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723567" start="10384" end="10404" title="John Gibson Lockhart" label="John Gibson Lockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405082" start="10630" end="10636" title="Stock market bubble" label="bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937713" start="11306" end="11317" title="Vivian Grey" label="Vivian Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545853" start="11622" end="11630" title="solecism" label="solecism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052882" start="13808" end="13825" title="Contarini Fleming" label="Contarini Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053865" start="14236" end="14262" title="The Wondrous Tale of Alroy" label="The Wondrous Tale of Alroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516783" start="14316" end="14328" title="History of European Jews in the Middle Ages" label="medieval Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="14614" end="14625" title="Reform Bill of 1832" label="Reform Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="14653" end="14657" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q320849" start="14677" end="14695" title="John Wilson Croker" label="John Wilson Croker"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="14815" end="14819" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687668" start="14924" end="14931" title="Radicals (UK)" label="Radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q750841" start="15253" end="15265" title="Wycombe (UK Parliament constituency)" label="High Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687668" start="15273" end="15280" title="Radicals (UK)" label="Radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="15578" end="15597" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="16328" end="16341" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="16417" end="16432" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q333136" start="16434" end="16448" title="Lord Lyndhurst" label="Lord Lyndhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660519" start="16478" end="16495" title="Sir Francis William Sykes, 3rd Baronet" label="Sir Francis Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="16908" end="16919" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119972" start="16923" end="16930" title="Taunton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Taunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q314917" start="16965" end="16986" title="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q320768" start="17821" end="17837" title="Henry Labouchere, 1st Baron Taunton" label="Henry Labouchere"/>
<link wikidata="Q931825" start="18860" end="18872" title="Carlton Club" label="Carlton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261565" start="18941" end="18957" title="Frances Vane, Marchioness of Londonderry" label="Lady Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="18972" end="18982" title="William IV" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="18999" end="19013" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037966" start="19172" end="19188" title="1837 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="19283" end="19299" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735490" start="19358" end="19367" title="Maidstone (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040126" start="19383" end="19396" title="Wyndham Lewis (politician)" label="Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919716" start="19784" end="19791" title="Venetia (Disraeli novel)" label="Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="19836" end="19843" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="19848" end="19853" title="Byron" label="Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735422" start="19918" end="19931" title="maiden speech" label="maiden speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="20291" end="20306" title="Sir Robert Peel" label="Sir Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="20375" end="20383" title="Chartism" label="Chartist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778938" start="20450" end="20465" title="Mary Anne Lewis" label="Mary Anne Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q126884555" start="20983" end="20993" title="Shrewsbury (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073185" start="21051" end="21072" title="1841 United Kingdom general election" label="1841 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="21343" end="21355" title="back benches" label="back benches"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931961" start="21671" end="21689" title="landed aristocracy" label="landed aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="21867" end="21882" title="Lord Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058095" start="21979" end="21992" title="Young England" label="Young England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="22226" end="22241" title="Reform Act 1867" label="Reform Act 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q176524" start="22380" end="22391" title="John Bright" label="John Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797469" start="22820" end="22834" title="Maynooth Grant" label="Maynooth Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="22888" end="22919" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="22921" end="22938" title="William Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="23304" end="23316" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q332933" start="23568" end="23588" title="Lord George Bentinck" label="Lord George Bentinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633397" start="23641" end="23649" title="Peelites" label="Peelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q237829" start="23874" end="23886" title="Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby" label="Lord Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q335300" start="24324" end="24338" title="George Campbell, 8th Duke of Argyll" label="Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q571415" start="24376" end="24385" title="Subaltern (military)" label="subaltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="25188" end="25205" title="Lord John Russell" label="Lord John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073198" start="25231" end="25252" title="1847 United Kingdom general election" label="1847 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983254" start="25292" end="25307" title="Buckinghamshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q333605" start="25712" end="25732" title="Lionel de Rothschild" label="Lionel de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123767" start="25759" end="25773" title="City of London (UK Parliament constituency)" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="25780" end="25794" title="Judaism" label="practising Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666446" start="26719" end="26730" title="Charles Manners, 6th Duke of Rutland" label="Lord Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933291" start="26969" end="26984" title="Hughenden Manor" label="Hughenden Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="26989" end="27004" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679336" start="27414" end="27433" title="Lord Henry Bentinck" label="Lord Henry Bentinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q334530" start="27438" end="27453" title="William Cavendish-Scott-Bentinck, 5th Duke of Portland" label="Lord Titchfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q332824" start="27718" end="27738" title="John Charles Herries" label="John Charles Herries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453774" start="28083" end="28093" title="Whig government, 1846–1852" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277265" start="28689" end="28702" title="Earl of Derby" label="Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="28843" end="28858" title="Lord Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="29341" end="29368" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="29725" end="29743" title="Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30207" end="30216" title="Legislative session#Procedure in Commonwealth realms" label="prorogued"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943728" start="30356" end="30368" title="1852 United Kingdom general election" label="the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q337595" start="31327" end="31341" title="Sidney Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Lea" label="Sidney Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q24631" start="32297" end="32313" title="George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen" label="Earl of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="33131" end="33151" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566685" start="33221" end="33231" title="Chancellor of Oxford University" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="33250" end="33261" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="33543" end="33563" title="motion of confidence" label="motion of confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="33957" end="33972" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="34067" end="34078" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="a rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447671" start="34164" end="34180" title="select committee (parliamentary system)" label="select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="34296" end="34322" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104138" start="34626" end="34639" title="Orsini affair" label="Orsini affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="34704" end="34716" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163458" start="34851" end="34871" title="conspiracy to murder" label="conspiracy to murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="34900" end="34915" title="bomb" label="infernal device"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="35382" end="35401" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359529" start="35725" end="35753" title="Government of India Act 1858" label="Government of India Act 1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368994" start="35944" end="35978" title="Emancipation of the Jews in the United Kingdom" label="to allow Jews to sit in Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345445" start="37286" end="37310" title="1859 United Kingdom general election" label="ensuing general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="37480" end="37503" title="speech from the throne" label="Address from the Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="37922" end="37939" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Robert Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479905" start="38154" end="38173" title="James Gascoyne-Cecil, 2nd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Cecil&amp;#x27;s father"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="38582" end="38600" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114878" start="38651" end="38671" title="United Kingdom and the American Civil War" label="like most Englishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="38892" end="38909" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="39113" end="39133" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q545482" start="39159" end="39186" title="Schleswig-Holstein Question" label="Schleswig-Holstein Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074533" start="39537" end="39563" title="1865 United Kingdom general election" label="July 1865 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q378908" start="40114" end="40132" title="Adullamites" label="dissident Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="41159" end="41173" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Cranborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287243" start="41819" end="41834" title="Ralph Bernal Osborne" label="Bernal Ostborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="41850" end="41865" title="Reform Act 1867" label="Reform Act 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q573455" start="42048" end="42062" title="rotten borough" label="rotten borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="42315" end="42319" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q565155" start="43165" end="43178" title="Osborne House" label="Osborne House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="43186" end="43199" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q116728" start="43284" end="43316" title="Victoria, Princess Royal" label="Prussian Crown Princess Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q332731" start="43998" end="44013" title="Frederic Thesiger, 1st Baron Chelmsford" label="Lord Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="44017" end="44032" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q333804" start="44038" end="44049" title="Lord Cairns" label="Lord Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q334272" start="44065" end="44081" title="George Ward Hunt" label="George Ward Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="44369" end="44386" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="44500" end="44518" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q464946" start="44666" end="44684" title="Archbishop Manning" label="Archbishop Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="44859" end="44867" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074525" start="45241" end="45266" title="1868 United Kingdom general election" label="December general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138987" start="45446" end="45467" title="Corrupt Practices Act 1868" label="Corrupt Practices Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="45537" end="45552" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q743652" start="45916" end="45926" title="1868 Expedition to Abyssinia" label="expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q262589" start="45935" end="45946" title="Tewodros II" label="Tewodros II"/>
<link wikidata="Q336474" start="45965" end="45982" title="Robert Napier, 1st Baron Napier of Magdala" label="Sir Robert Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684687" start="46240" end="46247" title="Lothair (novel)" label="Lothair"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="46681" end="46700" title="Edward VII" label="the Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765264" start="46805" end="46821" title="John Eldon Gorst" label="John Eldon Gorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="47342" end="47359" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778938" start="47405" end="47414" title="Mary Anne Disraeli" label="Mary Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345293" start="48520" end="48543" title="Ministerial by-election" label="had to seek re-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918351" start="48580" end="48598" title="1874 United Kingdom general election" label="a general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q476840" start="49025" end="49041" title="Home Rule League" label="Home Rule League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="49239" end="49245" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q639769" start="49399" end="49427" title="Secretary of State for India" label="Secretary of State for India"/>
<link wikidata="Q332650" start="49547" end="49569" title="Sir Stafford Northcote" label="Sir Stafford Northcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326207" start="49650" end="49670" title="Earl of Beaconsfield" label="Earl of Beaconsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="49818" end="49826" title="Balmoral Castle" label="Balmoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="50511" end="50523" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q812906" start="50579" end="50591" title="Beaconsfield" label="Beaconsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672324" start="50740" end="50761" title="Selina Bridgeman" label="Selina, Lady Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613675" start="51021" end="51043" title="Richard Assheton Cross" label="Richard Assheton Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="51049" end="51063" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801206" start="51132" end="51197" title="Artisans&amp;#x27; and Labourers&amp;#x27; Dwellings Improvement Act 1875" label="Artisans&amp;#x27; and Labourers&amp;#x27; Dwellings Improvement Act 1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965361" start="51199" end="51216" title="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict." label="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q7257394" start="51342" end="51364" title="Public Health Act 1875" label="Public Health Act 1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965361" start="51366" end="51383" title="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict." label="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51424" end="51455" title="Sale of Food and Drugs Act 1875" label="Sale of Food and Drugs Act 1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965361" start="51457" end="51474" title="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict." label="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51491" end="51520" title="Elementary Education Act 1876" label="Elementary Education Act 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906476" start="51522" end="51539" title="39 &amp;amp; 40 Vict." label="39 &amp;amp; 40 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q1390816" start="51592" end="51603" title="Factory Act" label="Factory Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163417" start="51634" end="51681" title="Conspiracy, and Protection of Property Act 1875" label="Conspiracy, and Protection of Property Act 1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965361" start="51683" end="51700" title="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict." label="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q5374323" start="51751" end="51781" title="Employers and Workmen Act 1875" label="Employers and Workmen Act 1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965361" start="51783" end="51800" title="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict." label="38 &amp;amp; 39 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q6540572" start="52823" end="52837" title="Liberal-Labour (UK)" label="Liberal-Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719491" start="52841" end="52860" title="Alexander Macdonald (Lib–Lab politician)" label="Alexander Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="53072" end="53088" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355298" start="53102" end="53125" title="competitive examination" label="competitive examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974879" start="53131" end="53148" title="Civil Service (United Kingdom)" label="the Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660184" start="53934" end="53947" title="Sydney Turner" label="Sydney Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246655" start="53995" end="54008" title="Dean of Ripon" label="Dean of Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323511" start="54022" end="54032" title="Low church" label="Low church"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="54211" end="54217" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555387" start="54228" end="54240" title="Broad church" label="Broad church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074525" start="54314" end="54327" title="1868 United Kingdom general election" label="1868 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="54350" end="54374" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q336875" start="54457" end="54471" title="Archibald Tait" label="Archibald Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="54477" end="54493" title="Bishop of London" label="Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q984399" start="54572" end="54590" title="Samuel Wilberforce" label="Samuel Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271558" start="54603" end="54623" title="Bishop of Winchester" label="Bishop of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026977" start="54677" end="54689" title="John Jackson (bishop)" label="John Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837214" start="54695" end="54712" title="Bishop of Lincoln" label="Bishop of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="55568" end="55578" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159378" start="55971" end="55989" title="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha" label="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="55995" end="56011" title="Khedive of Egypt" label="Khedive of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q209169" start="56105" end="56125" title="Ferdinand de Lesseps" label="Ferdinand de Lesseps"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="56336" end="56350" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q735165" start="56404" end="56420" title="Eastern Question" label="Eastern Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q334120" start="56973" end="56990" title="Nathan Rothschild, 1st Baron Rothschild" label="Nathan Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628706" start="57095" end="57112" title="Pall Mall Gazette" label="Pall Mall Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087117" start="57120" end="57139" title="Frederick Greenwood" label="Frederick Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q959814" start="57239" end="57257" title="Suez Canal Company" label="Suez Canal Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="57487" end="57493" title="French franc" label="francs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="57527" end="57542" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147302" start="58014" end="58029" title="Sir Ian Malcolm" label="Sir Ian Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q271878" start="58336" end="58347" title="Lord Curzon" label="Lord Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271032" start="58764" end="58778" title="Matthew Arnold" label="Matthew Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679350" start="58913" end="58924" title="Adam Kirsch" label="Adam Kirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q312567" start="59346" end="59360" title="Lord Melbourne" label="Lord Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417253" start="59423" end="59433" title="kiss hands" label="kiss hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="59763" end="59775" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q58600" start="59907" end="59918" title="Frederick III, German Emperor" label="her husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352166" start="60048" end="60064" title="Empress of India" label="Empress of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550193" start="60269" end="60284" title="State Opening of Parliament" label="open Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="60516" end="60535" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Speech" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q334355" start="60833" end="60844" title="Robert Lowe" label="Robert Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="61888" end="61894" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="61899" end="61910" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258726" start="61950" end="61958" title="Herzegovina Uprising (1875–77)" label="revolted"/>
<link wikidata="Q151500" start="62064" end="62073" title="Abdülaziz" label="Abdülaziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313557" start="62124" end="62139" title="Julius Andrássy" label="Julius Andrássy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622059" start="62254" end="62266" title="April Uprising" label="and Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785811" start="62762" end="62784" title="Batak massacre" label="atrocities in Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q699400" start="63712" end="63737" title="Constantinople Conference" label="Constantinople Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q729125" start="63938" end="63950" title="Ottoman Army" label="Ottoman Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758403" start="64012" end="64026" title="Andrew Roberts (historian)" label="Andrew Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="64830" end="64847" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165420" start="64989" end="64995" title="Pleven" label="Plevna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689591" start="65357" end="65367" title="jingoistic" label="jingoistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108440906" start="65575" end="65597" title="Second Melbourne ministry" label="the Melbourne ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="65783" end="65787" title="British Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="65792" end="65796" title="Royal Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194113" start="66086" end="66107" title="Treaty of San Stefano" label="Treaty of San Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023149" start="66109" end="66136" title="Liberation of Bulgaria" label="conceding a Bulgarian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="66256" end="66268" title="client state" label="client state"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="67146" end="67156" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="67171" end="67176" title="Batum" label="Batum"/>
<link wikidata="Q127063" start="67181" end="67185" title="Kars" label="Kars"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="67211" end="67220" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="67394" end="67400" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="67502" end="67520" title="Congress of Berlin" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38346" start="68068" end="68084" title="Lord Odo Russell" label="Lord Odo Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555069" start="68563" end="68580" title="Cyprus Convention" label="Cyprus Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="68787" end="68798" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="69064" end="69080" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q698208" start="69115" end="69131" title="Reich Chancellery" label="Radziwill Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="69223" end="69240" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="69484" end="69494" title="Order of the Garter" label="the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q335493" start="70796" end="70807" title="Robert Bulwer-Lytton, 1st Earl of Lytton" label="Lord Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527395" start="70975" end="70989" title="Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, 1st Earl of Cranbrook" label="Lord Cranbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q233507" start="71061" end="71084" title="Second Anglo-Afghan War" label="Second Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q335008" start="71092" end="71104" title="Frederick Roberts, 1st Earl Roberts" label="Lord Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="71200" end="71205" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="71291" end="71302" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301901" start="71307" end="71312" title="Colony of Natal" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010624" start="71322" end="71336" title="Boer republics" label="Boer republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="71342" end="71351" title="South African Republic" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="71389" end="71406" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q950220" start="71437" end="71453" title="Sir Bartle Frere" label="Sir Bartle Frere"/>
<link wikidata="Q129962" start="71582" end="71586" title="Zulu people" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q380403" start="71603" end="71611" title="Cetewayo" label="Cetewayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531549" start="72014" end="72018" title="impi" label="impi"/>
<link wikidata="Q747589" start="72126" end="72146" title="Battle of Isandlwana" label="Battle of Isandlwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q336077" start="72456" end="72475" title="Sir Garnet Wolseley" label="Sir Garnet Wolseley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166177" start="72568" end="72584" title="Battle of Ulundi" label="Battle of Ulundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185450" start="72622" end="72641" title="Pierre Louis Napoleon Cavagnari" label="Sir Louis Cavagnari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11062919" start="72724" end="72739" title="Military history of Afghanistan" label="Afghan soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842577" start="72926" end="72940" title="Edinburghshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Edinburghshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702418" start="73066" end="73083" title="Walter Montagu Douglas Scott, 5th Duke of Buccleuch" label="Duke of Buccleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q244620" start="73100" end="73116" title="Archibald Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery" label="Earl of Rosebery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745452" start="73319" end="73364" title="American election campaigns in the 19th century" label="aspects of American electioneering techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842599" start="73488" end="73507" title="Midlothian campaign" label="Midlothian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74473" end="74497" title="Lord Mayor of London#Role" label="Lord Mayor&amp;#x27;s Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q81279" start="74505" end="74514" title="Guildhall, London" label="Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243284" start="74978" end="74997" title="Resignation Honours" label="Resignation Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571116" start="75162" end="75171" title="Southwark (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527395" start="75668" end="75682" title="Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, 1st Earl of Cranbrook" label="Lord Cranbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904063" start="76337" end="76350" title="Montagu Corry" label="Montagu Corry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376697" start="76479" end="76487" title="Endymion (Disraeli novel)" label="Endymion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536757" start="77492" end="77507" title="George Barrington, 7th Viscount Barrington" label="Lord Barrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="77511" end="77527" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763560" start="78046" end="78055" title="Anglican sacraments" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196144" start="78416" end="78429" title="Curzon Street" label="Curzon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110171" start="78624" end="78636" title="Primrose Day" label="Primrose Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="78669" end="78682" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527395" start="78983" end="79026" title="Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, 1st Earl of Cranbrook" label="Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, Viscount Cranbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="79476" end="79488" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="79542" end="79559" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q159537" start="79574" end="79583" title="Primula vulgaris" label="primroses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594862" start="79756" end="79791" title="St Michael and All Angels Church, Hughenden" label="Church of St Michael and All Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426712" start="79957" end="79974" title="literary executor" label="literary executor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528107" start="80060" end="80082" title="Sarah Brydges Willyams" label="Sarah Brydges Willyams"/>
<link wikidata="Q950800" start="80122" end="80131" title="St Mawgan" label="St Mawgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166864" start="80420" end="80449" title="Burials and memorials in Westminster Abbey" label="memorial in Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81019" end="81036" title="Victorian Britain#Late" label="Victorian Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276851" start="81171" end="81183" title="Shane Leslie" label="Shane Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="81287" end="81293" title="vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="81305" end="81314" title="plutocrat" label="plutocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="81866" end="81874" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937713" start="82092" end="82103" title="Vivian Grey" label="Vivian Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q45028402" start="82127" end="82141" title="The Young Duke" label="The Young Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="82191" end="82208" title="Aristocracy (class)" label="aristocratic life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="82399" end="82406" title="Lord Byron" label="Byronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526635" start="83421" end="83440" title="love at first sight" label="love at first sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="83667" end="83691" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Whig Reform Bill of 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="83840" end="83849" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="84525" end="84542" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257675" start="84985" end="85019" title="Public Worship Regulation Act 1874" label="Public Worship Regulation Act 1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684687" start="85096" end="85103" title="Lothair (novel)" label="Lothair"/>
<link wikidata="Q268211" start="85154" end="85177" title="Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress" label="Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="85407" end="85426" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="85755" end="85764" title="Thackeray" label="Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="85850" end="85855" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242948" start="85936" end="85944" title="priggish" label="priggish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728959" start="86520" end="86530" title="One nation conservatism" label="One Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q314773" start="86953" end="86976" title="Lord Randolph Churchill" label="Lord Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q337375" start="87559" end="87571" title="Douglas Hurd" label="Douglas Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="87792" end="87806" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184012" start="88952" end="88965" title="Philip Magnus-Allcroft" label="Philip Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30122611" start="89958" end="89968" title="Paul Smith (historian)" label="Paul Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600032" start="90286" end="90303" title="Stanley Weintraub" label="Stanley Weintraub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728959" start="90687" end="90701" title="Tory democracy" label="Tory democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021436" start="90946" end="90964" title="Llewellyn Woodward" label="Llewellyn Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889725" start="91201" end="91222" title="English Jews" label="Jews lived in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="91360" end="91380" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239433" start="91386" end="91400" title="David Salomons" label="David Salomons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368994" start="91439" end="91468" title="Jewish emancipation in the United Kingdom" label="1858 emancipation of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q333605" start="91487" end="91507" title="Lionel de Rothschild" label="Lionel de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="91632" end="91650" title="Jewish Christian" label="baptised Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q334120" start="91759" end="91804" title="Nathan Mayer Rothschild, 1st Baron Rothschild" label="Nathan Mayer Rothschild, 1st Baron Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="91852" end="91866" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869155" start="91928" end="91946" title="History of the Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734201" start="92075" end="92089" title="Jonathan Parry" label="Jonathan Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812353" start="92099" end="92112" title="Todd Endelman" label="Todd Endelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="92710" end="92720" title="music hall" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q182229" start="93690" end="93703" title="George Arliss" label="George Arliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="93758" end="93786" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q774800" start="93809" end="93817" title="Disraeli (1929 film)" label="Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q204685" start="94119" end="94131" title="John Gielgud" label="John Gielgud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429028" start="94163" end="94180" title="Thorold Dickinson" label="Thorold Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522319" start="94215" end="94233" title="The Prime Minister (film)" label="The Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q103894" start="94306" end="94319" title="Alec Guinness" label="Alec Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q939909" start="94343" end="94354" title="The Mudlark" label="The Mudlark"/>
<link wikidata="Q234141" start="94369" end="94380" title="Ian McShane" label="Ian McShane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="94411" end="94414" title="Associated Television" label="ATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173876" start="94451" end="94463" title="David Butler (screenwriter)" label="David Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297878" start="94507" end="94526" title="Masterpiece Theatre" label="Masterpiece Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714679" start="94582" end="94608" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Limited or Anthology Series" label="Outstanding Limited Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328292" start="94611" end="94624" title="Richard Pasco" label="Richard Pasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="94648" end="94651" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069478" start="94665" end="94674" title="Number 10 (TV series)" label="Number 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516164" start="94714" end="94723" title="Mrs Brown" label="Mrs Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q432362" start="94754" end="94765" title="Antony Sher" label="Antony Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937713" start="94799" end="94810" title="Vivian Grey" label="Vivian Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800919" start="94846" end="94855" title="Popanilla" label="Popanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q45028402" start="94877" end="94891" title="The Young Duke" label="The Young Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052882" start="94927" end="94944" title="Contarini Fleming" label="Contarini Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063568" start="94966" end="94981" title="Ixion in Heaven" label="Ixion in Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053865" start="95006" end="95032" title="The Wondrous Tale of Alroy" label="The Wondrous Tale of Alroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10695771" start="95120" end="95140" title="The Rise of Iskander" label="The Rise of Iskander"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635312" start="95162" end="95183" title="The Infernal Marriage" label="The Infernal Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295247" start="95298" end="95314" title="Henrietta Temple" label="Henrietta Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919716" start="95336" end="95343" title="Venetia (Disraeli novel)" label="Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684687" start="95366" end="95373" title="Lothair (novel)" label="Lothair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376697" start="95395" end="95403" title="Endymion (Disraeli novel)" label="Endymion"/>
<link wikidata="Q56731722" start="95425" end="95433" title="Falconet (novel)" label="Falconet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058095" start="95496" end="95509" title="Young England" label="Young England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161083" start="95530" end="95539" title="Coningsby (novel)" label="Coningsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506752" start="95584" end="95589" title="Sybil (novel)" label="Sybil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682378" start="95631" end="95638" title="Tancred (novel)" label="Tancred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790889" start="100850" end="100869" title="The Weekly Standard" label="The Weekly Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534964" start="101063" end="101082" title="Geoffrey Wheatcroft" label="Geoffrey Wheatcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="101094" end="101122" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3876" wikidata="Q185547" url="?curid=3876" title="Binomial distribution">
<text>&lt;/math&gt;
 | kurtosis = formula_1
 | entropy = formula_2 in shannons. For nats, use the natural log in the log.
 | mgf = formula_3
 | char = formula_4
 | pgf = formula_5
 | fisher = formula_6(for fixed formula_7)


In probability theory and statistics, the binomial distribution with parameters and is the discrete probability distribution of the number of successes in a sequence of independent experiments, each asking a yes–no question, and each with its own Boolean-valued outcome: &quot;success&quot; (with probability ) or &quot;failure&quot; (with probability ). A single success/failure experiment is also called a Bernoulli trial or Bernoulli experiment, and a sequence of outcomes is called a Bernoulli process; for a single trial, i.e., , the binomial distribution is a Bernoulli distribution. The binomial distribution is the basis for the binomial test of statistical significance.

The binomial distribution is frequently used to model the number of successes in a sample of size drawn with replacement from a population of size . If the sampling is carried out without replacement, the draws are not independent and so the resulting distribution is a hypergeometric distribution, not a binomial one. However, for much larger than , the binomial distribution remains a good approximation, and is widely used.

== Definitions ==

=== Probability mass function ===

If the random variable follows the binomial distribution with parameters and , we write . The probability of getting exactly successes in independent Bernoulli trials (with the same rate ) is given by the probability mass function:
: formula_8
for , where
: formula_9
is the binomial coefficient. The formula can be understood as follows: is the probability of obtaining the sequence of independent Bernoulli trials in which trials are &quot;successes&quot; and the remaining trials result in &quot;failure&quot;. Since the trials are independent with probabilities remaining constant between them, any sequence of trials with successes (and failures) has the same probability of being achieved (regardless of positions of successes within the sequence). There are formula_10 such sequences, since the binomial coefficient formula_10 counts the number of ways to choose the positions of the successes among the trials. The binomial distribution is concerned with the probability of obtaining &quot;any&quot; of these sequences, meaning the probability of obtaining one of them () must be added formula_10 times, hence formula_13.

In creating reference tables for binomial distribution probability, usually, the table is filled in up to values. This is because for , the probability can be calculated by its complement as
: formula_14

Looking at the expression as a function of , there is a value that maximizes it. This value can be found by calculating
: formula_15
and comparing it to 1. There is always an integer that satisfies
: formula_16

 is monotone increasing for and monotone decreasing for , with the exception of the case where is an integer. In this case, there are two values for which is maximal: and . is the &quot;most probable&quot; outcome (that is, the most likely, although this can still be unlikely overall) of the Bernoulli trials and is called the mode.

Equivalently, . Taking the floor function, we obtain .

=== Example ===

Suppose a biased coin comes up heads with probability 0.3 when tossed. The probability of seeing exactly 4 heads in 6 tosses is
: formula_17

=== Cumulative distribution function ===

The cumulative distribution function can be expressed as:
: formula_18
where formula_19 is the &quot;floor&quot; under , i.e. the greatest integer less than or equal to .

It can also be represented in terms of the regularized incomplete beta function, as follows:
: formula_20
which is equivalent to the cumulative distribution functions of the beta distribution and of the -distribution:
: formula_21
: formula_22

Some closed-form bounds for the cumulative distribution function are given below.

== Properties ==
=== Expected value and variance ===

If , that is, is a binomially distributed random variable, being the total number of experiments and &quot;p&quot; the probability of each experiment yielding a successful result, then the expected value of is:
: formula_23

This follows from the linearity of the expected value along with the fact that is the sum of identical Bernoulli random variables, each with expected value . In other words, if formula_24 are identical (and independent) Bernoulli random variables with parameter , then and
: formula_25

The variance is:
: formula_26

This similarly follows from the fact that the variance of a sum of independent random variables is the sum of the variances.

=== Higher moments ===

The first 6 central moments, defined as formula_27, are given by 
: formula_28

The non-central moments satisfy
: formula_29
and in general

: formula_30
where formula_31 is the formula_32th falling power of formula_7.
A simple bound
 follows by bounding the Binomial moments via the higher Poisson moments: 
: formula_34
This shows that if formula_35, then formula_36 is at most a constant factor away from formula_37

=== Mode ===

Usually the mode of a binomial distribution is equal to formula_38, where formula_39 is the floor function. However, when is an integer and is neither 0 nor 1, then the distribution has two modes: and . When is equal to 0 or 1, the mode will be 0 and correspondingly. These cases can be summarized as follows:
: formula_40

Proof: Let
: formula_41

For formula_42 only formula_43 has a nonzero value with formula_44. For formula_45 we find formula_46 and formula_47 for formula_48. This proves that the mode is 0 for formula_42 and formula_7 for formula_45.

Let formula_52. We find
:formula_53.

From this follows
: formula_54

So when formula_55 is an integer, then formula_55 and formula_57 is a mode. In the case that formula_58, then only formula_59 is a mode.

=== Median ===
In general, there is no single formula to find the median for a binomial distribution, and it may even be non-unique. However, several special results have been established:
* If is an integer, then the mean, median, and mode coincide and equal .
* Any median must lie within the interval formula_60.
* A median cannot lie too far away from the mean:formula_61
which implies the simpler but looser bound
: formula_62

For and for even , it is possible to make the denominator constant:
: formula_63

== Statistical inference ==
=== Estimation of parameters ===
When is known, the parameter can be estimated using the proportion of successes:
: formula_64
This estimator is found using maximum likelihood estimator and also the method of moments. This estimator is unbiased and uniformly with minimum variance, proven using Lehmann–Scheffé theorem, since it is based on a minimal sufficient and complete statistic (i.e.: ). It is also consistent both in probability and in MSE. This statistic is asymptotically normal thanks to the central limit theorem, because it is the same as taking the mean over Bernoulli samples. It has a variance of formula_65, a property which is used in various ways, such as in Wald&#x27;s confidence intervals.

A closed form Bayes estimator for also exists when using the Beta distribution as a conjugate prior distribution. When using a general formula_66 as a prior, the posterior mean estimator is:
: formula_67
The Bayes estimator is asymptotically efficient and as the sample size approaches infinity (), it approaches the MLE solution. The Bayes estimator is biased (how much depends on the priors), admissible and consistent in probability. Using the Bayesian estimator with the Beta distribution can be used with Thompson sampling.

For the special case of using the standard uniform distribution as a non-informative prior, formula_68, the posterior mean estimator becomes:
:formula_69
(A posterior mode should just lead to the standard estimator.) This method is called the rule of succession, which was introduced in the 18th century by Pierre-Simon Laplace.

When relying on Jeffreys prior, the prior is formula_70, which leads to the estimator:
: formula_71

When estimating with very rare events and a small (e.g.: if ), then using the standard estimator leads to formula_72 which sometimes is unrealistic and undesirable. In such cases there are various alternative estimators. One way is to use the Bayes estimator formula_73, leading to:
: formula_74
Another method is to use the upper bound of the confidence interval obtained using the rule of three:
: formula_75

=== Confidence intervals for the parameter p ===

Even for quite large values of &quot;n&quot;, the actual distribution of the mean is significantly nonnormal. Because of this problem several methods to estimate confidence intervals have been proposed.

In the equations for confidence intervals below, the variables have the following meaning:
* &quot;n&quot;1 is the number of successes out of &quot;n&quot;, the total number of trials
* formula_76 is the proportion of successes
* formula_77 is the formula_78 quantile of a standard normal distribution (i.e., probit) corresponding to the target error rate formula_79. For example, for a 95% confidence level the error formula_79 = 0.05, so formula_78 = 0.975 and formula_77 = 1.96.

==== Wald method ====

: formula_83

A continuity correction of may be added.

==== Agresti–Coull method ====
: formula_84

Here the estimate of is modified to
: formula_85

This method works well for and . See here for formula_86. For use the Wilson (score) method below.

==== Arcsine method ====
: formula_87

==== Wilson (score) method ====
The notation in the formula below differs from the previous formulas in two respects:
* Firstly, has a slightly different interpretation in the formula below: it has its ordinary meaning of &#x27;the th quantile of the standard normal distribution&#x27;, rather than being a shorthand for &#x27;the th quantile&#x27;.
* Secondly, this formula does not use a plus-minus to define the two bounds. Instead, one may use formula_88 to get the lower bound, or use formula_89 to get the upper bound. For example: for a 95% confidence level the error formula_79 = 0.05, so one gets the lower bound by using formula_91, and one gets the upper bound by using formula_92.
: formula_93

==== Comparison ====
The so-called &quot;exact&quot; (Clopper–Pearson) method is the most conservative. (&quot;Exact&quot; does not mean perfectly accurate; rather, it indicates that the estimates will not be less conservative than the true value.)

The Wald method, although commonly recommended in textbooks, is the most biased.

== Related distributions ==

=== Sums of binomials ===
If and are independent binomial variables with the same probability , then is again a binomial variable; its distribution is :
: formula_94

A Binomial distributed random variable can be considered as the sum of Bernoulli distributed random variables. So the sum of two Binomial distributed random variables and is equivalent to the sum of Bernoulli distributed random variables, which means . This can also be proven directly using the addition rule.

However, if and do not have the same probability , then the variance of the sum will be smaller than the variance of a binomial variable distributed as .

=== Poisson binomial distribution ===
The binomial distribution is a special case of the Poisson binomial distribution, which is the distribution of a sum of independent non-identical Bernoulli trials .

=== Ratio of two binomial distributions ===

This result was first derived by Katz and coauthors in 1978.

Let and be independent. Let .

Then log(&quot;T&quot;) is approximately normally distributed with mean log(&quot;p&quot;1/&quot;p&quot;2) and variance .

=== Conditional binomials ===
If &quot;X&quot; ~ B(&quot;n&quot;, &quot;p&quot;) and &quot;Y&quot; | &quot;X&quot; ~ B(&quot;X&quot;, &quot;q&quot;) (the conditional distribution of &quot;Y&quot;, given &quot;X&quot;), then &quot;Y&quot; is a simple binomial random variable with distribution &quot;Y&quot; ~ B(&quot;n&quot;, &quot;pq&quot;).

For example, imagine throwing &quot;n&quot; balls to a basket &quot;UX&quot; and taking the balls that hit and throwing them to another basket &quot;UY&quot;. If &quot;p&quot; is the probability to hit &quot;UX&quot; then &quot;X&quot; ~ B(&quot;n&quot;, &quot;p&quot;) is the number of balls that hit &quot;UX&quot;. If &quot;q&quot; is the probability to hit &quot;UY&quot; then the number of balls that hit &quot;UY&quot; is &quot;Y&quot; ~ B(&quot;X&quot;, &quot;q&quot;) and therefore &quot;Y&quot; ~ B(&quot;n&quot;, &quot;pq&quot;).
Since formula_95 and formula_96, by the law of total probability,
: formula_97
Since formula_98 the equation above can be expressed as
: formula_99
Factoring formula_100 and pulling all the terms that don&#x27;t depend on formula_101 out of the sum now yields
: formula_102
After substituting formula_103 in the expression above, we get
: formula_104
Notice that the sum (in the parentheses) above equals formula_105 by the binomial theorem. Substituting this in finally yields
: formula_106
and thus formula_107 as desired.
=== Bernoulli distribution ===
The Bernoulli distribution is a special case of the binomial distribution, where . Symbolically, has the same meaning as . Conversely, any binomial distribution, , is the distribution of the sum of independent Bernoulli trials, , each with the same probability .

=== Normal approximation ===


If is large enough, then the skew of the distribution is not too great. In this case a reasonable approximation to is given by the normal distribution
: formula_108
and this basic approximation can be improved in a simple way by using a suitable continuity correction.
The basic approximation generally improves as increases (at least 20) and is better when is not near to 0 or 1. Various rules of thumb may be used to decide whether is large enough, and is far enough from the extremes of zero or one:
* One rule is that for the normal approximation is adequate if the absolute value of the skewness is strictly less than 0.3; that is, if
*: formula_109
This can be made precise using the Berry–Esseen theorem.
* A stronger rule states that the normal approximation is appropriate only if everything within 3 standard deviations of its mean is within the range of possible values; that is, only if
*: formula_110
: This 3-standard-deviation rule is equivalent to the following conditions, which also imply the first rule above.
:: formula_111

The rule formula_112 is totally equivalent to request that
: formula_113
Moving terms around yields:
: formula_114
Since formula_115 and formula_116, to obtain the desired conditions:
: formula_117
Notice that these conditions automatically imply that formula_118. On the other hand, apply again the square root and divide by 3,
: formula_119
Subtracting the second set of inequalities from the first one yields:
: formula_120
and so, the desired first rule is satisfied,
: formula_121

* Another commonly used rule is that both values and must be greater than or equal to 5. However, the specific number varies from source to source, and depends on how good an approximation one wants. In particular, if one uses 9 instead of 5, the rule implies the results stated in the previous paragraphs.

Assume that both values formula_122 and formula_123 are greater than 9. Since formula_124, we easily have that 
: formula_125
We only have to divide now by the respective factors formula_126 and formula_127, to deduce the alternative form of the 3-standard-deviation rule:
: formula_117
The following is an example of applying a continuity correction. Suppose one wishes to calculate for a binomial random variable . If has a distribution given by the normal approximation, then is approximated by . The addition of 0.5 is the continuity correction; the uncorrected normal approximation gives considerably less accurate results.

This approximation, known as de Moivre–Laplace theorem, is a huge time-saver when undertaking calculations by hand (exact calculations with large are very onerous); historically, it was the first use of the normal distribution, introduced in Abraham de Moivre&#x27;s book &quot;The Doctrine of Chances&quot; in 1738. Nowadays, it can be seen as a consequence of the central limit theorem since is a sum of independent, identically distributed Bernoulli variables with parameter . This fact is the basis of a hypothesis test, a &quot;proportion z-test&quot;, for the value of using , the sample proportion and estimator of , in a common test statistic.

For example, suppose one randomly samples people out of a large population and ask them whether they agree with a certain statement. The proportion of people who agree will of course depend on the sample. If groups of &quot;n&quot; people were sampled repeatedly and truly randomly, the proportions would follow an approximate normal distribution with mean equal to the true proportion &quot;p&quot; of agreement in the population and with standard deviation
: formula_129

=== Poisson approximation ===

The binomial distribution converges towards the Poisson distribution as the number of trials goes to infinity while the product converges to a finite limit. Therefore, the Poisson distribution with parameter can be used as an approximation to of the binomial distribution if is sufficiently large and is sufficiently small. According to rules of thumb, this approximation is good if and such that , or if and such that , or if and .

Concerning the accuracy of Poisson approximation, see Novak, ch. 4, and references therein.

=== Limiting distributions ===

* &quot;Poisson limit theorem&quot;: As approaches and approaches 0 with the product held fixed, the distribution approaches the Poisson distribution with expected value .
* &quot;de Moivre–Laplace theorem&quot;: As approaches while remains fixed, the distribution of
*: formula_130
: approaches the normal distribution with expected value 0 and variance 1. This result is sometimes loosely stated by saying that the distribution of is asymptotically normal with expected value 0 and variance 1. This result is a specific case of the central limit theorem.

=== Beta distribution ===

The binomial distribution and beta distribution are different views of the same model of repeated Bernoulli trials. The binomial distribution is the PMF of successes given independent events each with a probability of success. 
Mathematically, when and , the beta distribution and the binomial distribution are related by a factor of :
: formula_131

Beta distributions also provide a family of prior probability distributions for binomial distributions in Bayesian inference: 
: formula_132
Given a uniform prior, the posterior distribution for the probability of success given independent events with observed successes is a beta distribution.

== Computational methods ==
=== Random number generation ===

Methods for random number generation where the marginal distribution is a binomial distribution are well-established.
One way to generate random variates samples from a binomial distribution is to use an inversion algorithm. To do so, one must calculate the probability that for all values from through . (These probabilities should sum to a value close to one, in order to encompass the entire sample space.) Then by using a pseudorandom number generator to generate samples uniformly between 0 and 1, one can transform the calculated samples into discrete numbers by using the probabilities calculated in the first step.

== History ==

This distribution was derived by Jacob Bernoulli. He considered the case where where is the probability of success and and are positive integers. Blaise Pascal had earlier considered the case where , tabulating the corresponding binomial coefficients in what is now recognized as Pascal&#x27;s triangle.

== See also ==

* Logistic regression
* Multinomial distribution
* Negative binomial distribution
* Beta-binomial distribution
* Binomial measure, an example of a multifractal measure.
* Statistical mechanics
* Piling-up lemma, the resulting probability when XOR-ing independent Boolean variables

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==

* Interactive graphic: Univariate Distribution Relationships
* Binomial distribution formula calculator
* Difference of two binomial variables: X-Y or |X-Y|
* Querying the binomial probability distribution in WolframAlpha
* Confidence (credible) intervals for binomial probability, p: online calculator available at causaScientia.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15551713" start="64" end="71" title="Shannon (unit)" label="shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q376660" start="78" end="82" title="nat (unit)" label="nats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="222" end="240" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="245" end="255" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185547" start="261" end="282" title="Binomial distribution" label="binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="310" end="343" title="discrete probability distribution" label="discrete probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="388" end="399" title="statistical independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062469" start="400" end="410" title="experiment (probability theory)" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345343" start="427" end="442" title="yes–no question" label="yes–no question"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020770" start="466" end="473" title="Boolean-valued function" label="Boolean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104930" start="481" end="488" title="outcome (probability)" label="outcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077800" start="627" end="642" title="Bernoulli trial" label="Bernoulli trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q518831" start="707" end="724" title="Bernoulli process" label="Bernoulli process"/>
<link wikidata="Q391371" start="785" end="807" title="Bernoulli distribution" label="Bernoulli distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q864022" start="856" end="869" title="binomial test" label="binomial test"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="873" end="897" title="statistical significance" label="statistical significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="1004" end="1020" title="with replacement" label="with replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q730600" start="1170" end="1197" title="hypergeometric distribution" label="hypergeometric distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="1389" end="1404" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q869887" start="1587" end="1612" title="probability mass function" label="probability mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q209875" start="1657" end="1677" title="binomial coefficient" label="binomial coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q188224" start="3258" end="3262" title="Mode (statistics)" label="mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="3292" end="3306" title="Floor and ceiling functions" label="floor function"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429954" start="3348" end="3359" title="fair coin" label="biased coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="3526" end="3558" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="3652" end="3668" title="floor and ceiling functions" label="greatest integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q468881" start="3737" end="3773" title="regularized incomplete beta function" label="regularized incomplete beta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="3827" end="3859" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q756254" start="3868" end="3885" title="beta distribution" label="beta distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q177144" start="3897" end="3910" title="F-distribution" label="-distribution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4014" end="4019" title="#Tail bounds" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="4265" end="4279" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="4592" end="4600" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088747" start="4781" end="4795" title="central moment" label="central moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339261" start="4960" end="4973" title="Falling and rising factorials" label="falling power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5053" end="5075" title="Poisson distribution#Higher moments" label="higher Poisson moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q188224" start="5215" end="5219" title="mode (statistics)" label="mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="5295" end="5309" title="floor function" label="floor function"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="6036" end="6042" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045555" start="6670" end="6698" title="maximum likelihood estimator" label="maximum likelihood estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925212" start="6712" end="6729" title="method of moments (statistics)" label="method of moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264527" start="6749" end="6757" title="Bias of an estimator" label="unbiased"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755281" start="6777" end="6793" title="Minimum-variance unbiased estimator" label="minimum variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129636" start="6808" end="6831" title="Lehmann–Scheffé theorem" label="Lehmann–Scheffé theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099110" start="6856" end="6874" title="minimal sufficient" label="minimal sufficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532735" start="6879" end="6887" title="Completeness (statistics)" label="complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782585" start="6919" end="6929" title="Consistent estimator" label="consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940696" start="6957" end="6960" title="Mean squared error" label="MSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q12345341" start="6980" end="6994" title="Asymptotic distribution" label="asymptotically"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="6995" end="7001" title="normal distribution" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190391" start="7016" end="7037" title="central limit theorem" label="central limit theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="7076" end="7080" title="arithmetic mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7191" end="7223" title="Binomial_proportion_confidence_interval#Wald_interval" label="Wald&amp;#x27;s confidence intervals"/>
<link wikidata="Q842217" start="7240" end="7255" title="Bayes estimator" label="Bayes estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q756254" start="7287" end="7304" title="Beta distribution" label="Beta distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711784" start="7310" end="7319" title="Conjugate prior" label="conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="7320" end="7338" title="prior distribution" label="prior distribution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7388" end="7402" title="Bayes estimator#Posterior mean" label="posterior mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q842217" start="7453" end="7477" title="Asymptotic efficiency (Bayes)" label="asymptotically efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045555" start="7543" end="7546" title="Maximum likelihood estimation" label="MLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264527" start="7580" end="7586" title="Bias of an estimator" label="biased"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7621" end="7631" title="Bayes estimator#Admissibility" label="admissible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782585" start="7636" end="7646" title="Consistent estimator" label="consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795822" start="7736" end="7753" title="Thompson sampling" label="Thompson sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="7790" end="7819" title="standard uniform distribution" label="standard uniform distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="7825" end="7846" title="non-informative prior" label="non-informative prior"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7913" end="7927" title="Bayes estimator#Posterior mode" label="posterior mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823926" start="7999" end="8017" title="rule of succession" label="rule of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="8063" end="8083" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4068240" start="8102" end="8116" title="Jeffreys prior" label="Jeffreys prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="8531" end="8550" title="confidence interval" label="confidence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378983" start="8570" end="8583" title="Rule of three (statistics)" label="rule of three"/>
<link wikidata="Q578714" start="9112" end="9120" title="quantile" label="quantile"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="9126" end="9154" title="standard normal distribution" label="standard normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117995" start="9162" end="9168" title="probit" label="probit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="9244" end="9260" title="confidence level" label="confidence level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165416" start="9375" end="9396" title="continuity correction" label="continuity correction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10410" end="10425" title="Binomial proportion confidence interval#Clopper–Pearson interval" label="Clopper–Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111134" start="11284" end="11332" title="Binomial sum variance inequality" label="smaller than the variance of a binomial variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258231" start="11440" end="11469" title="Poisson binomial distribution" label="Poisson binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077800" start="11535" end="11551" title="Bernoulli trials" label="Bernoulli trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989192" start="12740" end="12764" title="law of total probability" label="law of total probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="13124" end="13140" title="binomial theorem" label="binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q391371" start="13260" end="13282" title="Bernoulli distribution" label="Bernoulli distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077800" start="13466" end="13482" title="Bernoulli trials" label="Bernoulli trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="13682" end="13701" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165416" start="13797" end="13818" title="continuity correction" label="continuity correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398821" start="13940" end="13954" title="Rule of thumb" label="rules of thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785872" start="14241" end="14261" title="Berry–Esseen theorem" label="Berry–Esseen theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165416" start="15720" end="15741" title="continuity correction" label="continuity correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855610" start="16050" end="16075" title="de Moivre–Laplace theorem" label="de Moivre–Laplace theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q200397" start="16263" end="16280" title="Abraham de Moivre" label="Abraham de Moivre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007756" start="16299" end="16322" title="The Doctrine of Chances" label="The Doctrine of Chances"/>
<link wikidata="Q190391" start="16387" end="16408" title="central limit theorem" label="central limit theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q391371" start="16464" end="16483" title="Bernoulli distribution" label="Bernoulli variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q210832" start="16529" end="16544" title="hypothesis test" label="hypothesis test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461038" start="16650" end="16671" title="common test statistics" label="common test statistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="17227" end="17247" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208500" start="17746" end="17767" title="Poisson limit theorem" label="Poisson limit theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="17867" end="17887" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="17893" end="17907" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855610" start="17918" end="17943" title="de Moivre–Laplace theorem" label="de Moivre–Laplace theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="18038" end="18057" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="18084" end="18092" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12345341" start="18174" end="18195" title="Asymptotic normality" label="asymptotically normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="18222" end="18230" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q190391" start="18272" end="18293" title="central limit theorem" label="central limit theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q869887" start="18472" end="18475" title="Probability mass function" label="PMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q756254" start="18674" end="18691" title="Beta distribution" label="Beta distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="18718" end="18748" title="prior distribution" label="prior probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="18780" end="18798" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q228206" start="19044" end="19068" title="random number generation" label="random number generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q670653" start="19079" end="19100" title="marginal distribution" label="marginal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291996" start="19170" end="19184" title="random variate" label="random variate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623338" start="19458" end="19487" title="pseudorandom number generator" label="pseudorandom number generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q122392" start="19704" end="19719" title="Jacob Bernoulli" label="Jacob Bernoulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="19817" end="19830" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="19951" end="19973" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132755" start="19994" end="20013" title="Logistic regression" label="Logistic regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147928" start="20016" end="20040" title="Multinomial distribution" label="Multinomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q743364" start="20043" end="20073" title="Negative binomial distribution" label="Negative binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q307557" start="20076" end="20102" title="Beta-binomial distribution" label="Beta-binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629238" start="20139" end="20151" title="Multifractal system" label="multifractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="20152" end="20159" title="measure (mathematics)" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="20163" end="20184" title="Statistical mechanics" label="Statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229327" start="20187" end="20202" title="Piling-up lemma" label="Piling-up lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="20235" end="20238" title="XOR" label="XOR"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3878" wikidata="Q214746" url="?curid=3878" title="Biostatistics">
<text>Biostatistics (also known as biometry) is a branch of statistics that applies statistical methods to a wide range of topics in biology. It encompasses the design of biological experiments, the collection and analysis of data from those experiments and the interpretation of the results.

== History ==
=== Biostatistics and genetics ===

Biostatistical modeling forms an important part of numerous modern biological theories. Genetics studies, since its beginning, used statistical concepts to understand observed experimental results. Some genetics scientists even contributed with statistical advances with the development of methods and tools. Gregor Mendel started the genetics studies investigating genetics segregation patterns in families of peas and used statistics to explain the collected data. In the early 1900s, after the rediscovery of Mendel&#x27;s Mendelian inheritance work, there were gaps in understanding between genetics and evolutionary Darwinism. Francis Galton tried to expand Mendel&#x27;s discoveries with human data and proposed a different model with fractions of the heredity coming from each ancestral composing an infinite series. He called this the theory of &quot;Law of Ancestral Heredity&quot;. His ideas were strongly disagreed by William Bateson, who followed Mendel&#x27;s conclusions, that genetic inheritance were exclusively from the parents, half from each of them. This led to a vigorous debate between the biometricians, who supported Galton&#x27;s ideas, as Raphael Weldon, Arthur Dukinfield Darbishire and Karl Pearson, and Mendelians, who supported Bateson&#x27;s (and Mendel&#x27;s) ideas, such as Charles Davenport and Wilhelm Johannsen. Later, biometricians could not reproduce Galton conclusions in different experiments, and Mendel&#x27;s ideas prevailed. By the 1930s, models built on statistical reasoning had helped to resolve these differences and to produce the neo-Darwinian modern evolutionary synthesis.

Solving these differences also allowed to define the concept of population genetics and brought together genetics and evolution. The three leading figures in the establishment of population genetics and this synthesis all relied on statistics and developed its use in biology.
* Ronald Fisher worked alongside statistician Betty Allan developing several basic statistical methods in support of his work studying the crop experiments at Rothamsted Research, published in Fisher&#x27;s books Statistical Methods for Research Workers (1925) and The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (1930), as well as Allan&#x27;s scientific papers. Fisher went on to give many contributions to genetics and statistics. Some of them include the ANOVA, p-value concepts, Fisher&#x27;s exact test and Fisher&#x27;s equation for population dynamics. He is credited for the sentence &quot;Natural selection is a mechanism for generating an exceedingly high degree of improbability&quot;.
* Sewall G. Wright developed &quot;F&quot;-statistics and methods of computing them and defined inbreeding coefficient.
* J. B. S. Haldane&#x27;s book, &quot;The Causes of Evolution&quot;, reestablished natural selection as the premier mechanism of evolution by explaining it in terms of the mathematical consequences of Mendelian genetics. He also developed the theory of primordial soup.

These and other biostatisticians, mathematical biologists, and statistically inclined geneticists helped bring together evolutionary biology and genetics into a consistent, coherent whole that could begin to be quantitatively modeled.

In parallel to this overall development, the pioneering work of D&#x27;Arcy Thompson in &quot;On Growth and Form&quot; also helped to add quantitative discipline to biological study.

Despite the fundamental importance and frequent necessity of statistical reasoning, there may nonetheless have been a tendency among biologists to distrust or deprecate results which are not qualitatively apparent. One anecdote describes Thomas Hunt Morgan banning the Friden calculator from his department at Caltech, saying &quot;Well, I am like a guy who is prospecting for gold along the banks of the Sacramento River in 1849. With a little intelligence, I can reach down and pick up big nuggets of gold. And as long as I can do that, I&#x27;m not going to let any people in my department waste scarce resources in placer mining.&quot;

== Research planning ==

Any research in life sciences is proposed to answer a scientific question we might have. To answer this question with a high certainty, we need accurate results. The correct definition of the main hypothesis and the research plan will reduce errors while taking a decision in understanding a phenomenon. The research plan might include the research question, the hypothesis to be tested, the experimental design, data collection methods, data analysis perspectives and costs involved. It is essential to carry the study based on the three basic principles of experimental statistics: randomization, replication, and local control.

=== Research question ===

The research question will define the objective of a study. The research will be headed by the question, so it needs to be concise, at the same time it is focused on interesting and novel topics that may improve science and knowledge and that field. To define the way to ask the scientific question, an exhaustive literature review might be necessary. So the research can be useful to add value to the scientific community.

=== Hypothesis definition ===

Once the aim of the study is defined, the possible answers to the research question can be proposed, transforming this question into a hypothesis. The main propose is called null hypothesis (H0) and is usually based on a permanent knowledge about the topic or an obvious occurrence of the phenomena, sustained by a deep literature review. We can say it is the standard expected answer for the data under the situation in test. In general, HO assumes no association between treatments. On the other hand, the alternative hypothesis is the denial of HO. It assumes some degree of association between the treatment and the outcome. Although, the hypothesis is sustained by question research and its expected and unexpected answers.

As an example, consider groups of similar animals (mice, for example) under two different diet systems. The research question would be: what is the best diet? In this case, H0 would be that there is no difference between the two diets in mice metabolism (H0: μ1 = μ2) and the alternative hypothesis would be that the diets have different effects over animals metabolism (H1: μ1 ≠ μ2).

The hypothesis is defined by the researcher, according to his/her interests in answering the main question. Besides that, the alternative hypothesis can be more than one hypothesis. It can assume not only differences across observed parameters, but their degree of differences (&quot;i.e.&quot; higher or shorter).

=== Sampling ===

Usually, a study aims to understand an effect of a phenomenon over a population. In biology, a population is defined as all the individuals of a given species, in a specific area at a given time. In biostatistics, this concept is extended to a variety of collections possible of study. Although, in biostatistics, a population is not only the individuals, but the total of one specific component of their organisms, as the whole genome, or all the sperm cells, for animals, or the total leaf area, for a plant, for example.

It is not possible to take the measures from all the elements of a population. Because of that, the sampling process is very important for statistical inference. Sampling is defined as to randomly get a representative part of the entire population, to make posterior inferences about the population. So, the sample might catch the most variability across a population. The sample size is determined by several things, since the scope of the research to the resources available. In clinical research, the trial type, as inferiority, equivalence, and superiority is a key in determining sample size.

=== Experimental design ===
Experimental designs sustain those basic principles of experimental statistics. There are three basic experimental designs to randomly allocate treatments in all plots of the experiment. They are completely randomized design, randomized block design, and factorial designs. Treatments can be arranged in many ways inside the experiment. In agriculture, the correct experimental design is the root of a good study and the arrangement of treatments within the study is essential because environment largely affects the plots (plants, livestock, microorganisms). These main arrangements can be found in the literature under the names of &quot;lattices&quot;, &quot;incomplete blocks&quot;, &quot;split plot&quot;, &quot;augmented blocks&quot;, and many others. All of the designs might include control plots, determined by the researcher, to provide an error estimation during inference.

In clinical studies, the samples are usually smaller than in other biological studies, and in most cases, the environment effect can be controlled or measured. It is common to use randomized controlled clinical trials, where results are usually compared with observational study designs such as case–control or cohort.

=== Data collection ===

Data collection methods must be considered in research planning, because it highly influences the sample size and experimental design.

Data collection varies according to type of data. For qualitative data, collection can be done with structured questionnaires or by observation, considering presence or intensity of disease, using score criterion to categorize levels of occurrence. For quantitative data, collection is done by measuring numerical information using instruments.

In agriculture and biology studies, yield data and its components can be obtained by metric measures. However, pest and disease injuries in plats are obtained by observation, considering score scales for levels of damage. Especially, in genetic studies, modern methods for data collection in field and laboratory should be considered, as high-throughput platforms for phenotyping and genotyping. These tools allow bigger experiments, while turn possible evaluate many plots in lower time than a human-based only method for data collection.
Finally, all data collected of interest must be stored in an organized data frame for further analysis.

== Analysis and data interpretation ==

=== Descriptive tools ===
Data can be represented through tables or graphical representation, such as line charts, bar charts, histograms, scatter plot. Also, measures of central tendency and variability can be very useful to describe an overview of the data. Follow some examples:

==== Frequency tables ====

One type of table is the frequency table, which consists of data arranged in rows and columns, where the frequency is the number of occurrences or repetitions of data. Frequency can be:

Absolute: represents the number of times that a determined value appear;

formula_1

Relative: obtained by the division of the absolute frequency by the total number;

formula_2

In the next example, we have the number of genes in ten operons of the same organism.


==== Line graph ====

Line graphs represent the variation of a value over another metric, such as time. In general, values are represented in the vertical axis, while the time variation is represented in the horizontal axis.

==== Bar chart ====

A bar chart is a graph that shows categorical data as bars presenting heights (vertical bar) or widths (horizontal bar) proportional to represent values. Bar charts provide an image that could also be represented in a tabular format.

In the bar chart example, we have the birth rate in Brazil for the December months from 2010 to 2016. The sharp fall in December 2016 reflects the outbreak of Zika virus in the birth rate in Brazil.

==== Histograms ====

The histogram (or frequency distribution) is a graphical representation of a dataset tabulated and divided into uniform or non-uniform classes. It was first introduced by Karl Pearson.

==== Scatter plot ====

A scatter plot is a mathematical diagram that uses Cartesian coordinates to display values of a dataset. A scatter plot shows the data as a set of points, each one presenting the value of one variable determining the position on the horizontal axis and another variable on the vertical axis. They are also called scatter graph, scatter chart, scattergram, or scatter diagram.

==== Mean ====
The arithmetic mean is the sum of a collection of values (formula_3) divided by the number of items of this collection (formula_4).

: formula_5

==== Median ====
The median is the value in the middle of a dataset.

==== Mode ====
The mode is the value of a set of data that appears most often.
==== Box plot ====

Box plot is a method for graphically depicting groups of numerical data. The maximum and minimum values are represented by the lines, and the interquartile range (IQR) represent 25–75% of the data. Outliers may be plotted as circles.

==== Correlation coefficients ====

Although correlations between two different kinds of data could be inferred by graphs, such as scatter plot, it is necessary validate this though numerical information. For this reason, correlation coefficients are required. They provide a numerical value that reflects the strength of an association.

==== Pearson correlation coefficient ====

 Pearson correlation coefficient is a measure of association between two variables, X and Y. This coefficient, usually represented by &quot;ρ&quot; (rho) for the population and &quot;r&quot; for the sample, assumes values between −1 and 1, where &quot;ρ&quot; = 1 represents a perfect positive correlation, &quot;ρ&quot; = −1 represents a perfect negative correlation, and &quot;ρ&quot; = 0 is no linear correlation.

=== Inferential statistics ===
It is used to make inferences about an unknown population, by estimation and/or hypothesis testing. In other words, it is desirable to obtain parameters to describe the population of interest, but since the data is limited, it is necessary to make use of a representative sample in order to estimate them. With that, it is possible to test previously defined hypotheses and apply the conclusions to the entire population. The standard error of the mean is a measure of variability that is crucial to do inferences.
* Hypothesis testing

Hypothesis testing is essential to make inferences about populations aiming to answer research questions, as settled in &quot;Research planning&quot; section. Authors defined four steps to be set:

# &quot;The hypothesis to be tested&quot;: as stated earlier, we have to work with the definition of a null hypothesis (H0), that is going to be tested, and an alternative hypothesis. But they must be defined before the experiment implementation.
# &quot;Significance level and decision rule&quot;: A decision rule depends on the level of significance, or in other words, the acceptable error rate (α). It is easier to think that we define a &quot;critical value&quot; that determines the statistical significance when a test statistic is compared with it. So, α also has to be predefined before the experiment.
# &quot;Experiment and statistical analysis&quot;: This is when the experiment is really implemented following the appropriate experimental design, data is collected and the more suitable statistical tests are evaluated.
# &quot;Inference&quot;: Is made when the null hypothesis is rejected or not rejected, based on the evidence that the comparison of p-values and α brings. It is pointed that the failure to reject H0 just means that there is not enough evidence to support its rejection, but not that this hypothesis is true.
* Confidence intervals

A confidence interval is a range of values that can contain the true real parameter value in given a certain level of confidence. The first step is to estimate the best-unbiased estimate of the population parameter. The upper value of the interval is obtained by the sum of this estimate with the multiplication between the standard error of the mean and the confidence level. The calculation of lower value is similar, but instead of a sum, a subtraction must be applied.

== Statistical considerations ==

=== Power and statistical error ===

When testing a hypothesis, there are two types of statistic errors possible: Type I error and Type II error. 

* The type I error or false positive is the incorrect rejection of a true null hypothesis
* The type II error or false negative is the failure to reject a false null hypothesis. 

The significance level denoted by α is the type I error rate and should be chosen before performing the test. The type II error rate is denoted by β and statistical power of the test is 1 − β.

=== p-value ===

The p-value is the probability of obtaining results as extreme as or more extreme than those observed, assuming the null hypothesis (H0) is true. It is also called the calculated probability. It is common to confuse the p-value with the significance level (α), but, the α is a predefined threshold for calling significant results. If p is less than α, the null hypothesis (H0) is rejected.

=== Multiple testing ===

In multiple tests of the same hypothesis, the probability of the occurrence of false positives (familywise error rate) increase and a strategy is needed to account for this occurrence. This is commonly achieved by using a more stringent threshold to reject null hypotheses. The Bonferroni correction defines an acceptable global significance level, denoted by α* and each test is individually compared with a value of α = α*/m. This ensures that the familywise error rate in all m tests, is less than or equal to α*. When m is large, the Bonferroni correction may be overly conservative. An alternative to the Bonferroni correction is to control the false discovery rate (FDR). The FDR controls the expected proportion of the rejected null hypotheses (the so-called discoveries) that are false (incorrect rejections). This procedure ensures that, for independent tests, the false discovery rate is at most q*. Thus, the FDR is less conservative than the Bonferroni correction and have more power, at the cost of more false positives.

=== Mis-specification and robustness checks ===

The main hypothesis being tested (e.g., no association between treatments and outcomes) is often accompanied by other technical assumptions (e.g., about the form of the probability distribution of the outcomes) that are also part of the null hypothesis. When the technical assumptions are violated in practice, then the null may be frequently rejected even if the main hypothesis is true. Such rejections are said to be due to model mis-specification. Verifying whether the outcome of a statistical test does not change when the technical assumptions are slightly altered (so-called robustness checks) is the main way of combating mis-specification.

=== Model selection criteria ===

Model criteria selection will select or model that more approximate true model. The Akaike&#x27;s Information Criterion (AIC) and The Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) are examples of asymptotically efficient criteria.

== Developments and big data ==
Recent developments have made a large impact on biostatistics. Two important changes have been the ability to collect data on a high-throughput scale, and the ability to perform much more complex analysis using computational techniques. This comes from the development in areas as sequencing technologies, Bioinformatics and Machine learning (Machine learning in bioinformatics).

=== Use in high-throughput data ===

New biomedical technologies like microarrays, next-generation sequencers (for genomics) and mass spectrometry (for proteomics) generate enormous amounts of data, allowing many tests to be performed simultaneously. Careful analysis with biostatistical methods is required to separate the signal from the noise. For example, a microarray could be used to measure many thousands of genes simultaneously, determining which of them have different expression in diseased cells compared to normal cells. However, only a fraction of genes will be differentially expressed.

Multicollinearity often occurs in high-throughput biostatistical settings. Due to high intercorrelation between the predictors (such as gene expression levels), the information of one predictor might be contained in another one. It could be that only 5% of the predictors are responsible for 90% of the variability of the response. In such a case, one could apply the biostatistical technique of dimension reduction (for example via principal component analysis). Classical statistical techniques like linear or logistic regression and linear discriminant analysis do not work well for high dimensional data (i.e. when the number of observations n is smaller than the number of features or predictors p: n &lt; p). As a matter of fact, one can get quite high R2-values despite very low predictive power of the statistical model. These classical statistical techniques (esp. least squares linear regression) were developed for low dimensional data (i.e. where the number of observations n is much larger than the number of predictors p: n » p). In cases of high dimensionality, one should always consider an independent validation test set and the corresponding residual sum of squares (RSS) and R2 of the validation test set, not those of the training set.

Often, it is useful to pool information from multiple predictors together. For example, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) considers the perturbation of whole (functionally related) gene sets rather than of single genes. These gene sets might be known biochemical pathways or otherwise functionally related genes. The advantage of this approach is that it is more robust: It is more likely that a single gene is found to be falsely perturbed than it is that a whole pathway is falsely perturbed. Furthermore, one can integrate the accumulated knowledge about biochemical pathways (like the JAK-STAT signaling pathway) using this approach.

=== Bioinformatics advances in databases, data mining, and biological interpretation ===

The development of biological databases enables storage and management of biological data with the possibility of ensuring access for users around the world. They are useful for researchers depositing data, retrieve information and files (raw or processed) originated from other experiments or indexing scientific articles, as PubMed. Another possibility is search for the desired term (a gene, a protein, a disease, an organism, and so on) and check all results related to this search. There are databases dedicated to SNPs (dbSNP), the knowledge on genes characterization and their pathways (KEGG) and the description of gene function classifying it by cellular component, molecular function and biological process (Gene Ontology). In addition to databases that contain specific molecular information, there are others that are ample in the sense that they store information about an organism or group of organisms. As an example of a database directed towards just one organism, but that contains much data about it, is the &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; genetic and molecular database – TAIR. Phytozome, in turn, stores the assemblies and annotation files of dozen of plant genomes, also containing visualization and analysis tools. Moreover, there is an interconnection between some databases in the information exchange/sharing and a major initiative was the International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC) which relates data from DDBJ, EMBL-EBI, and NCBI.

Nowadays, increase in size and complexity of molecular datasets leads to use of powerful statistical methods provided by computer science algorithms which are developed by machine learning area. Therefore, data mining and machine learning allow detection of patterns in data with a complex structure, as biological ones, by using methods of supervised and unsupervised learning, regression, detection of clusters and association rule mining, among others. To indicate some of them, self-organizing maps and &quot;k&quot;-means are examples of cluster algorithms; neural networks implementation and support vector machines models are examples of common machine learning algorithms.

Collaborative work among molecular biologists, bioinformaticians, statisticians and computer scientists is important to perform an experiment correctly, going from planning, passing through data generation and analysis, and ending with biological interpretation of the results.

=== Use of computationally intensive methods ===

On the other hand, the advent of modern computer technology and relatively cheap computing resources have enabled computer-intensive biostatistical methods like bootstrapping and re-sampling methods.

In recent times, random forests have gained popularity as a method for performing statistical classification. Random forest techniques generate a panel of decision trees. Decision trees have the advantage that you can draw them and interpret them (even with a basic understanding of mathematics and statistics). Random Forests have thus been used for clinical decision support systems.

== Applications ==
=== Public health ===
Public health, including epidemiology, health services research, nutrition, environmental health and health care policy &amp; management. In these medicine contents, it&#x27;s important to consider the design and analysis of the clinical trials. As one example, there is the assessment of severity state of a patient with a prognosis of an outcome of a disease.

With new technologies and genetics knowledge, biostatistics are now also used for Systems medicine, which consists in a more personalized medicine. For this, is made an integration of data from different sources, including conventional patient data, clinico-pathological parameters, molecular and genetic data as well as data generated by additional new-omics technologies.

=== Quantitative genetics ===

The study of population genetics and statistical genetics in order to link variation in genotype with a variation in phenotype. In other words, it is desirable to discover the genetic basis of a measurable trait, a quantitative trait, that is under polygenic control. A genome region that is responsible for a continuous trait is called a quantitative trait locus (QTL). The study of QTLs become feasible by using molecular markers and measuring traits in populations, but their mapping needs the obtaining of a population from an experimental crossing, like an F2 or recombinant inbred strains/lines (RILs). To scan for QTLs regions in a genome, a gene map based on linkage have to be built. Some of the best-known QTL mapping algorithms are Interval Mapping, Composite Interval Mapping, and Multiple Interval Mapping.

However, QTL mapping resolution is impaired by the amount of recombination assayed, a problem for species in which it is difficult to obtain large offspring. Furthermore, allele diversity is restricted to individuals originated from contrasting parents, which limit studies of allele diversity when we have a panel of individuals representing a natural population. For this reason, the genome-wide association study was proposed in order to identify QTLs based on linkage disequilibrium, that is the non-random association between traits and molecular markers. It was leveraged by the development of high-throughput SNP genotyping.

In animal and plant breeding, the use of markers in selection aiming for breeding, mainly the molecular ones, collaborated to the development of marker-assisted selection. While QTL mapping is limited due resolution, GWAS does not have enough power when rare variants of small effect that are also influenced by environment. So, the concept of Genomic Selection (GS) arises in order to use all molecular markers in the selection and allow the prediction of the performance of candidates in this selection. The proposal is to genotype and phenotype a training population, develop a model that can obtain the genomic estimated breeding values (GEBVs) of individuals belonging to a genotype and but not phenotype population, called testing population. This kind of study could also include a validation population, thinking in the concept of cross-validation, in which the real phenotype results measured in this population are compared with the phenotype results based on the prediction, what used to check the accuracy of the model.

As a summary, some points about the application of quantitative genetics are:
* This has been used in agriculture to improve crops (Plant breeding) and livestock (Animal breeding).
* In biomedical research, this work can assist in finding candidates gene alleles that can cause or influence predisposition to diseases in human genetics

=== Expression data ===

Studies for differential expression of genes from RNA-Seq data, as for RT-qPCR and microarrays, demands comparison of conditions. The goal is to identify genes which have a significant change in abundance between different conditions. Then, experiments are designed appropriately, with replicates for each condition/treatment, randomization and blocking, when necessary. In RNA-Seq, the quantification of expression uses the information of mapped reads that are summarized in some genetic unit, as exons that are part of a gene sequence. As microarray results can be approximated by a normal distribution, RNA-Seq counts data are better explained by other distributions. The first used distribution was the Poisson one, but it underestimate the sample error, leading to false positives. Currently, biological variation is considered by methods that estimate a dispersion parameter of a negative binomial distribution. Generalized linear models are used to perform the tests for statistical significance and as the number of genes is high, multiple tests correction have to be considered. Some examples of other analysis on genomics data comes from microarray or proteomics experiments. Often concerning diseases or disease stages.

=== Other studies ===
* Ecology, ecological forecasting
* Biological sequence analysis
* Systems biology for gene network inference or pathways analysis.
* Clinical research and pharmaceutical development
* Population dynamics, especially in regards to fisheries science.
* Phylogenetics and evolution
* Pharmacodynamics
* Pharmacokinetics
* Neuroimaging

== Tools ==

There are a lot of tools that can be used to do statistical analysis in biological data. Most of them are useful in other areas of knowledge, covering a large number of applications (alphabetical). Here are brief descriptions of some of them:
* ASReml: Another software developed by VSNi that can be used also in R environment as a package. It is developed to estimate variance components under a general linear mixed model using restricted maximum likelihood (REML). Models with fixed effects and random effects and nested or crossed ones are allowed. Gives the possibility to investigate different variance-covariance matrix structures.
* CycDesigN: A computer package developed by VSNi that helps the researchers create experimental designs and analyze data coming from a design present in one of three classes handled by CycDesigN. These classes are resolvable, non-resolvable, partially replicated and crossover designs. It includes less used designs the Latinized ones, as t-Latinized design.
* Orange: A programming interface for high-level data processing, data mining and data visualization. Include tools for gene expression and genomics.
* R: An open source environment and programming language dedicated to statistical computing and graphics. It is an implementation of S language maintained by CRAN. In addition to its functions to read data tables, take descriptive statistics, develop and evaluate models, its repository contains packages developed by researchers around the world. This allows the development of functions written to deal with the statistical analysis of data that comes from specific applications. In the case of Bioinformatics, for example, there are packages located in the main repository (CRAN) and in others, as Bioconductor. It is also possible to use packages under development that are shared in hosting-services as GitHub.
* SAS: A data analysis software widely used, going through universities, services and industry. Developed by a company with the same name (SAS Institute), it uses SAS language for programming.
* PLA 3.0: Is a biostatistical analysis software for regulated environments (e.g. drug testing) which supports Quantitative Response Assays (Parallel-Line, Parallel-Logistics, Slope-Ratio) and Dichotomous Assays (Quantal Response, Binary Assays). It also supports weighting methods for combination calculations and the automatic data aggregation of independent assay data.
* Weka: A Java software for machine learning and data mining, including tools and methods for visualization, clustering, regression, association rule, and classification. There are tools for cross-validation, bootstrapping and a module of algorithm comparison. Weka also can be run in other programming languages as Perl or R.
* Python (programming language) image analysis, deep-learning, machine-learning
* SQL databases
* NoSQL
* NumPy numerical python
* SciPy
* SageMath
* LAPACK linear algebra
* MATLAB
* Apache Hadoop
* Apache Spark
* Amazon Web Services

== Scope and training programs ==

Almost all educational programmes in biostatistics are at postgraduate level. They are most often found in schools of public health, affiliated with schools of medicine, forestry, or agriculture, or as a focus of application in departments of statistics.

In the United States, where several universities have dedicated biostatistics departments, many other top-tier universities integrate biostatistics faculty into statistics or other departments, such as epidemiology. Thus, departments carrying the name &quot;biostatistics&quot; may exist under quite different structures. For instance, relatively new biostatistics departments have been founded with a focus on bioinformatics and computational biology, whereas older departments, typically affiliated with schools of public health, will have more traditional lines of research involving epidemiological studies and clinical trials as well as bioinformatics. In larger universities around the world, where both a statistics and a biostatistics department exist, the degree of integration between the two departments may range from the bare minimum to very close collaboration. In general, the difference between a statistics program and a biostatistics program is twofold: (i) statistics departments will often host theoretical/methodological research which are less common in biostatistics programs and (ii) statistics departments have lines of research that may include biomedical applications but also other areas such as industry (quality control), business and economics and biological areas other than medicine.

== Specialized journals ==

* Biostatistics
* International Journal of Biostatistics
* Journal of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
* Biostatistics and Public Health
* Biometrics
* Biometrika
* Biometrical Journal
* Communications in Biometry and Crop Science
* Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology
* Statistical Methods in Medical Research
* Pharmaceutical Statistics
* Statistics in Medicine

== See also ==
* Bioinformatics
* Epidemiological method
* Epidemiology
* Group size measures
* Health indicator
* Mathematical and theoretical biology

== References ==
== External links ==
* The International Biometric Society
* The Collection of Biostatistics Research Archive
* Guide to Biostatistics (MedPageToday.com) 
* Biomedical Statistics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214746" start="0" end="13" title="Biostatistics" label="Biostatistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214746" start="29" end="37" title="Biostatistics" label="biometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="54" end="64" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="127" end="134" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="176" end="186" title="experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="426" end="434" title="Genetics" label="Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37970" start="647" end="660" title="Gregor Mendel" label="Gregor Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191026" start="970" end="984" title="Francis Galton" label="Francis Galton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191026" start="1197" end="1222" title="Francis Galton" label="Law of Ancestral Heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q297302" start="1267" end="1282" title="William Bateson" label="William Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573240" start="1503" end="1517" title="Raphael Weldon" label="Raphael Weldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087423" start="1519" end="1547" title="Arthur Dukinfield Darbishire" label="Arthur Dukinfield Darbishire"/>
<link wikidata="Q310794" start="1552" end="1564" title="Karl Pearson" label="Karl Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q982237" start="1646" end="1663" title="Charles Davenport" label="Charles Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q347272" start="1668" end="1685" title="Wilhelm Johannsen" label="Wilhelm Johannsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q337897" start="1933" end="1962" title="Modern synthesis (20th century)" label="modern evolutionary synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="2144" end="2163" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="2244" end="2257" title="Ronald Fisher" label="Ronald Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326711" start="2401" end="2420" title="Rothamsted Research" label="Rothamsted Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604373" start="2455" end="2495" title="Statistical Methods for Research Workers" label="Statistical Methods for Research Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736096" start="2507" end="2548" title="The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection" label="The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q42297" start="2695" end="2700" title="ANOVA" label="ANOVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q253255" start="2702" end="2709" title="p-value" label="p-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="2720" end="2744" title="Ronald Fisher" label="Fisher&amp;#x27;s exact test"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="2749" end="2771" title="Ronald Fisher" label="Fisher&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q904564" start="2776" end="2795" title="population dynamics" label="population dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q221061" start="2936" end="2952" title="Sewall G. Wright" label="Sewall G. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423646" start="2963" end="2987" title="F-statistics" label="&amp;quot;F&amp;quot;-statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q353632" start="3030" end="3052" title="inbreeding coefficient" label="inbreeding coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="3056" end="3072" title="J. B. S. Haldane" label="J. B. S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994232" start="3307" end="3322" title="primordial soup" label="primordial soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q751611" start="3359" end="3382" title="mathematical biology" label="mathematical biologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="3445" end="3465" title="evolutionary biology" label="evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="3470" end="3478" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3536" end="3548" title="Statistics" label="quantitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q739438" start="3625" end="3645" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Thompson" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268708" start="3936" end="3949" title="qualitative data" label="qualitatively"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="3983" end="4001" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503567" start="4014" end="4031" title="Friden, Inc." label="Friden calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="4055" end="4062" title="Caltech" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="4364" end="4377" title="placer mining" label="placer mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q864928" start="4427" end="4440" title="life sciences" label="life sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="4465" end="4484" title="scientific question" label="scientific question"/>
<link wikidata="Q272035" start="4555" end="4563" title="Accuracy and precision" label="accurate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="4608" end="4618" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="4803" end="4822" title="experimental design" label="experimental design"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929239" start="4824" end="4839" title="data collection" label="data collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988917" start="4849" end="4862" title="data analysis" label="data analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363085" start="4995" end="5008" title="randomization" label="randomization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933199" start="5010" end="5021" title="Replication (statistics)" label="replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="5349" end="5368" title="scientific question" label="scientific question"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412849" start="5384" end="5401" title="literature review" label="literature review"/>
<link wikidata="Q240305" start="5472" end="5492" title="scientific community" label="scientific community"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="5661" end="5671" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="5700" end="5715" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="5947" end="5951" title="Experiment" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q843558" start="6034" end="6056" title="alternative hypothesis" label="alternative hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="6499" end="6509" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q843558" start="6532" end="6554" title="alternative hypothesis" label="alternative hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="6646" end="6656" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q843558" start="6768" end="6790" title="alternative hypothesis" label="alternative hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="7045" end="7055" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="7060" end="7067" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="7071" end="7081" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q795052" start="7104" end="7114" title="individual" label="individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="7127" end="7134" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="7292" end="7302" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="7381" end="7389" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="7405" end="7411" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="7430" end="7435" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q12453" start="7532" end="7540" title="Measurement" label="measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="7568" end="7578" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="7601" end="7609" title="Sampling (statistics)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="7640" end="7661" title="statistical inference" label="statistical inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="7663" end="7671" title="Sampling (statistics)" label="Sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="7809" end="7815" title="Sample (statistics)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q845777" start="7837" end="7848" title="Statistical variability" label="variability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564360" start="7874" end="7885" title="sample size" label="sample size"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133849" start="7982" end="7999" title="clinical research" label="clinical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q319763" start="8020" end="8031" title="inferiority" label="inferiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384705" start="8033" end="8044" title="Equivalence (measure theory)" label="equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907518" start="8050" end="8058" title="superior (hierarchy)" label="superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q322481" start="8093" end="8097" title="size" label="size"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="8128" end="8148" title="Experimental designs" label="Experimental designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="8183" end="8206" title="design of experiments" label="experimental statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836899" start="8272" end="8282" title="treatment group" label="treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300585" start="8290" end="8295" title="Quadrat" label="plots"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="8303" end="8313" title="experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156536" start="8324" end="8352" title="completely randomized design" label="completely randomized design"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927286" start="8354" end="8377" title="randomized block design" label="randomized block design"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116558" start="8383" end="8400" title="factorial designs" label="factorial designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="8468" end="8479" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="8493" end="8512" title="experimental design" label="experimental design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836899" start="8564" end="8574" title="treatment group" label="treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q898312" start="8613" end="8624" title="environment (systems)" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300585" start="8645" end="8650" title="Quadrat" label="plots"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="8652" end="8658" title="plants" label="plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="8660" end="8669" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="8671" end="8684" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394145" start="8768" end="8776" title="lattice model (physics)" label="lattices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316306" start="8821" end="8831" title="split plot" label="split plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q367359" start="8919" end="8932" title="Scientific control" label="control plots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376021" start="8978" end="8994" title="Estimation theory" label="error estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="9002" end="9011" title="inference" label="inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="9017" end="9033" title="clinical studies" label="clinical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="9039" end="9045" title="sample (statistics)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q898312" start="9124" end="9135" title="environment (systems)" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436668" start="9194" end="9231" title="Randomized controlled trial" label="randomized controlled clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q818574" start="9273" end="9292" title="observational study" label="observational study"/>
<link wikidata="Q961652" start="9309" end="9321" title="case–control" label="case–control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303415" start="9325" end="9331" title="cohort (statistics)" label="cohort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268708" start="9549" end="9565" title="qualitative data" label="qualitative data"/>
<link wikidata="Q730675" start="9748" end="9765" title="quantitative data" label="quantitative data"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824326" start="9926" end="9940" title="metric measure" label="metric measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q496946" start="10584" end="10590" title="Table (information)" label="tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q28923" start="10594" end="10603" title="chart" label="graphical"/>
<link wikidata="Q734219" start="10685" end="10704" title="Central tendency" label="measures of central"/>
<link wikidata="Q845777" start="10718" end="10729" title="Statistical dispersion" label="variability"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="10862" end="10871" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q139677" start="11259" end="11265" title="operon" label="operon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378376" start="11313" end="11323" title="Line graph" label="Line graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124595" start="11540" end="11549" title="bar chart" label="bar chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q202864" start="11932" end="11942" title="Zika virus" label="Zika virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185020" start="11999" end="12008" title="histogram" label="histogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q310794" start="12166" end="12178" title="Karl Pearson" label="Karl Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045782" start="12207" end="12219" title="scatter plot" label="scatter plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="12601" end="12616" title="arithmetic mean" label="arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="12764" end="12770" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q188224" start="12832" end="12836" title="mode (statistics)" label="mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q895726" start="12912" end="12920" title="Box plot" label="Box plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q779824" start="13110" end="13117" title="Outlier" label="Outlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433612" start="13369" end="13392" title="correlation coefficient" label="correlation coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136628" start="13530" end="13561" title="Pearson correlation coefficient" label="Pearson correlation coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="13997" end="14006" title="inference" label="inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q620994" start="14404" end="14430" title="Standard error" label="standard error of the mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q210832" start="14495" end="14513" title="Statistical hypothesis testing" label="Hypothesis testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="14816" end="14831" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q843558" start="14873" end="14895" title="alternative hypothesis" label="alternative hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="15043" end="15064" title="significance level" label="level of significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461038" start="15234" end="15248" title="test statistic" label="test statistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="15452" end="15471" title="Design of experiments" label="experimental design"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="15588" end="15603" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q253255" start="15678" end="15685" title="p-value" label="p-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="15856" end="15876" title="Confidence intervals" label="Confidence intervals"/>
<link wikidata="Q989120" start="16500" end="16512" title="Type I error" label="Type I error"/>
<link wikidata="Q989120" start="16517" end="16530" title="Type II error" label="Type II error"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207010" start="16556" end="16570" title="False positives and false negatives" label="false positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207010" start="16647" end="16661" title="False positives and false negatives" label="false negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="16695" end="16710" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="16718" end="16736" title="significance level" label="significance level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199823" start="16867" end="16896" title="Statistical power" label="statistical power of the test"/>
<link wikidata="Q253255" start="16929" end="16936" title="p-value" label="p-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="17041" end="17056" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="17162" end="17184" title="Statistical significance" label="significance level (α)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207010" start="17421" end="17436" title="False positives and false negatives" label="false positives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433418" start="17437" end="17460" title="Family-wise error rate" label="(familywise error rate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q385989" start="17620" end="17641" title="Bonferroni correction" label="Bonferroni correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432696" start="17992" end="18018" title="False discovery rate" label="false discovery rate (FDR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="18077" end="18092" title="Null hypothesis" label="null hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888345" start="19111" end="19135" title="Model selection" label="Model criteria selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888345" start="19195" end="19236" title="Model selection" label="Akaike&amp;#x27;s Information Criterion (AIC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888345" start="19245" end="19281" title="Model selection" label="Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="19647" end="19657" title="DNA sequencing" label="sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="19672" end="19686" title="Bioinformatics" label="Bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="19691" end="19707" title="Machine learning" label="Machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314784" start="19709" end="19743" title="Machine learning in bioinformatics" label="Machine learning in bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q591745" start="19817" end="19828" title="DNA microarray" label="microarrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="19830" end="19856" title="DNA sequencing" label="next-generation sequencers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="19876" end="19893" title="mass spectrometers" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332350" start="20350" end="20367" title="Multicollinearity" label="Multicollinearity"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="20486" end="20501" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132755" start="20862" end="20881" title="logistic regression" label="logistic regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228929" start="20886" end="20914" title="linear discriminant analysis" label="linear discriminant analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="21224" end="21237" title="least squares" label="least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q18085840" start="21696" end="21724" title="Gene Set Enrichment Analysis" label="Gene Set Enrichment Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q902835" start="22199" end="22225" title="JAK-STAT signaling pathway" label="JAK-STAT signaling pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117139" start="22358" end="22377" title="biological database" label="biological database"/>
<link wikidata="Q180686" start="22666" end="22672" title="PubMed" label="PubMed"/>
<link wikidata="Q501128" start="22859" end="22863" title="Single-nucleotide polymorphism" label="SNPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243761" start="22865" end="22870" title="dbSNP" label="dbSNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q909442" start="22933" end="22937" title="KEGG" label="KEGG"/>
<link wikidata="Q135085" start="23057" end="23070" title="Gene ontology" label="Gene Ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="23372" end="23392" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667403" start="23706" end="23762" title="International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration" label="International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="23994" end="24010" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q334384" start="24163" end="24173" title="Supervised learning" label="supervised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152135" start="24178" end="24199" title="unsupervised learning" label="unsupervised learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q622825" start="24226" end="24234" title="Cluster analysis" label="clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q386780" start="24239" end="24262" title="Association rule learning" label="association rule mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136838" start="24304" end="24323" title="self-organizing map" label="self-organizing map"/>
<link wikidata="Q310401" start="24329" end="24348" title="k-means clustering" label="&amp;quot;k&amp;quot;-means"/>
<link wikidata="Q192776" start="24385" end="24400" title="Artificial neural network" label="neural networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q282453" start="24420" end="24442" title="support vector machine" label="support vector machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q301990" start="24994" end="25007" title="Bootstrapping (statistics)" label="bootstrapping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25012" end="25023" title="Re-sampling (statistics)" label="re-sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q245748" start="25051" end="25065" title="random forests" label="random forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744628" start="25116" end="25142" title="statistical classification" label="statistical classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="25462" end="25475" title="Public health" label="Public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="25487" end="25499" title="epidemiology" label="epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518253" start="25501" end="25525" title="health services research" label="health services research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="25527" end="25536" title="nutrition" label="nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q932068" start="25538" end="25558" title="environmental health" label="environmental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="25609" end="25617" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="25691" end="25705" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663871" start="25907" end="25923" title="Systems medicine" label="Systems medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="26244" end="26263" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709513" start="26268" end="26288" title="statistical genetics" label="statistical genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="26319" end="26327" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="26348" end="26357" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q853421" start="26570" end="26594" title="quantitative trait locus" label="quantitative trait locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311855" start="26645" end="26661" title="molecular marker" label="molecular marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302705" start="26799" end="26824" title="recombinant inbred strain" label="recombinant inbred strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q715789" start="26880" end="26888" title="gene map" label="gene map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098876" start="27438" end="27467" title="genome-wide association study" label="genome-wide association study"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064311" start="27516" end="27538" title="linkage disequilibrium" label="linkage disequilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391886" start="27668" end="27682" title="SNP genotyping" label="SNP genotyping"/>
<link wikidata="Q227675" start="27688" end="27694" title="Animal breeding" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q788558" start="27699" end="27713" title="plant breeding" label="plant breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="27737" end="27746" title="Selective breeding" label="selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954823" start="27830" end="27855" title="marker-assisted selection" label="marker-assisted selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q541014" start="28524" end="28540" title="cross-validation (statistics)" label="cross-validation"/>
<link wikidata="Q788558" start="28850" end="28864" title="Plant breeding" label="Plant breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="28870" end="28879" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q227675" start="28881" end="28896" title="Animal breeding" label="Animal breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="28968" end="28972" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="28973" end="28979" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q265799" start="29039" end="29053" title="human genetics" label="human genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542347" start="29130" end="29137" title="RNA-Seq" label="RNA-Seq"/>
<link wikidata="Q856198" start="29151" end="29158" title="Real-time polymerase chain reaction" label="RT-qPCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931516" start="29163" end="29174" title="microarrays" label="microarrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q373027" start="29578" end="29582" title="exon" label="exon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931516" start="29621" end="29631" title="microarray" label="microarray"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="29787" end="29794" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q743364" start="29966" end="29996" title="negative binomial distribution" label="negative binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501882" start="29998" end="30022" title="Generalized linear model" label="Generalized linear model"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="30203" end="30211" title="genomics" label="genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q471857" start="30242" end="30252" title="proteomics" label="proteomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="30336" end="30343" title="Ecology" label="Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333237" start="30345" end="30367" title="ecological forecasting" label="ecological forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154615" start="30381" end="30398" title="sequence analysis" label="sequence analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q815297" start="30401" end="30416" title="Systems biology" label="Systems biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133849" start="30468" end="30485" title="Clinical research" label="Clinical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q904564" start="30519" end="30538" title="Population dynamics" label="Population dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420050" start="30565" end="30582" title="fisheries science" label="fisheries science"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="30586" end="30599" title="Phylogenetics" label="Phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="30604" end="30613" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q725307" start="30616" end="30632" title="Pharmacodynamics" label="Pharmacodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="30635" end="30651" title="Pharmacokinetics" label="Pharmacokinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="30654" end="30666" title="Neuroimaging" label="Neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654344" start="30926" end="30932" title="ASReml" label="ASReml"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316301" start="31111" end="31140" title="restricted maximum likelihood" label="restricted maximum likelihood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134404" start="31281" end="31300" title="Covariance matrix" label="variance-covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242899" start="31588" end="31605" title="Crossover study" label="crossover designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355041" start="31682" end="31688" title="Orange (software)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="31832" end="31833" title="R (programming language)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="31838" end="31849" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283865" start="31963" end="31964" title="S (programming language)" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888953" start="32431" end="32443" title="Bioconductor" label="Bioconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="32538" end="32544" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003932" start="32548" end="32551" title="SAS (software)" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473820" start="32685" end="32698" title="SAS Institute" label="SAS Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388824" start="32709" end="32721" title="SAS language" label="SAS language"/>
<link wikidata="Q115494" start="33114" end="33118" title="Weka (machine learning)" label="Weka"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="33122" end="33126" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="33140" end="33156" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="33161" end="33172" title="data mining" label="data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="33441" end="33470" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="33521" end="33524" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q82231" start="33537" end="33542" title="NoSQL" label="NoSQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q197520" start="33545" end="33550" title="NumPy" label="NumPy"/>
<link wikidata="Q197492" start="33570" end="33575" title="SciPy" label="SciPy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165184" start="33578" end="33586" title="SageMath" label="SageMath"/>
<link wikidata="Q642141" start="33589" end="33595" title="LAPACK" label="LAPACK"/>
<link wikidata="Q169478" start="33613" end="33619" title="MATLAB" label="MATLAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q29120" start="33622" end="33635" title="Apache Hadoop" label="Apache Hadoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573619" start="33638" end="33650" title="Apache Spark" label="Apache Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q456157" start="33653" end="33672" title="Amazon Web Services" label="Amazon Web Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="33767" end="33779" title="postgraduate" label="postgraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="34167" end="34179" title="epidemiology" label="epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="34376" end="34390" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177005" start="34395" end="34416" title="computational biology" label="computational biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="34482" end="34495" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="34580" end="34594" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q827792" start="35199" end="35214" title="quality control" label="quality control"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="35230" end="35239" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="35714" end="35728" title="Bioinformatics" label="Bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382703" start="35731" end="35753" title="Epidemiological method" label="Epidemiological method"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="35756" end="35768" title="Epidemiology" label="Epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q281601" start="35771" end="35790" title="Group size measures" label="Group size measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021791" start="35793" end="35809" title="Health indicator" label="Health indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q751611" start="35812" end="35848" title="Mathematical and theoretical biology" label="Mathematical and theoretical biology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3912" wikidata="Q794580" url="?curid=3912" title="List of major biblical figures">
<text>The Bible is a collection of canonical sacred texts of Judaism and Christianity. Different religious groups include different books within their canons, in different orders, and sometimes divide or combine books, or incorporate additional material into canonical books. Christian Bibles range from the sixty-six books of the Protestant canon to the eighty-one books of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church canon.

==Hebrew Bible==

*Tubal-cain

===Prophets===

*Samuel
*Enoch

===Kings===

*David
*Solomon

===Priests===
* Aaron
* Eleazar
* Eli
* Phinehas

===Tribes of Israel===
According to the Book of Genesis, the Israelites were descendants of the sons of Jacob, who was renamed Israel after wrestling with an angel. His twelve male children become the ancestors of the Twelve Tribes of Israel.

* Asher
* Benjamin
* Dan
* Gad
* Issachar
* Joseph, which was split into two tribes descended from his sons:
** Tribe of Ephraim
** Tribe of Manasseh
* Judah
* Levi
* Naphtali
* Reuben
* Simeon
* Zebulun

==Deuterocanon==

===Maccabees===
*Eleazar Avaran
*John Gaddi
*John Hyrcanus
*Jonathan Apphus
*Judas Maccabeus
*Mattathias
*Simon Thassi
===Greek rulers===
*Alexander the Great
*Antiochus III the Great
*Antiochus IV Epiphanes
*Philip II of Macedon
===Persian rulers===
*Astyages
*Darius III
===Others===
*Baruch
*Tobit
*Judith
*Susanna

==New Testament==
===Jesus and his relatives===

* Jesus Christ
* Mary, mother of Jesus
* Joseph
* Brothers of Jesus
** James (often identified with James, son of Alphaeus)
** Joseph (Joses)
** Judas (Jude) (often identified with Thaddeus)
** Simon
* Mary of Clopas
* Cleopas (often identified with Alphaeus and Clopas)

===Apostles of Jesus===

The Thirteen:
* Peter (a.k.a. Simon or Cephas)
* Andrew (Simon Peter&#x27;s brother)
* James, son of Zebedee
* John, son of Zebedee
* Philip
* Bartholomew also known as &quot;Nathanael&quot;
* Thomas also known as &quot;Doubting Thomas&quot;
* Matthew also known as &quot;Levi&quot;
* James, son of Alphaeus
* Judas, son of James (a.k.a. Thaddeus or Lebbaeus)
* Simon the Zealot
* Judas Iscariot (the traitor)
* Matthias

Others:
* Paul
* Barnabas
* Mary Magdalene (the one who discovered Jesus&#x27; empty tomb)

===Priests===
* Caiaphas, high priest
* Annas, first high priest of Roman Judea
* Zechariah, father of John the Baptist

===Prophets===
* Agabus
* Anna
* Simeon
* John the Baptist

===Other believers===

* Apollos
* Aquila
* Dionysius the Areopagite
* Epaphras, fellow prisoner of Paul, fellow worker
* John Mark (often identified with Mark)
* Joseph of Arimathea
* Lazarus
* Luke
* Mark
* Martha
* Mary Magdalene
* Mary, sister of Martha
* Nicodemus
* Onesimus
* Philemon
* Priscilla
* Silas
* Sopater
* Stephen, first martyr
* Timothy
* Titus

===Secular rulers===

* Agrippa I, called &quot;King Herod&quot; or &quot;Herod&quot; in Acts 12
* Felix governor of Judea who was present at the trial of Paul, and his wife Drusilla in Acts 24:24
* Herod Agrippa II, king over several territories, before whom Paul made his defense in Acts 26.
* Herod Antipas, called &quot;Herod the Tetrarch&quot; or &quot;Herod&quot; in the Gospels and in Acts 4:27
* Herodias
* Herod the Great
* Philip the Tetrarch
* Pontius Pilate
* Salome, the daughter of Herodias
* Quirinius
====Roman Emperors====
* Augustus
* Tiberius
* Claudius

==See also==

* List of biblical names
* List of burial places of biblical figures
* List of Jewish biblical figures
* List of minor biblical figures, A–K
* List of minor biblical figures, L–Z
* List of minor New Testament figures

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4" end="9" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="29" end="50" title="Biblical canon" label="canonical sacred text"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="55" end="62" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="67" end="79" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="228" end="247" title="Books of the Bible#Intertestamental books" label="additional material"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="325" end="335" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="373" end="398" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356181" start="426" end="436" title="Tubal-cain" label="Tubal-cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577515" start="455" end="461" title="Samuel" label="Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213027" start="463" end="468" title="Enoch" label="Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="484" end="489" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="491" end="498" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51676" start="516" end="521" title="Aaron" label="Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q159443" start="524" end="531" title="Eleazar" label="Eleazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q362021" start="534" end="537" title="Eli (Judges)" label="Eli"/>
<link wikidata="Q128063" start="540" end="548" title="Phinehas" label="Phinehas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="590" end="605" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="611" end="621" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="654" end="659" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141419" start="690" end="713" title="Jacob wrestling with the angel" label="wrestling with an angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q390248" start="740" end="760" title="myth of origin" label="become the ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605404" start="768" end="791" title="Twelve Tribes of Israel" label="Twelve Tribes of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163106" start="796" end="801" title="Tribe of Asher" label="Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812965" start="804" end="812" title="Tribe of Benjamin" label="Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121613" start="815" end="818" title="Tribe of Dan" label="Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q548841" start="821" end="824" title="Tribe of Gad" label="Gad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005023" start="827" end="835" title="Tribe of Issachar" label="Issachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q198747" start="838" end="844" title="Tribe of Joseph" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329576" start="906" end="922" title="Tribe of Ephraim" label="Tribe of Ephraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735753" start="926" end="943" title="Tribe of Manasseh" label="Tribe of Manasseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q913564" start="946" end="951" title="Tribe of Judah" label="Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707860" start="954" end="958" title="Tribe of Levi" label="Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348367" start="961" end="969" title="Tribe of Naphtali" label="Naphtali"/>
<link wikidata="Q783246" start="972" end="978" title="Tribe of Reuben" label="Reuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370197" start="981" end="987" title="Tribe of Simeon" label="Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534999" start="990" end="997" title="Tribe of Zebulun" label="Zebulun"/>
<link wikidata="Q578133" start="1034" end="1048" title="Eleazar Avaran" label="Eleazar Avaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917245" start="1050" end="1060" title="John Gaddi" label="John Gaddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319043" start="1062" end="1075" title="John Hyrcanus" label="John Hyrcanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75043" start="1077" end="1092" title="Jonathan Apphus" label="Jonathan Apphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q111559" start="1094" end="1109" title="Judas Maccabeus" label="Judas Maccabeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75048" start="1111" end="1121" title="Mattathias" label="Mattathias"/>
<link wikidata="Q359711" start="1123" end="1135" title="Simon Thassi" label="Simon Thassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="1156" end="1175" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365" start="1177" end="1200" title="Antiochus III the Great" label="Antiochus III the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356" start="1202" end="1224" title="Antiochus IV Epiphanes" label="Antiochus IV Epiphanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="1226" end="1246" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271527" start="1269" end="1277" title="Astyages" label="Astyages"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="1279" end="1289" title="Darius III" label="Darius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q599907" start="1304" end="1310" title="Baruch ben Neriah" label="Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131737" start="1312" end="1317" title="Tobit of Nineveh" label="Tobit"/>
<link wikidata="Q202129" start="1319" end="1325" title="Judith" label="Judith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930210" start="1327" end="1334" title="Susanna (Book of Daniel)" label="Susanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1387" end="1399" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="1402" end="1423" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary, mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="1426" end="1432" title="Saint Joseph" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q620744" start="1435" end="1452" title="Brothers of Jesus" label="Brothers of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="1456" end="1461" title="James, brother of Jesus" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721201" start="1512" end="1526" title="Joses, brother of Jesus" label="Joseph (Joses)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464332" start="1530" end="1542" title="Jude, brother of Jesus" label="Judas (Jude)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099259" start="1579" end="1584" title="Simon, brother of Jesus" label="Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q235377" start="1587" end="1601" title="Mary of Clopas" label="Mary of Clopas"/>
<link wikidata="Q711072" start="1604" end="1611" title="Cleopas" label="Cleopas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542853" start="1635" end="1643" title="Alphaeus" label="Alphaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979581" start="1648" end="1654" title="Clopas" label="Clopas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="1698" end="1703" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="1731" end="1737" title="Saint Andrew" label="Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="1769" end="1790" title="Saint James the Great" label="James, son of Zebedee"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="1793" end="1797" title="John the Apostle" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q43675" start="1816" end="1822" title="Philip the Apostle" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q43982" start="1825" end="1836" title="Bartholomew" label="Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359769" start="1857" end="1866" title="Nathanael (follower of Jesus)" label="Nathanael"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="1875" end="1881" title="Thomas (apostle)" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43600" start="1926" end="1933" title="Matthew the Evangelist" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q44047" start="1967" end="1989" title="James, son of Alphaeus" label="James, son of Alphaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43945" start="1992" end="2011" title="Saint Jude" label="Judas, son of James"/>
<link wikidata="Q12871" start="2044" end="2060" title="Simon the Zealot" label="Simon the Zealot"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="2063" end="2077" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q44020" start="2094" end="2102" title="Saint Matthias" label="Matthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="2114" end="2118" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q185856" start="2121" end="2129" title="Barnabas" label="Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="2132" end="2146" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q211246" start="2212" end="2220" title="Caiaphas" label="Caiaphas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51680" start="2236" end="2241" title="Annas" label="Annas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="2264" end="2275" title="Roman Judea" label="Roman Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q139464" start="2278" end="2287" title="Zechariah (priest)" label="Zechariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q335127" start="2334" end="2340" title="Agabus" label="Agabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774668" start="2343" end="2347" title="Anna (Bible)" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q345205" start="2350" end="2356" title="Simeon (Gospel of Luke)" label="Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="2359" end="2375" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q335114" start="2402" end="2409" title="Apollos" label="Apollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085604" start="2412" end="2418" title="Priscilla and Aquila" label="Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q310686" start="2421" end="2445" title="Dionysius the Areopagite" label="Dionysius the Areopagite"/>
<link wikidata="Q953527" start="2448" end="2456" title="Epaphras" label="Epaphras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992340" start="2499" end="2508" title="John Mark" label="John Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q271474" start="2540" end="2559" title="Joseph of Arimathea" label="Joseph of Arimathea"/>
<link wikidata="Q539890" start="2562" end="2569" title="Lazarus of Bethany" label="Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128538" start="2572" end="2576" title="Luke the Evangelist" label="Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="2579" end="2583" title="Mark the Evangelist" label="Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q232453" start="2586" end="2592" title="Martha" label="Martha"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="2595" end="2609" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q239058" start="2612" end="2634" title="Mary, sister of Martha" label="Mary, sister of Martha"/>
<link wikidata="Q295084" start="2637" end="2646" title="Nicodemus" label="Nicodemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319568" start="2649" end="2657" title="Onesimus" label="Onesimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q709209" start="2660" end="2668" title="Philemon of Colossae" label="Philemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085604" start="2671" end="2680" title="Priscilla (Christian)" label="Priscilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q312376" start="2683" end="2688" title="Silas" label="Silas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567249" start="2691" end="2698" title="Sopater" label="Sopater"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="2701" end="2708" title="Saint Stephen" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212647" start="2725" end="2732" title="Saint Timothy" label="Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q320136" start="2735" end="2740" title="Saint Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298636" start="2766" end="2775" title="Agrippa I" label="Agrippa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q316915" start="2841" end="2846" title="Antonius Felix" label="Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q255778" start="2916" end="2924" title="Drusilla (daughter of Herod Agrippa I)" label="Drusilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q313419" start="2941" end="2957" title="Herod Agrippa II" label="Herod Agrippa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q192950" start="3038" end="3051" title="Herod Antipas" label="Herod Antipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="3119" end="3126" title="Canonical gospels" label="Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q230091" start="3146" end="3154" title="Herodias" label="Herodias"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="3157" end="3172" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q345647" start="3175" end="3194" title="Philip the Tetrarch" label="Philip the Tetrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131" start="3197" end="3211" title="Pontius Pilate" label="Pontius Pilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q228896" start="3214" end="3246" title="Salome" label="Salome, the daughter of Herodias"/>
<link wikidata="Q313398" start="3249" end="3258" title="Quirinius" label="Quirinius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="3284" end="3292" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="3295" end="3303" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="3306" end="3314" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075643" start="3332" end="3354" title="List of biblical names" label="List of biblical names"/>
<link wikidata="Q285317" start="3357" end="3398" title="List of burial places of biblical figures" label="List of burial places of biblical figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575334" start="3401" end="3432" title="List of Jewish biblical figures" label="List of Jewish biblical figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712858" start="3435" end="3470" title="List of minor biblical figures, A–K" label="List of minor biblical figures, A–K"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068232" start="3473" end="3508" title="List of minor biblical figures, L–Z" label="List of minor biblical figures, L–Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q85780004" start="3511" end="3546" title="List of minor New Testament figures" label="List of minor New Testament figures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3914" wikidata="Q733600" url="?curid=3914" title="British &amp; Irish Lions">
<text>The British &amp; Irish Lions is a rugby union team selected from players eligible for the national teams of England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. The Lions are a test side and most often select players who have already played for their national team, although they can pick uncapped players who are eligible for any of the four unions. The team tours every four years, with these rotating between Australia, New Zealand and South Africa in order. The most recent test series, the 2021 series against South Africa, was won 2–1 by South Africa.

From 1888 onwards, combined British rugby sides toured the Southern Hemisphere. The first tour was a commercial venture, undertaken without official backing. The six subsequent visits enjoyed a growing degree of support from the authorities, before the 1910 South Africa tour, which was the first tour representative of the four Home Unions. In 1949 the four Home Unions formally created a Tours Committee and for the first time, every player of the 1950 Lions squad had played internationally before the tour. The 1950s tours saw high win rates in provincial games, but the Test series were typically lost or drawn. The series wins in 1971 (New Zealand) and 1974 (South Africa) interrupted this pattern. The last tour of the amateur age took place in 1993. The Lions have also played occasional matches in the Northern Hemisphere either as one-off exhibitions or before a Southern Hemisphere tour.

==Naming and symbols==
===Name===
The Shaw and Shrewsbury team first played in 1888 and is considered the precursor of the British &amp; Irish Lions. It was then primarily English in composition but also contained players from Scotland and Wales. Later the team used the name British Isles. On their 1950 tour of New Zealand and Australia they officially adopted the name British Lions, the nickname first used by British and South African journalists on the 1924 South African tour after the lion emblem on their ties, the emblem on their jerseys having been dropped in favour of the four-quartered badge with the symbols of the four represented unions.

When the team first emerged in the 19th century, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland was one single state. The team continued after the Irish Free State was set up in 1922, but was still known as the British Lions or British Isles. The name &quot;British &amp; Irish Lions&quot; has been used since the 2001 tour of Australia. The team is often referred to simply as the Lions.

===Anthem===
As the Lions represent four rugby unions, which cover two sovereign states, they do not currently have a national anthem. For the 1989 tour, the British national anthem &quot;God Save the Queen&quot; was used. For the 2005 tour to New Zealand, the Lions management commissioned a song, &quot;The Power of Four&quot;, although it was met with little support among Lions fans at the matches and has not been used since.

===Colours and strip===
For more than half a century, the Lions have worn a red jersey that sports the amalgamated crests of the four unions. Prior to 1950 the strip went through a number of significantly different formats.

====Unsanctioned tours====
In 1888, the promoter of the first expedition to Australia and New Zealand, Arthur Shrewsbury, demanded &quot;something that would be good material and yet take them by storm out here&quot;. The result was a jersey in thick red, white and blue hoops, worn above white shorts and dark socks. The tours to South Africa in 1891 and 1896 retained the red, white and blue theme but this time as red and white hooped jerseys and dark blue shorts and socks. The 1899 trip to Australia saw a reversion to red, white and blue jerseys, but with the blue used in thick hoops and the red and white in thin bands. The shorts remained blue, as did the socks although a white flash was added to the latter. The one-off test in 1999 between England and Australia that was played to commemorate Australia&#x27;s first test against Reverend Matthew Mullineux&#x27;s British side saw England wear an updated version of this jersey. In 1903, the South Africa tour followed on from the 1896 tour, with red and white hooped jerseys. The slight differences were that the red hoops were slightly thicker than the white (the opposite was true in 1896), and the white flash on the socks introduced in 1899 was partially retained. The Australia tour of 1904 saw exactly the same kit as in 1899. In 1908, with the Scottish and Irish unions not taking part, the Anglo-Welsh side sported red jerseys with a thick white band on tour to Australia and New Zealand. Blue shorts were retained, but the socks were for the first time red, with a white flash.

====Blue jerseys, the Lions named and the crest adopted====

The Scots were once again involved in Tom Smyth&#x27;s 1910 team to South Africa. Thus, dark blue jerseys were introduced with white shorts and the red socks of 1908. The jerseys also had a single lion-rampant crest. The 1924 tour returned to South Africa, retaining the blue jerseys but now with shorts to match. It is the 1924 tour that is credited as being the first in which the team were referred to as &quot;the Lions&quot;, the irony being that it was on this tour that the single lion-rampant crest was replaced with the forerunner of the four-quartered badge with the symbols of the four represented unions, that is still worn today. Although the lion had been dropped from the jersey, the players had worn the lion motif on their ties as they arrived in South Africa, which led the press and public referring to them as &quot;the Lions&quot;.

The unofficial 1927 Argentina tour used the same kit and badge, and three heraldic lions returned as the jersey badge in 1930. This was the tour to New Zealand where the tourists&#x27; now standard blue jerseys caused some controversy. The convention in rugby is for the home side to accommodate its guests when there is a clash of kit. The New Zealand side, by then already synonymous with the appellation &quot;All Blacks&quot;, had an all black kit that clashed with the Lions&#x27; blue. After much reluctance and debate New Zealand agreed to change for the Tests and New Zealand played in all white for the first time. On the 1930 tour a delegation led by the Irish lock George Beamish expressed their displeasure at the fact that while the blue of Scotland, white of England and red of Wales were represented in the strip there was no green for Ireland. A green flash was added to the socks, which from 1938 became a green turnover (although on blue socks thus eliminating red from the kit), and that has remained a feature of the strip ever since. In 1936, the four-quartered badge returned for the tour to Argentina and has remained on the kits ever since, but other than that the strip remained the same.

====Red jerseys====
The adoption of the red jersey happened in the 1950 tour. A return to New Zealand was accompanied by a desire to avoid the controversy of 1930 and so red replaced blue for the jersey with the resultant kit being that which is still worn today, the combination of red jersey, white shorts and green and blue socks, representing the four unions. The only additions to the strip since 1950 began appearing in 1993, with the addition of kit suppliers logos in prominent positions. Umbro had in 1989 asked for &quot;maximum brand exposure whenever possible&quot; but this did not affect the kit&#x27;s appearance. Since then, Nike, Adidas and Canterbury have had more overt branding on the shirts, with sponsors Scottish Provident (1997), (2001), Zurich (2005), HSBC (2009 and 2013), Standard Life Investments (2017) and Vodafone (2021).

====Jersey evolution====

==Squad==
==History==

===1888–1909===

The earliest tours date back to 1888, when a 21-man squad visited Australia and New Zealand. The squad drew players from England, Scotland and Wales, though English players predominated. The 35-match tour of two host nations included no tests, but the side played provincial, city and academic sides, winning 27 matches. They played 19 games of Australian rules football, against prominent clubs in Victoria and South Australia, winning six and drawing one of these (see Australian rules football in England).
The first tour, although unsanctioned by rugby bodies, established the concept of Northern Hemisphere sporting sides touring to the Southern Hemisphere. Three years after the first tour, the Western Province union invited rugby bodies in Britain to tour South Africa. Some saw the 1891 team – the first sanctioned by the Rugby Football Union – as the England national team, though others referred to it as &quot;the British Isles&quot;. The tourists played a total of twenty matches, three of them tests. The team also played the regional side of South Africa (South Africa did not exist as a political unit in 1891), winning all three matches. In a notable event of the tour, the touring side presented the Currie Cup to Griqualand West, the province they thought produced the best performance on the tour.

Five years later a British Isles side returned to South Africa. They played one extra match on this tour, making the total of 21 games, including four tests against South Africa, with the British Isles winning three of them. The squad had a notable Irish orientation, with the Ireland national team contributing six players to the 21-man squad.
In 1899 the British Isles touring side returned to Australia for the first time since the unofficial tour of 1888. The squad of 23 for the first time ever had players from each of the home nations. The team again participated in 21 matches, playing state teams as well as northern Queensland sides and Victorian teams. A four-test series took place against Australia, the tourists winning three out of the four. The team returned via Hawaii and Canada playing additional games en route.

Four years later, in 1903, the British Isles team returned to South Africa. The opening performance of the side proved disappointing from the tourists&#x27; point of view, with defeats in its opening three matches by Western Province sides in Cape Town. From then on the team experienced mixed results, though more wins than losses. The side lost the test series to South Africa, drawing twice, but with the South Africans winning the decider 8 to nil.
No more than twelve months passed before the British Isles team ventured to Australia and New Zealand in 1904. The tourists devastated the Australian teams, winning every single game. Australia also lost all three tests to the visitors, even getting held to a standstill in two of the three games. Though the New Zealand leg of the tour did not take long in comparison to the number of Australian games, the British Isles experienced considerable difficulty across the Tasman after whitewashing the Australians. The team managed two early wins before losing the test to New Zealand and only winning one more game as well as drawing once. Despite their difficulties in New Zealand, the tour proved a raging success on-field for the British Isles.

In 1908, another tour took place to Australia and New Zealand. In a reversal of previous practice, the planners allocated more matches in New Zealand rather than in Australia: perhaps the strength of the New Zealand teams and the heavy defeats of all Australian teams on the previous tour influenced this decision. Some commentators thought that this tour hoped to reach out to rugby communities in Australia, as rugby league (infamously) started in Australia in 1908. The Anglo-Welsh side (Irish and Scottish unions did not participate) performed well in all the non-test matches, but drew a test against New Zealand and lost the other two.
===1910–1949===

Visits that took place before the 1910 South Africa tour (the first selected by a committee from the four Home Unions) had enjoyed a growing degree of support from the authorities, although only one of these included representatives of all four nations. The 1910 tour to South Africa marked the official beginning of British Isles rugby tours: the inaugural tour operating under all four unions. The team performed moderately against the non-test teams, claiming victories in just over half their matches, and the test series went to South Africa, who won two of the three games. A side managed by Oxford University — supposedly the England rugby team, but actually including three Scottish players — toured Argentina at the time: the people of Argentina termed it the &quot;Combined British&quot;.

The next British Isles team tour did not take place until 1924, again in South Africa. The team, led by Ronald Cove-Smith, struggled with injuries and lost three of the four test matches, drawing the other 3–3. In total, 21 games were played, with the touring side winning 9, drawing 3 and losing 9.
In 1927 a short, nine-game series took place in Argentina, with the British isles winning all nine encounters, and the tour was a financial success for Argentine rugby. The Lions returned to New Zealand in 1930 with some success. The Lions won all of their games that did not have test status except for the matches against Auckland, Wellington and Canterbury, but they lost three of their four test matches against New Zealand, winning the first test 6–3. The side also visited Australia, losing a test but winning five out of the six non-test games.

In 1936 the British Isles visited Argentina for the third time, winning all ten of their matches and only conceding nine points in the whole tour. Two years later in 1938 the British Isles toured in South Africa, winning more than half of their normal matches. Despite having lost the test series to South Africa by game three, they won the final test. This is when they were named THE LIONS by their then Captain Sam Walker.

===1950–1969===
The first post-war tour went to New Zealand and Australia in 1950. The Lions, sporting newly redesigned jerseys and displaying a fresh style of play, managed to win 22 and draw one of 29 matches over the two nations. The Lions won the opening four fixtures before losing to Otago and Southland, but succeeded in holding New Zealand to a 9–9 draw. The Lions performed well in the remaining All Black tests though they lost all three, the team did not lose another non-test in the New Zealand leg of the tour. The Lions won all their games in Australia except for their final fixture against a New South Wales XV in Newcastle. They won both tests against Australia, in Brisbane, Queensland and in Sydney.

In 1955 the Lions toured South Africa and left with another imposing record, one draw and 19 wins from the 25 fixtures. The four-test series against South Africa, a thrilling affair, ended in a drawn series.

The 1959 tour to Australia and New Zealand marked once again a very successful tour for the Lions, who only lost six of their 35 fixtures. The Lions easily won both tests against Australia and lost the first three tests against New Zealand, but did find victory (9–6) in the final test.

After the glittering decade of the 1950s, the first tour of the 1960s proved not nearly as successful as previous ones. The 1962 tour to South Africa saw the Lions still win 16 of their 25 games, but did not fare well against the Springboks, losing three of the four tests. For the 1966 tour to Australia and New Zealand John Robins became the first Lions coach, and the trip started off very well for the Lions, who stormed through Australia, winning five non-tests and drawing one, and defeating Australia in two tests. The Lions experienced mixed results during the New Zealand leg of the tour, as well as losing all of the tests against New Zealand. The Lions also played a test against Canada on their way home, winning 19 to 8 in Toronto. The 1968 tour of South Africa saw the Lions win 15 of their 16 provincial matches, but the team actually lost three tests against the Springboks and drew one.

===1970–1979===
The 1970s saw a renaissance for the Lions. The 1971 British Lions tour to New Zealand and Australia, centred around the skilled Welsh half-back pairing of Gareth Edwards and Barry John, secured a series win over New Zealand. The tour started with a loss to Queensland but proceeded to storm through the next provincial fixtures, winning 11 games in a row. The Lions then went on to defeat New Zealand in Dunedin. The Lions only lost one match on the rest of the tour and won the test series against New Zealand, winning and drawing the last two games, to take the series two wins to one.

The 1974 British Lions tour to South Africa was one of the best-known and most successful Lions teams. Apartheid concerns meant some players declined the tour. Nonetheless, led by the esteemed Irish forward Willie John McBride, the tour went through 22 games unbeaten and triumphed 3–0 (with one drawn) in the test series. The series featured a lot of violence. The management of the Lions concluded that the Springboks dominated their opponents with physical aggression. At that time, test match referees came from the home nation, substitutions took place only if a doctor found a player unable to continue and there were no video cameras or sideline officials to prevent violent play. The Lions decided &quot;to get their retaliation in first&quot; with the infamous &quot;99 call&quot;. The Lions postulated that a South African referee would probably not send off all of the Lions if they all retaliated against &quot;blatant thuggery&quot;. Famous video footage of the &#x27;battle of Boet Erasmus Stadium&#x27; shows JPR Williams running over half of the pitch and launching himself at Van Heerden after such a call.

The 1977 British Lions tour to New Zealand saw the Lions drop only one non-test out of 21 games, a loss to a Universities side. The team did not win the test series though, winning one game but losing the other three.

In August 1977 the British Lions made a stopover in Fiji on the way home from their tour of New Zealand. Fiji beat them 25–21 at Buckhurst Park, Suva.

===1980–1989===
The Lions toured South Africa in 1980, and completed a flawless non-test record, winning 14 out of 14 matches. The Lions lost the first three tests to South Africa, only winning the last one once the Springboks were guaranteed to win the series.

The 1983 tour to New Zealand saw the team successful in the non-test games, winning all but two games, but being whitewashed in the test series against New Zealand.

A tour to South Africa by the Lions was anticipated in 1986, but the invitation for the Lions to tour was never accepted because of controversy surrounding Apartheid and the tour did not go ahead. The Lions did not return to South Africa until 1997, after the Apartheid era. A Lions team was selected in April 1986 for the International Rugby Board centenary match against &#x27;The Rest&#x27;. The team was organised by the Four Home Unions Committee and the players were given the status of official British Lions.

The Lions tour to Australia in 1989 was a shorter affair, being only 12 matches in total. The tour was very successful for the Lions, who won all eight non-test matches and won the test series against Australia, two to one.

===1990–1999===
The tour to New Zealand in 1993 was the last of the amateur era. The Lions won six and lost four non-test matches, and lost the test series 2–1. The tour to South Africa in 1997 was a success for the Lions, who completed the tour with only two losses, and won the test series 2–1.

===2000–2009===

In 2001, the ten-game tour to Australia saw the Wallabies win the test series 2–1. This series saw the first award of the Tom Richards Trophy. In the Lions&#x27; 2005 tour to New Zealand, coached by Clive Woodward, the Lions won seven games against provincial teams, were defeated by the New Zealand Maori team, and suffered heavy defeats in all three tests.

In 2009, the Lions toured South Africa. There they faced the World Cup winners South Africa, with Ian McGeechan leading a coaching team including Warren Gatland, Shaun Edwards and Rob Howley. The Lions were captained by Irish lock Paul O&#x27;Connell. The initial Lions selection consisted of fourteen Irish players, thirteen Welsh, eight English and two Scots in the 37-man squad. In the first Test on 20 June, they lost 26–21, and lost the series in the second 28–25 in a tightly fought game at Loftus Versfeld on 27 June. The Lions won the third Test 28–9 at Ellis Park, and the series finished 2–1 to South Africa.

===2010–2019===
During June 2013 the British &amp; Irish Lions toured Australia. Former Scotland and Lions full-back Andy Irvine was appointed as tour manager in 2010. Wales head coach Warren Gatland was the Lions&#x27; head coach, and their tour captain was Sam Warburton. The tour started in Hong Kong with a match against the Barbarians before moving on to Australia for the main tour featuring six provincial matches and three tests. The Lions won all but one non-test matches, losing to the Brumbies 14–12 on 18 June. The first test was followed shortly after this, which saw the Lions go 1-up over Australia winning 23–21. Australia did have a chance to take the win in the final moments of the game, but a missed penalty by Kurtley Beale saw the Lions take the win. The Wallabies drew the series in the second test winning 16–15, though the Lions had a chance to steal the win had it not been because of a missed penalty by Leigh Halfpenny. With tour captain Warburton out of the final test due to injury, Alun Wyn Jones took over the captaincy in the final test in Sydney. The final test was won by the Lions in what was a record win, winning 41–16 to earn their first series win since 1997 and their first over Australia since 1989.

Following his winning tour of Australia in 2013, Warren Gatland was reappointed as Lions Head Coach for the tour to New Zealand in June and July 2017. In April 2016, it was announced that the side would again be captained again by Sam Warburton. The touring schedule included 10 games: an opening game against the Provincial Barbarians, challenge matches against all five of New Zealand&#x27;s Super Rugby sides, a match against the Māori All Blacks and three tests against . The Lions defeated the Provincial Barbarians in the first game of the tour, before being beaten by the Blues three days later. The team recovered to beat the Crusaders but this was followed up with another midweek loss, this time against the Highlanders. The Lions then faced the Māori All Blacks, winning comfortably to restore optimism and followed up with their first midweek victory of the tour against the Chiefs. On 24 June, the Lions, captained by Peter O&#x27;Mahony, faced New Zealand in Eden Park in the first Test and were beaten 30–15. This was followed by the final midweek game of the tour, a draw against the Hurricanes. For the second Test, Gatland recalled Warburton to the starting team as captain. In Wellington Regional Stadium, the Lions beat a 14-man New Zealand side 24–21 after Sonny Bill Williams was red-carded at the 24-minute mark after a shoulder charge on Anthony Watson. This tied the series going into the final game, ending the side&#x27;s 47-game winning run at home. In the final test at Eden Park the following week, the teams were tied at 15 points apiece with 78 minutes gone. Romain Poite signaled a penalty to New Zealand for an offside infringement after Ken Owens received the ball in front of his teammate Liam Williams, giving New Zealand the opportunity to kick for goal and potentially win the series. Poite, however, decided to downgrade the penalty to a free-kick after discussing with assistant referee Jérôme Garcès and Lions captain Sam Warburton. The match finished as a draw and the series was tied.

===2020–present===
Warren Gatland was Lions head coach again for the tour to South Africa in 2021. In December 2019, the Lions&#x27; Test venues were announced, but the tour was significantly disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and all the games were played behind closed doors. South Africa won the test series by two games to one. In the deciding third test, Morne Steyn again kicked a late penalty to win the series. In 2024, it was announced that Andy Farrell would succeed Gatland as the Lions head coach. A women&#x27;s Lions team was established in 2024, with their inaugural tour to New Zealand to take place in 2027.

==Overall test match record==

Overall test series results
==Tours==

===Format===
The Lions now regularly tour three Southern Hemisphere countries; Australia, South Africa and New Zealand. They also toured Argentina three times before the Second World War. Since 1989 tours have been held every four years. The most recent tour was to South Africa in 2021.

In a break with tradition, the 2005 tour of New Zealand was preceded by a &quot;home&quot; fixture against Argentina at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff on 23 May 2005. It finished in a 25–25 draw. A similar fixture was held against Japan before the 2021 tour of South Africa at Murrayfield, with the Lions winning 28–10.

On tour, games take place against local provinces, clubs or representative sides as well as test matches against the host&#x27;s national team.

The Lions and their predecessor teams have also played games against other nearby countries on tour. For example, they played Rhodesia in 1910, 1924, 1938, 1955, 1962, 1968 and 1974 during their tours to South Africa. They were also beaten by Fiji on their 1977 tour to New Zealand. In addition, they visited pre-independence Namibia (then South West Africa), in 1955, 1962, 1968 and 1974.

There have also been games in other countries on the way home. These include games in in 1959 and 1966, East Africa (then mostly Kenya, and held in Nairobi), and an unofficial game against Ceylon (future Sri Lanka) in 1950.

====Other matches====
===Lions non-tour and home matches===

The Lions have played a number of other matches against international opposition. With the exception of the matches against Argentina in 2005 and Japan in 2021, which were preparation matches for Lions tours, these matches have been one-offs to mark special occasions.

The Lions played an unofficial international match in 1955 at Cardiff Arms Park against a Welsh XV to mark the 75th anniversary of the Welsh Rugby Union. The Lions won 20–17 but did not include all the big names of the 1955 tour, such as Tony O&#x27;Reilly, Jeff Butterfield, Phil Davies, Dickie Jeeps, Bryn Meredith and Jim Greenwood.

In 1977, the Lions played their first official home game, against the Barbarians as a charity fund-raiser held as part of the Queen&#x27;s silver jubilee celebrations. The Barbarians line-up featured JPR Williams, Gerald Davies, Gareth Edwards, Jean-Pierre Rives and Jean-Claude Skrela. The Lions included 13 of the team who played in the fourth test against New Zealand three weeks before and won 23–14.

In 1986, a match was organised against The Rest as a warm-up to the 1986 South Africa tour, and as a celebration to mark the International Rugby Board&#x27;s centenary. The Lions lost 15–7 and the planned tour was subsequently cancelled.

In 1989, the Lions played against France in Paris. The game formed part of the celebrations of the bi-centennial of the French Revolution. The Lions, captained by Rob Andrew, won 29–27.

In 1990, a Four Home Unions team played against the Rest of Europe in a match to raise money for the rebuilding of Romania following the overthrow of Nicolae Ceaușescu in December 1989. The team used the Lions&#x27; logo, while the Rest of Europe played under the symbol of the Romanian Rugby Federation.

==Player records==
:&quot;Players in bold are still active at international level.&quot;
:&quot;Only matches against full international sides are listed.&quot;

===Most caps===

&quot;Updated 7 August 2021&quot;

===Most points===
&quot;Updated 31 July 2021&quot;

===Most tries===
&quot;Updated 31 July 2021&quot;

==See also==

*List of British &amp; Irish Lions test matches
*Rugby union and apartheid
*Rugby union in the British Isles

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q733600" start="4" end="29" title="British &amp;amp; Irish Lions" label="British &amp;amp; Irish Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="35" end="46" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="109" end="116" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="118" end="125" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="127" end="135" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="141" end="146" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q13859879" start="164" end="168" title="test match (rugby union)" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="276" end="284" title="cap (sport)" label="uncapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798319" start="482" end="493" title="2021 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to South Africa" label="2021 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="502" end="514" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="1722" end="1735" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q781388" start="1746" end="1755" title="1950 British Lions tour to New Zealand and Australia" label="1950 tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="2155" end="2198" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="2250" end="2266" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535481" start="2417" end="2439" title="2001 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to Australia" label="2001 tour of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="2681" end="2699" title="God Save the King" label="God Save the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114212" start="2798" end="2815" title="The Power of Four" label="The Power of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865349" start="3253" end="3270" title="Arthur Shrewsbury" label="Arthur Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990190" start="3991" end="4017" title="Matthew Mullineux" label="Reverend Matthew Mullineux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996169" start="5630" end="5649" title="1927 British Lions tour to Argentina" label="1927 Argentina tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996172" start="6246" end="6255" title="1930 British Lions tour to New Zealand and Australia" label="1930 tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536821" start="6291" end="6305" title="George Beamish" label="George Beamish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996170" start="6721" end="6738" title="1936 British Lions tour to Argentina" label="tour to Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374416" start="7557" end="7575" title="Scottish Provident" label="Scottish Provident"/>
<link wikidata="Q230426" start="7592" end="7598" title="Zurich Assurance" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q190464" start="7607" end="7611" title="HSBC" label="HSBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621936" start="7629" end="7654" title="Standard Life Aberdeen" label="Standard Life Investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="7666" end="7674" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="8095" end="8120" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="8149" end="8157" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825179" start="8221" end="8257" title="Australian rules football in England" label="Australian rules football in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300859" start="8451" end="8473" title="Western Province (rugby)" label="Western Province union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996163" start="8541" end="8550" title="1891 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1891 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347463" start="8581" end="8601" title="Rugby Football Union" label="Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="8611" end="8632" title="England national rugby union team" label="England national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144890" start="8968" end="8978" title="Currie Cup" label="Currie Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547918" start="8982" end="8997" title="Griqualand West" label="Griqualand West"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="9695" end="9705" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="9716" end="9725" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="9771" end="9780" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="10145" end="10154" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="11515" end="11527" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996187" start="12462" end="12478" title="1910 British Lions tour to Argentina" label="toured Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535469" start="12619" end="12623" title="1924 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441507" start="12665" end="12682" title="Ronald Cove-Smith" label="Ronald Cove-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996169" start="12864" end="12868" title="1927 British Lions tour to Argentina" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="12909" end="12918" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305080" start="13013" end="13028" title="Rugby union in Argentina" label="Argentine rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="13185" end="13193" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="13195" end="13205" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033766" start="13210" end="13220" title="Canterbury Rugby Football Union" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="13277" end="13288" title="New Zealand national rugby union team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996170" start="13417" end="13421" title="1936 British Lions tour to Argentina" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="14131" end="14136" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q864971" start="14141" end="14150" title="Southland Region" label="Southland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="14449" end="14464" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="14471" end="14480" title="Newcastle, Australia" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="14510" end="14519" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="14524" end="14532" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="14534" end="14544" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="14710" end="14722" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255264" start="15379" end="15390" title="John Robins (rugby union)" label="John Robins"/>
<link wikidata="Q774221" start="15749" end="15755" title="Canada national rugby union team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="15794" end="15801" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535476" start="16026" end="16078" title="1971 British Lions tour to New Zealand and Australia" label="1971 British Lions tour to New Zealand and Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381089" start="16134" end="16148" title="Gareth Edwards (rugby union)" label="Gareth Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q775742" start="16153" end="16163" title="Barry John" label="Barry John"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="16383" end="16390" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996179" start="16572" end="16611" title="1974 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1974 British Lions tour to South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q448312" start="16775" end="16794" title="Willie John McBride" label="Willie John McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646319" start="17344" end="17351" title="99 call" label="99 call"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046060" start="17559" end="17585" title="EPRFU Stadium" label="Boet Erasmus Stadium&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q725555" start="17592" end="17604" title="JPR Williams" label="JPR Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996180" start="17697" end="17735" title="1977 British Lions tour to New Zealand" label="1977 British Lions tour to New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q739683" start="18097" end="18117" title="1980 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="South Africa in 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q964536" start="18331" end="18355" title="1983 British Lions tour to New Zealand" label="1983 tour to New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="18649" end="18658" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q369225" start="18816" end="18841" title="International Rugby Board" label="International Rugby Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316055" start="18872" end="18880" title="The Rest (rugby union)" label="The Rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397688" start="19029" end="19046" title="1989 British Lions tour to Australia" label="Australia in 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535478" start="19264" end="19283" title="1993 British Lions tour to New Zealand" label="New Zealand in 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535480" start="19409" end="19429" title="1997 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="South Africa in 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535481" start="19573" end="19590" title="2001 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to Australia" label="tour to Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="19599" end="19608" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817370" start="19673" end="19692" title="Tom Richards Trophy" label="Tom Richards Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535483" start="19701" end="19737" title="2005 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to New Zealand" label="Lions&amp;#x27; 2005 tour to New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q920429" start="19930" end="19949" title="2009 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to South Africa" label="toured South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q124753" start="19972" end="19981" title="2007 Rugby World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q433258" start="20009" end="20022" title="Ian McGeechan" label="Ian McGeechan"/>
<link wikidata="Q934781" start="20057" end="20071" title="Warren Gatland" label="Warren Gatland"/>
<link wikidata="Q981899" start="20073" end="20086" title="Shaun Edwards" label="Shaun Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q981948" start="20091" end="20101" title="Rob Howley" label="Rob Howley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038034" start="20142" end="20161" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q182081" start="20473" end="20483" title="Ellis Park Stadium" label="Ellis Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629141" start="20594" end="20610" title="2013 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to Australia" label="toured Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q526295" start="20648" end="20659" title="Andy Irvine (rugby union)" label="Andy Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="20699" end="20704" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q934781" start="20716" end="20730" title="Warren Gatland" label="Warren Gatland"/>
<link wikidata="Q460627" start="20790" end="20803" title="Sam Warburton" label="Sam Warburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q807749" start="20860" end="20870" title="Barbarian F.C." label="Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q605245" start="21027" end="21035" title="Brumbies" label="Brumbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074817" start="21262" end="21275" title="Kurtley Beale" label="Kurtley Beale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398346" start="21462" end="21477" title="Leigh Halfpenny" label="Leigh Halfpenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q447961" start="21544" end="21558" title="Alun Wyn Jones" label="Alun Wyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535480" start="21725" end="21729" title="1997 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397688" start="21767" end="21771" title="1989 British Lions tour to Australia" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711939" start="21882" end="21901" title="2017 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to New Zealand" label="tour to New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q460627" start="22005" end="22018" title="Sam Warburton" label="Sam Warburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015235" start="22088" end="22109" title="New Zealand Barbarians" label="Provincial Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q855988" start="22168" end="22179" title="Super Rugby" label="Super Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490464" start="22207" end="22223" title="Māori All Blacks" label="Māori All Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156303" start="22353" end="22358" title="Blues (Super Rugby)" label="Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q959847" start="22408" end="22417" title="Crusaders (rugby union)" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210077" start="22492" end="22503" title="Highlanders (rugby union)" label="Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q586617" start="22661" end="22667" title="Chiefs (Super Rugby)" label="Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176180" start="22705" end="22724" title="Peter O&amp;#x27;Mahony" label="Peter O&amp;#x27;Mahony"/>
<link wikidata="Q312411" start="22747" end="22756" title="Eden Park" label="Eden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q639797" start="22874" end="22884" title="Hurricanes (rugby union)" label="Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348677" start="22970" end="22997" title="Wellington Regional Stadium" label="Wellington Regional Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798319" start="23873" end="23901" title="2021 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to South Africa" label="tour to South Africa in 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="24013" end="24021" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849107" start="24255" end="24267" title="Andy Farrell" label="Andy Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q124336166" start="24317" end="24340" title="British &amp;amp; Irish Lions (women)" label="women&amp;#x27;s Lions team"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24671" end="24687" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535483" start="24821" end="24845" title="2005 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to New Zealand" label="2005 tour of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="24897" end="24906" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="24914" end="24932" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122433" start="25024" end="25029" title="Japan national rugby union team" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798319" start="25041" end="25066" title="2021 British &amp;amp; Irish Lions tour to South Africa" label="2021 tour of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024926" start="25070" end="25081" title="Murrayfield Stadium" label="Murrayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544873" start="25385" end="25393" title="Zimbabwe national rugby union team" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996168" start="25397" end="25401" title="1910 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535469" start="25403" end="25407" title="1924 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q379076" start="25409" end="25413" title="1938 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996171" start="25415" end="25419" title="1955 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535467" start="25421" end="25425" title="1962 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535473" start="25427" end="25431" title="1968 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996179" start="25436" end="25440" title="1974 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134669" start="25502" end="25506" title="Fiji national rugby union team" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996180" start="25516" end="25540" title="1977 British Lions tour to New Zealand" label="1977 tour to New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="25585" end="25592" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="25599" end="25616" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996171" start="25622" end="25626" title="1955 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535467" start="25628" end="25632" title="1962 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535473" start="25634" end="25638" title="1968 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996179" start="25643" end="25647" title="1974 British Lions tour to South Africa" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996176" start="25739" end="25743" title="1959 British Lions tour to Australia and New Zealand" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996178" start="25748" end="25752" title="1966 British Lions tour to Australia and New Zealand" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327644" start="25754" end="25765" title="East Africa rugby union team" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="25779" end="25784" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="25798" end="25805" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q511912" start="25839" end="25845" title="Sri Lanka national rugby union team" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q781388" start="25868" end="25872" title="1950 British Lions tour to New Zealand and Australia" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q432321" start="26268" end="26285" title="Cardiff Arms Park" label="Cardiff Arms Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038022" start="26341" end="26358" title="Welsh Rugby Union" label="Welsh Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q448441" start="26444" end="26462" title="Tony O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="Tony O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686268" start="26464" end="26480" title="Jeff Butterfield" label="Jeff Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026658" start="26495" end="26507" title="Dickie Jeeps" label="Dickie Jeeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q447949" start="26509" end="26522" title="Bryn Meredith" label="Bryn Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195324" start="26527" end="26540" title="Jim Greenwood (rugby union)" label="Jim Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q807749" start="26613" end="26623" title="Barbarians FC" label="Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516094" start="26669" end="26696" title="Silver Jubilee of Elizabeth II" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s silver jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316055" start="26988" end="26996" title="The Rest (rugby union)" label="The Rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q369225" start="27074" end="27099" title="World Rugby" label="International Rugby Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080547" start="27207" end="27237" title="France vs British Lions (1989)" label="played against France in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403952" start="27351" end="27361" title="Rob Andrew" label="Rob Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764623" start="27386" end="27402" title="Four Home Unions XV" label="Four Home Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764623" start="27427" end="27441" title="Rest of Europe XV" label="Rest of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="27525" end="27542" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279956" start="27653" end="27678" title="Federația Română de Rugby" label="Romanian Rugby Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564852" start="28012" end="28058" title="List of British &amp;amp; Irish Lions test matches" label="List of British &amp;amp; Irish Lions test matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975166" start="28060" end="28085" title="Rugby union and apartheid" label="Rugby union and apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378499" start="28087" end="28119" title="Rugby union in the British Isles" label="Rugby union in the British Isles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3916" wikidata="Q46185" url="?curid=3916" title="Bass guitar">
<text>The bass guitar, electric bass or simply bass () is the lowest-pitched member of the guitar family. It is a plucked string instrument similar in appearance and construction to an electric or acoustic guitar, but with a longer neck and scale length. The bass guitar most commonly has four strings, though five- and six-stringed models are also relatively popular, and bass guitars with even more (or fewer) strings or courses have been built. Since the mid-1950s, the bass guitar has largely come to replace the double bass in popular music due to its lighter weight, the inclusion of frets (for easier intonation) in most models, and, most importantly, its design for electric amplification. This is also because the double bass is acoustically compromised for its range (like the viola) in that it is scaled down from the optimal size that would be appropriate for those low notes.

The four-string bass guitar is usually tuned the same as the double bass, which corresponds to pitches one octave lower than the four lowest-pitched strings of a guitar (typically E, A, D, and G). It is played primarily with the fingers or thumb, or with a pick. 

The electric bass guitar is acoustically a relatively quiet instrument, so to be heard at a practical performance volume, it requires external amplification. It can also be used in conjunction with direct input boxes, audio interfaces, mixing consoles, computers, or bass effects processors that offer headphone jacks. The majority of bass pickup systems are electromagnetic in nature.

== Terminology ==
The &quot;New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot; refers to this instrument as an &quot;Electric bass guitar, usually with four heavy strings tuned E1&#x27;–A1&#x27;–D2–G2.&quot; It also defines &quot;bass&quot; as &quot;Bass (iv). A contraction of Double bass or Electric bass guitar.&quot; &quot;Mottola&#x27;s Cyclopedic Dictionary of Lutherie Terms&quot; begins its definition of the instrument as &quot;A bass guitar that produces sound primarily with the aid of electronic devices.&quot; According to some authors the proper term is &quot;electric bass&quot;. Common names for the instrument are &quot;bass guitar&quot;, &quot;electric bass guitar&quot;, and &quot;electric bass&quot; and some authors claim that they are historically accurate. A bass guitar whose neck lacks frets is termed a fretless bass.

=== Scale ===

The scale of a bass is defined as the length of the freely oscillating strings between the nut and the bridge saddles. On a modern 4-string bass guitar, 30&quot; (76 cm) or less is considered short scale, 32&quot; (81 cm) medium scale, 34&quot; (86 cm) standard or long scale and 35&quot; (89 cm) extra-long scale.

=== Pickup ===

Bass pickups are generally attached to the body of the guitar and located beneath the strings. They are responsible for converting the vibrations of the strings into analogous electrical signals, which are in turn passed as input to an instrument amplifier.

=== Strings ===

Bass guitar strings are composed of a &quot;core&quot; and &quot;winding&quot;. The core is a wire which runs through the center of the string and is generally made of steel, nickel, or an alloy. The winding is an additional wire wrapped around the core. Bass guitar strings vary by the material and cross-sectional shape of the winding. 

Common variants include roundwound, flatwound, halfwound (groundwound), coated, tapewound and taperwound (not to be confused with tapewound) strings. Roundwound and flatwound strings feature windings with circular and rounded-square cross-sections, respectively, with halfround (also referred to as halfwound, ground wound, pressure wound) strings being a hybrid between the two. Coated strings have their surface coated with a synthetic layer while tapewound strings feature a metal core with a non-metallic winding. Taperwound strings have a tapered end where the exposed core sits on the bridge saddle without windings. The choice of winding has considerable impact on the sound of the instrument, with certain winding styles often being preferred for certain musical genres.

== History ==
=== 1930s ===
In the 1930s, musician and inventor Paul Tutmarc of Seattle, Washington, developed the first electric bass guitar in its modern form, a fretted instrument designed to be played horizontally. The 1935 sales catalog for Tutmarc&#x27;s company Audiovox featured his &quot;Model 736 Bass Fiddle&quot;, a solid-bodied electric bass guitar with four strings, a scale length, and a single pickup. Around 100 were made during this period.
Audiovox also sold their &quot;Model 236&quot; bass amplifier.

=== 1950s ===

In the 1950s, Leo Fender and George Fullerton developed the first mass-produced electric bass guitar. The Fender Electric Instrument Manufacturing Company began producing the Precision Bass, or P-Bass, in October 1951. The design featured a simple uncontoured &quot;slab&quot; body design and a single coil pickup similar to that of a Telecaster. By 1957 the Precision more closely resembled the Fender Stratocaster with the body edges beveled for comfort, and the pickup was changed to a split coil design.
The Fender Bass was a revolutionary instrument for gigging musicians. In comparison with the large, heavy upright bass, which had been the main bass instrument in popular music from the early 20th century to the 1940s, the bass guitar could be easily transported to shows. When amplified, the bass guitar was also less prone than acoustic basses to unwanted audio feedback. The addition of frets enabled bassists to play in tune more easily than on fretless acoustic or electric upright basses, and allowed guitarists to more easily transition to the instrument.

In 1953, Monk Montgomery became the first bassist to tour with the Fender bass, in Lionel Hampton&#x27;s postwar big band. Montgomery was also possibly the first to record with the electric bass, on July 2, 1953, with the Art Farmer Septet. Roy Johnson (with Lionel Hampton), and Shifty Henry (with Louis Jordan and His Tympany Five), were other early Fender bass pioneers. Bill Black, who played with Elvis Presley, switched from upright bass to the Fender Precision Bass around 1957. The bass guitar was intended to appeal to guitarists as well as upright bass players, and many early pioneers of the instrument, such as Carol Kaye, Joe Osborn, and Paul McCartney were originally guitarists.

Also in 1953, Gibson released the first short-scale violin-shaped electric bass, the EB-1, with an extendable end pin so a bassist could play it upright or horizontally. In 1958, Gibson released the maple arched-top EB-2 described in the Gibson catalog as a &quot;hollow-body electric bass that features a Bass/Baritone pushbutton for two different tonal characteristics&quot;. In 1959, these were followed by the more conventional-looking EB-0 Bass. The EB-0 was very similar to a Gibson SG in appearance (although the earliest examples have a slab-sided body shape closer to that of the double-cutaway Les Paul Special). The Fender and Gibson versions used bolt-on and set necks.

Several other companies also began manufacturing bass guitars during the 1950s. Kay Musical Instrument Company began production of the K162 in 1952, while Danelectro released the Longhorn in 1956. Also in 1956, at the German trade fair &quot;Musikmesse Frankfurt&quot; the distinctive Höfner 500/1 violin-shaped bass first appeared, constructed using violin techniques by Walter Höfner, a second-generation violin luthier. Due to its use by Paul McCartney, it became known as the &quot;Beatle bass&quot;. In 1957, Rickenbacker introduced the model 4000, the first bass to feature a neck-through-body design in which the neck is part of the body wood. The Burns London Supersound was introduced in 1958.

=== 1960s ===

With the explosion in popularity of rock music in the 1960s, many more manufacturers began making electric basses, including Yamaha, Teisco and Guyatone. Introduced in 1960, the Fender Jazz Bass, initially known as the &quot;Deluxe Bass&quot;, used a body design known as an offset waist which was first seen on the Jazzmaster guitar in an effort to improve comfort while playing seated. The Jazz bass, or J-Bass, features two single-coil pickups.

Providing a more &quot;Gibson-scale&quot; instrument, rather than the Jazz and Precision, Fender produced the Mustang Bass, a scale-length instrument. The Fender VI, a 6-string bass, was tuned one octave lower than standard guitar tuning. It was released in 1961, and was briefly favored by Jack Bruce of Cream.

Gibson introduced its short-scale EB-3 in 1961, also used by Bruce. The EB-3 had a &quot;mini-humbucker&quot; at the bridge position. Gibson basses tended to be instruments with a shorter 30.5&quot; scale length than the Precision. Gibson did not produce a -scale bass until 1963 with the release of the Thunderbird.

The first commercial fretless bass guitar was the Ampeg AUB-1, introduced in 1966. In the late 1960s, eight-string basses, with four octave paired courses (similar to a 12 string guitar), were introduced, such as the Hagström H8.

=== 1970s ===
In 1972, Alembic established what became known as &quot;boutique&quot; or &quot;high-end&quot; electric bass guitars. These expensive, custom-tailored instruments, as used by Phil Lesh, Jack Casady, and Stanley Clarke, featured unique designs, premium hand-finished wood bodies, and innovative construction techniques such as multi-laminate neck-through-body construction and graphite necks. Alembic also pioneered the use of onboard electronics for pre-amplification and equalization. 

Active electronics increase the output of the instrument, and allow more options for controlling tonal flexibility, giving the player the ability to amplify as well as to attenuate certain frequency ranges while improving the overall frequency response (including more low-register and high-register sounds). 1976 saw the UK company Wal begin production of their own range of active basses. In 1974 Music Man Instruments, founded by Tom Walker, Forrest White and Leo Fender, introduced the StingRay, the first widely produced bass with active (powered) electronics built into the instrument. Basses with active electronics can include a preamplifier and knobs for boosting and cutting the low and high frequencies.

In the mid-1970s, five-string basses, with a very low &quot;B&quot; string, were introduced. In 1975, bassist Anthony Jackson commissioned luthier Carl Thompson to build a six-string bass tuned (low to high) B0, E1, A1, D2, G2, C3, adding a low B string and a high C string.

== See also ==
* Acoustic bass guitar
* Fretless bass
* Bass guitar tuning
* Bass instrument amplification
* Extended-range bass
* Bass effects
* Pickups
* List of bass guitar manufacturers
* List of bass guitarists

== References ==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="4" end="15" title="Bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="17" end="30" title="Bass guitar" label="electric bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="41" end="45" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="85" end="91" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q230262" start="108" end="133" title="plucked string instrument" label="plucked string instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="179" end="187" title="Electric guitar" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="191" end="206" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q944038" start="226" end="230" title="neck (music)" label="neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q942813" start="235" end="247" title="Scale length (string instruments)" label="scale length"/>
<link wikidata="Q326426" start="406" end="413" title="string (music)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001047" start="417" end="424" title="Course (music)" label="courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="511" end="522" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="526" end="539" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="584" end="588" title="fret" label="fret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343038" start="602" end="612" title="Intonation_(music)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="781" end="786" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="991" end="997" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622022" start="1064" end="1065" title="E (musical note)" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q744346" start="1067" end="1068" title="A (musical note)" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651121" start="1070" end="1071" title="D (musical note)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440231" start="1077" end="1078" title="G (musical note)" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q181890" start="1141" end="1145" title="plectrum" label="pick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434762" start="1283" end="1305" title="Bass amplifier" label="external amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153621" start="1347" end="1363" title="DI unit" label="direct input box"/>
<link wikidata="Q572648" start="1489" end="1495" title="Pickup (music technology)" label="pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="2346" end="2351" title="Fret" label="frets"/>
<link wikidata="Q932855" start="2364" end="2377" title="fretless bass" label="fretless bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008558" start="2963" end="2983" title="instrument amplifier" label="instrument amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="3192" end="3197" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743461" start="4187" end="4199" title="Paul Tutmarc" label="Paul Tutmarc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="4203" end="4210" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="4287" end="4291" title="fret" label="fret"/>
<link wikidata="Q572648" start="4533" end="4539" title="Pickup (music technology)" label="pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q297469" start="4675" end="4685" title="Leo Fender" label="Leo Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508615" start="4690" end="4706" title="George William Fullerton" label="George Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="4767" end="4815" title="Fender Electric Instrument Manufacturing Company" label="Fender Electric Instrument Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q727758" start="4836" end="4850" title="Fender Precision Bass" label="Precision Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456436" start="4956" end="4974" title="single coil pickup" label="single coil pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="4996" end="5006" title="Fender Telecaster" label="Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="5057" end="5076" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Fender Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q516104" start="5150" end="5160" title="humbucker" label="split coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="5275" end="5287" title="upright bass" label="upright bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="5527" end="5541" title="audio feedback" label="audio feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="5559" end="5563" title="fret" label="fret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273167" start="5639" end="5660" title="electric upright bass" label="electric upright bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q357529" start="5742" end="5757" title="Monk Montgomery" label="Monk Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q313525" start="5816" end="5830" title="Lionel Hampton" label="Lionel Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="5846" end="5854" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714350" start="5951" end="5972" title="the Art Farmer Septet" label="the Art Farmer Septet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278675" start="6013" end="6025" title="Shifty Henry" label="Shifty Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q461011" start="6032" end="6044" title="Louis Jordan" label="Louis Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001165" start="6053" end="6065" title="Tympany Five" label="Tympany Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q861962" start="6107" end="6117" title="Bill Black" label="Bill Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="6135" end="6148" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q433273" start="6356" end="6366" title="Carol Kaye" label="Carol Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211645" start="6368" end="6378" title="Joe Osborn" label="Joe Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="6384" end="6398" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q210278" start="6442" end="6448" title="Gibson Guitar Corporation" label="Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="6480" end="6486" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559317" start="6644" end="6648" title="Gibson EB-2" label="EB-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817158" start="6868" end="6877" title="Gibson EB-0" label="EB-0 Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q940380" start="6910" end="6919" title="Gibson SG" label="Gibson SG"/>
<link wikidata="Q322625" start="7032" end="7040" title="Gibson Les Paul" label="Les Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641911" start="7087" end="7094" title="Bolt-on neck" label="bolt-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579705" start="7099" end="7102" title="Set-in neck" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737385" start="7191" end="7221" title="Kay Musical Instrument Company" label="Kay Musical Instrument Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159473" start="7266" end="7276" title="Danelectro" label="Danelectro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165005" start="7396" end="7408" title="Höfner 500/1" label="Höfner 500/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496414" start="7490" end="7496" title="Höfner" label="Höfner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="7552" end="7566" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41014" start="7625" end="7637" title="Rickenbacker" label="Rickenbacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272642" start="7693" end="7705" title="neck-through" label="neck-through"/>
<link wikidata="Q689327" start="7766" end="7778" title="Burns London" label="Burns London"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="7866" end="7876" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="7955" end="7961" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695107" start="7963" end="7969" title="Teisco" label="Teisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622806" start="7974" end="7982" title="Guyatone" label="Guyatone"/>
<link wikidata="Q288342" start="8008" end="8024" title="Fender Jazz Bass" label="Fender Jazz Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162697" start="8146" end="8156" title="Jazzmaster" label="Jazzmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q548517" start="8389" end="8401" title="Fender Mustang Bass" label="Mustang Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404623" start="8434" end="8443" title="Fender VI" label="Fender VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q313683" start="8570" end="8580" title="Jack Bruce" label="Jack Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q203736" start="8584" end="8589" title="Cream (band)" label="Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523005" start="8626" end="8630" title="Gibson EB-3" label="EB-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q942813" start="8791" end="8803" title="Scale length (string instruments)" label="scale length"/>
<link wikidata="Q584917" start="8896" end="8907" title="Gibson Thunderbird" label="Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001047" start="9057" end="9064" title="Course (music)" label="courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568749" start="9127" end="9135" title="Hagström" label="Hagström"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528351" start="9164" end="9171" title="Alembic Inc" label="Alembic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350527" start="9330" end="9339" title="Phil Lesh" label="Phil Lesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q968070" start="9341" end="9352" title="Jack Casady" label="Jack Casady"/>
<link wikidata="Q453406" start="9358" end="9372" title="Stanley Clarke" label="Stanley Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272642" start="9496" end="9513" title="Neck-thru" label="neck-through-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="9531" end="9539" title="Carbon fiber reinforced polymer" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565278" start="9976" end="9979" title="Wal (bass)" label="Wal"/>
<link wikidata="Q766744" start="10042" end="10051" title="Music Man (company)" label="Music Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470531" start="10088" end="10101" title="Forrest White" label="Forrest White"/>
<link wikidata="Q297469" start="10106" end="10116" title="Leo Fender" label="Leo Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q743821" start="10133" end="10141" title="Music Man StingRay" label="StingRay"/>
<link wikidata="Q399804" start="10280" end="10292" title="preamplifier" label="preamplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="10297" end="10302" title="equalizer (audio)" label="knobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q570001" start="10469" end="10484" title="Anthony Jackson (musician)" label="Anthony Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658810" start="10506" end="10519" title="Carl Thompson (luthier)" label="Carl Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q424017" start="10652" end="10672" title="Acoustic bass guitar" label="Acoustic bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q932855" start="10675" end="10688" title="Fretless bass" label="Fretless bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867983" start="10691" end="10709" title="Bass guitar tuning" label="Bass guitar tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434762" start="10712" end="10741" title="Bass instrument amplification" label="Bass instrument amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887371" start="10744" end="10763" title="Extended-range bass" label="Extended-range bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21998361" start="10766" end="10778" title="Bass effects" label="Bass effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q572648" start="10781" end="10788" title="Pickup (music technology)" label="Pickups"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607324" start="10791" end="10824" title="List of bass guitar manufacturers" label="List of bass guitar manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863361" start="10827" end="10850" title="List of bass guitarists" label="List of bass guitarists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3921" wikidata="Q5372" url="?curid=3921" title="Basketball">
<text>Basketball is a team sport in which two teams, most commonly of five players each, opposing one another on a rectangular court, compete with the primary objective of shooting a basketball (approximately in diameter) through the defender&#x27;s hoop (a basket in diameter mounted high to a backboard at each end of the court), while preventing the opposing team from shooting through their own hoop. A field goal is worth two points, unless made from behind the three-point line, when it is worth three. After a foul, timed play stops and the player fouled or designated to shoot a technical foul is given one, two or three one-point free throws. The team with the most points at the end of the game wins, but if regulation play expires with the score tied, an additional period of play (overtime) is mandated.

Players advance the ball by bouncing it while walking or running (dribbling) or by passing it to a teammate, both of which require considerable skill. On offense, players may use a variety of shotsthe layup, the jump shot, or a dunk; on defense, they may steal the ball from a dribbler, intercept passes, or block shots; either offense or defense may collect a rebound, that is, a missed shot that bounces from rim or backboard. It is a violation to lift or drag one&#x27;s pivot foot without dribbling the ball, to carry it, or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling.

The five players on each side fall into five playing positions. The tallest player is usually the center, the second-tallest and strongest is the power forward, a slightly shorter but more agile player is the small forward, and the shortest players or the best ball handlers are the shooting guard and the point guard, who implement the coach&#x27;s game plan by managing the execution of offensive and defensive plays (player positioning). Informally, players may play three-on-three, two-on-two, and one-on-one.

Invented in 1891 by Canadian-American gym teacher James Naismith in Springfield, Massachusetts, in the United States, basketball has evolved to become one of the world&#x27;s most popular and widely viewed sports. The National Basketball Association (NBA) is the most significant professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition (drawing most of its talent from U.S. college basketball). Outside North America, the top clubs from national leagues qualify to continental championships such as the EuroLeague and the Basketball Champions League Americas. The FIBA Basketball World Cup and Men&#x27;s Olympic Basketball Tournament are the major international events of the sport and attract top national teams from around the world. Each continent hosts regional competitions for national teams, like EuroBasket and FIBA AmeriCup.

The FIBA Women&#x27;s Basketball World Cup and Women&#x27;s Olympic Basketball Tournament feature top national teams from continental championships. The main North American league is the WNBA (NCAA Women&#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship is also popular), whereas the strongest European clubs participate in the EuroLeague Women.

==History==
=== Early history ===
A game similar to basketball is mentioned in a 1591 book published in Frankfurt am Main that reports on the lifestyles and customs of coastal North American residents, (German; translates as &quot;Truthful Depictions of the Savages&quot;: &quot;Among other things, a game of skill is described in which balls must be thrown against a target woven from twigs, mounted high on a pole. There&#x27;s a small reward for the player if the target is being hit.&quot;

===Creation===

In December 1891, James Naismith, a Canadian-American professor of physical education and instructor at the International Young Men&#x27;s Christian Association Training School (now Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts, was trying to keep his gym class active on a rainy day. He sought a vigorous indoor game to keep his students occupied and at proper levels of fitness during the long New England winters. After rejecting other ideas as either too rough or poorly suited to walled-in gymnasiums, he invented a new game in which players would pass a ball to teammates and try to score points by tossing the ball into a basket mounted on a wall. Naismith wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto an elevated track. Naismith initially set up the peach basket with its bottom intact, which meant that the ball had to be retrieved manually after each &quot;basket&quot; or point scored. This quickly proved tedious, so Naismith removed the bottom of the basket to allow the balls to be poked out with a long dowel after each scored basket.


Shortly after, Senda Berenson, instructor of physical culture at the nearby Smith College, went to Naismith to learn more about the game. Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she started to organize games with her pupils, following adjusted rules. The first official women&#x27;s interinstitutional game was played barely 11 months later, between the University of California and the Miss Head&#x27;s School. In 1899, a committee was established at the Conference of Physical Training in Springfield to draw up general rules for women&#x27;s basketball. Thus, the sport quickly spread throughout America&#x27;s schools, colleges and universities with uniform rules for both sexes.

Basketball was originally played with a soccer ball. These round balls from &quot;association football&quot; were made, at the time, with a set of laces to close off the hole needed for inserting the inflatable bladder after the other sewn-together segments of the ball&#x27;s cover had been flipped outside-in. These laces could cause bounce passes and dribbling to be unpredictable. Eventually a lace-free ball construction method was invented, and this change to the game was endorsed by Naismith (whereas in American football, the lace construction proved to be advantageous for gripping and remains to this day). The first balls made specifically for basketball were brown, and it was only in the late 1950s that Tony Hinkle, searching for a ball that would be more visible to players and spectators alike, introduced the orange ball that is now in common use. Dribbling was not part of the original game except for the &quot;bounce pass&quot; to teammates. Passing the ball was the primary means of ball movement. Dribbling was eventually introduced but limited by the asymmetric shape of early balls. Dribbling was common by 1896, with a rule against the double dribble by 1898.

The peach baskets were used until 1906 when they were finally replaced by metal hoops with backboards. A further change was soon made, so the ball merely passed through. Whenever a person got the ball in the basket, their team would gain a point. Whichever team got the most points won the game. The baskets were originally nailed to the mezzanine balcony of the playing court, but this proved impractical when spectators in the balcony began to interfere with shots. The backboard was introduced to prevent this interference; it had the additional effect of allowing rebound shots. Naismith&#x27;s handwritten diaries, discovered by his granddaughter in early 2006, indicate that he was nervous about the new game he had invented, which incorporated rules from a children&#x27;s game called duck on a rock, as many had failed before it.

Frank Mahan, one of the players from the original first game, approached Naismith after the Christmas break, in early 1892, asking him what he intended to call his new game. Naismith replied that he had not thought of it because he had been focused on just getting the game started. Mahan suggested that it be called &quot;Naismith ball&quot;, at which he laughed, saying that a name like that would kill any game. Mahan then said, &quot;Why not call it basketball?&quot; Naismith replied, &quot;We have a basket and a ball, and it seems to me that would be a good name for it.&quot; The first official game was played in the YMCA gymnasium in Albany, New York, on January 20, 1892, with nine players. The game ended at 1–0; the shot was made from , on a court just half the size of a present-day Streetball or National Basketball Association (NBA) court.

At the time, soccer was being played with 10 to a team (which was increased to 11). When winter weather got too icy to play soccer, teams were taken indoors, and it was convenient to have them split in half and play basketball with five on each side. By 1897–98, teams of five became standard.

===College basketball===
Basketball&#x27;s early adherents were dispatched to YMCAs throughout the United States, and it quickly spread through the United States and Canada. By 1895, it was well established at several women&#x27;s high schools. While YMCA was responsible for initially developing and spreading the game, within a decade it discouraged the new sport, as rough play and rowdy crowds began to detract from YMCA&#x27;s primary mission. However, other amateur sports clubs, colleges, and professional clubs quickly filled the void. In the years before World War I, the Amateur Athletic Union and the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (forerunner of the NCAA) vied for control over the rules for the game. The first pro league, the National Basketball League, was formed in 1898 to protect players from exploitation and to promote a less rough game. This league only lasted five years.

James Naismith was instrumental in establishing college basketball. His colleague C. O. Beamis fielded the first college basketball team just a year after the Springfield YMCA game at the suburban Pittsburgh Geneva College. Naismith himself later coached at the University of Kansas for six years, before handing the reins to renowned coach Forrest &quot;Phog&quot; Allen. Naismith&#x27;s disciple Amos Alonzo Stagg brought basketball to the University of Chicago, while Adolph Rupp, a student of Naismith&#x27;s at Kansas, enjoyed great success as coach at the University of Kentucky. On February 9, 1895, the first intercollegiate 5-on-5 game was played at Hamline University between Hamline and the School of Agriculture, which was affiliated with the University of Minnesota. The School of Agriculture won in a 9–3 game.

In 1901, colleges, including the University of Chicago, Columbia University, Cornell University, Dartmouth College, the University of Minnesota, the U.S. Naval Academy, the University of Colorado and Yale University began sponsoring men&#x27;s games. In 1905, frequent injuries on the football field prompted President Theodore Roosevelt to suggest that colleges form a governing body, resulting in the creation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (IAAUS). In 1910, that body changed its name to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). The first Canadian interuniversity basketball game was played at YMCA in Kingston, Ontario on February 6, 1904, when McGill UniversityNaismith&#x27;s alma matervisited Queen&#x27;s University. McGill won 9–7 in overtime; the score was 7–7 at the end of regulation play, and a ten-minute overtime period settled the outcome. A good turnout of spectators watched the game.

The first men&#x27;s national championship tournament, the National Association of Intercollegiate Basketball tournament, which still exists as the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) tournament, was organized in 1937. The first national championship for NCAA teams, the National Invitation Tournament (NIT) in New York, was organized in 1938; the NCAA national tournament began one year later. College basketball was rocked by gambling scandals from 1948 to 1951, when dozens of players from top teams were implicated in game-fixing and point shaving. Partially spurred by an association with cheating, the NIT lost support to the NCAA tournament.

===High school basketball===

Before widespread school district consolidation, most American high schools were far smaller than their present-day counterparts. During the first decades of the 20th century, basketball quickly became the ideal interscholastic sport due to its modest equipment and personnel requirements. In the days before widespread television coverage of professional and college sports, the popularity of high school basketball was unrivaled in many parts of America. Perhaps the most legendary of high school teams was Indiana&#x27;s Franklin Wonder Five, which took the nation by storm during the 1920s, dominating Indiana basketball and earning national recognition.

Today virtually every high school in the United States fields a basketball team in varsity competition. Basketball&#x27;s popularity remains high, both in rural areas where they carry the identification of the entire community, as well as at some larger schools known for their basketball teams where many players go on to participate at higher levels of competition after graduation. In the 2016–17 season, 980,673 boys and girls represented their schools in interscholastic basketball competition, according to the National Federation of State High School Associations. The states of Illinois, Indiana and Kentucky are particularly well known for their residents&#x27; devotion to high school basketball, commonly called Hoosier Hysteria in Indiana; the critically acclaimed film &quot;Hoosiers&quot; shows high school basketball&#x27;s depth of meaning to these communities.

⁣There is currently no tournament to determine a national high school champion. The most serious effort was the National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament at the University of Chicago from 1917 to 1930. The event was organized by Amos Alonzo Stagg and sent invitations to state champion teams. The tournament started out as a mostly Midwest affair but grew. In 1929 it had 29 state champions. Faced with opposition from the National Federation of State High School Associations and North Central Association of Colleges and Schools that bore a threat of the schools losing their accreditation the last tournament was in 1930. The organizations said they were concerned that the tournament was being used to recruit professional players from the prep ranks. The tournament did not invite minority schools or private/parochial schools.

The National Catholic Interscholastic Basketball Tournament ran from 1924 to 1941 at Loyola University. The National Catholic Invitational Basketball Tournament from 1954 to 1978 played at a series of venues, including Catholic University, Georgetown and George Mason. The National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament for Black High Schools was held from 1929 to 1942 at Hampton Institute. The National Invitational Interscholastic Basketball Tournament was held from 1941 to 1967 starting out at Tuskegee Institute. Following a pause during World War II it resumed at Tennessee State College in Nashville. The basis for the champion dwindled after 1954 when &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; began an integration of schools. The last tournaments were held at Alabama State College from 1964 to 1967.

===Professional basketball===

Teams abounded throughout the 1920s. There were hundreds of men&#x27;s professional basketball teams in towns and cities all over the United States, and little organization of the professional game. Players jumped from team to team and teams played in armories and smoky dance halls. Leagues came and went. Barnstorming squads such as the Original Celtics and two all-African American teams, the New York Renaissance Five (&quot;Rens&quot;) and the (still existing) Harlem Globetrotters played up to two hundred games a year on their national tours.

In 1946, the Basketball Association of America (BAA) was formed. The first game was played in Toronto, Ontario, Canada between the Toronto Huskies and New York Knickerbockers on November 1, 1946. Three seasons later, in 1949, the BAA merged with the National Basketball League (NBL) to form the National Basketball Association (NBA). By the 1950s, basketball had become a major college sport, thus paving the way for a growth of interest in professional basketball. In 1959, a basketball hall of fame was founded in Springfield, Massachusetts, site of the first game. Its rosters include the names of great players, coaches, referees and people who have contributed significantly to the development of the game. The hall of fame has people who have accomplished many goals in their career in basketball. An upstart organization, the American Basketball Association, emerged in 1967 and briefly threatened the NBA&#x27;s dominance until the ABA-NBA merger in 1976. Today the NBA is the top professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition.

The NBA has featured many famous players, including George Mikan, the first dominating &quot;big man&quot;; ball-handling wizard Bob Cousy and defensive genius Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics; charismatic center Wilt Chamberlain, who originally played for the barnstorming Harlem Globetrotters; all-around stars Oscar Robertson and Jerry West; more recent big men Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Shaquille O&#x27;Neal, Hakeem Olajuwon and Karl Malone; playmakers John Stockton, Isiah Thomas and Steve Nash; crowd-pleasing forwards Julius Erving and Charles Barkley; European stars Dirk Nowitzki, Pau Gasol and Tony Parker; Latin American stars Manu Ginobili, more recent superstars, Allen Iverson, Kobe Bryant, Tim Duncan, LeBron James, Stephen Curry, Giannis Antetokounmpo, etc.; and the three players who many credit with ushering the professional game to its highest level of popularity during the 1980s and 1990s: Larry Bird, Earvin &quot;Magic&quot; Johnson, and Michael Jordan.

In 2001, the NBA formed a developmental league, the National Basketball Development League (later known as the NBA D-League and then the NBA G League after a branding deal with Gatorade). As of the 2023–24 season, the G League has 31 teams.

===International basketball===
FIBA (International Basketball Federation) was formed in 1932 by eight founding nations: Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Portugal, Romania and Switzerland. At this time, the organization only oversaw amateur players. Its acronym, derived from the French &quot;Fédération Internationale de Basket-ball Amateur&quot;, was thus &quot;FIBA&quot;. Men&#x27;s basketball was first included at the Berlin 1936 Summer Olympics, although a demonstration tournament was held in 1904. The United States defeated Canada in the first final, played outdoors. This competition has usually been dominated by the United States, whose team has won all but three titles. The first of these came in a controversial final game in Munich in 1972 against the Soviet Union, in which the ending of the game was replayed three times until the Soviet Union finally came out on top. In 1950 the first FIBA World Championship for men, now known as the FIBA Basketball World Cup, was held in Argentina. Three years later, the first FIBA World Championship for women, now known as the FIBA Women&#x27;s Basketball World Cup, was held in Chile. Women&#x27;s basketball was added to the Olympics in 1976, which were held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada with teams such as the Soviet Union, Brazil and Australia rivaling the American squads.

In 1989, FIBA allowed professional NBA players to participate in the Olympics for the first time. Prior to the 1992 Summer Olympics, only European and South American teams were allowed to field professionals in the Olympics. The United States&#x27; dominance continued with the introduction of the original Dream Team. In the 2004 Athens Olympics, the United States suffered its first Olympic loss while using professional players, falling to Puerto Rico (in a 19-point loss) and Lithuania in group games, and being eliminated in the semifinals by Argentina. It eventually won the bronze medal defeating Lithuania, finishing behind Argentina and Italy. The Redeem Team, won gold at the 2008 Olympics, and the B-Team, won gold at the 2010 FIBA World Championship in Turkey despite featuring no players from the 2008 squad. The United States continued its dominance as they won gold at the 2012 Olympics, 2014 FIBA World Cup and the 2016 Olympics.
Worldwide, basketball tournaments are held for boys and girls of all age levels. The global popularity of the sport is reflected in the nationalities represented in the NBA. Players from all six inhabited continents currently play in the NBA. Top international players began coming into the NBA in the mid-1990s, including Croatians Dražen Petrović and Toni Kukoč, Serbian Vlade Divac, Lithuanians Arvydas Sabonis and Šarūnas Marčiulionis, Dutchman Rik Smits and German Detlef Schrempf.

In the Philippines, the Philippine Basketball Association&#x27;s first game was played on April 9, 1975, at the Araneta Coliseum in Cubao, Quezon City, Philippines. It was founded as a &quot;rebellion&quot; of several teams from the now-defunct Manila Industrial and Commercial Athletic Association, which was tightly controlled by the Basketball Association of the Philippines (now defunct), the then-FIBA recognized national association. Nine teams from the MICAA participated in the league&#x27;s first season that opened on April 9, 1975. The NBL is Australia&#x27;s pre-eminent men&#x27;s professional basketball league. The league commenced in 1979, playing a winter season (April–September) and did so until the completion of the 20th season in 1998. The 1998–99 season, which commenced only months later, was the first season after the shift to the current summer season format (October–April). This shift was an attempt to avoid competing directly against Australia&#x27;s various football codes. It features 8 teams from around Australia and one in New Zealand. A few players including Luc Longley, Andrew Gaze, Shane Heal, Chris Anstey and Andrew Bogut made it big internationally, becoming poster figures for the sport in Australia. The Women&#x27;s National Basketball League began in 1981.

===Women&#x27;s basketball===


Women began to play basketball in the fall of 1892 at Smith College through Senda Berenson, substitute director of the newly opened gymnasium and physical education teacher, after having modified the rules for women. Shortly after Berenson was hired at Smith, she visited Naismith to learn more about the game. Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she instantly introduced the game as a class exercise and soon after teams were organized. The first women&#x27;s collegiate basketball game was played on March 21, 1893, when her Smith freshmen and sophomores played against one another. The first official women&#x27;s interinstitutional game was played later that year between the University of California and the Miss Head&#x27;s School. In 1899, a committee was established at the Conference of Physical Training in Springfield to draw up general rules for women&#x27;s basketball. These rules, designed by Berenson, were published in 1899. In 1902 Berenson became the editor of A. G. Spalding&#x27;s first Women&#x27;s Basketball Guide. The same year women of Mount Holyoke and Sophie Newcomb College (coached by Clara Gregory Baer), began playing basketball. By 1895, the game had spread to colleges across the country, including Wellesley, Vassar, and Bryn Mawr. The first intercollegiate women&#x27;s game was on April 4, 1896. Stanford women played Berkeley, 9-on-9, ending in a 2–1 Stanford victory.

Women&#x27;s basketball development was more structured than that for men in the early years. In 1905, the executive committee on Basket Ball Rules (National Women&#x27;s Basketball Committee) was created by the American Physical Education Association. These rules called for six to nine players per team and 11 officials. The International Women&#x27;s Sports Federation (1924) included a women&#x27;s basketball competition. 37 women&#x27;s high school varsity basketball or state tournaments were held by 1925. And in 1926, the Amateur Athletic Union backed the first national women&#x27;s basketball championship, complete with men&#x27;s rules. The Edmonton Grads, a touring Canadian women&#x27;s team based in Edmonton, Alberta, operated between 1915 and 1940. The Grads toured all over North America, and were exceptionally successful. They posted a record of 522 wins and only 20 losses over that span, as they met any team that wanted to challenge them, funding their tours from gate receipts. The Grads also shone on several exhibition trips to Europe, and won four consecutive exhibition Olympics tournaments, in 1924, 1928, 1932, and 1936; however, women&#x27;s basketball was not an official Olympic sport until 1976. The Grads&#x27; players were unpaid, and had to remain single. The Grads&#x27; style focused on team play, without overly emphasizing skills of individual players. The first women&#x27;s AAU All-America team was chosen in 1929. Women&#x27;s industrial leagues sprang up throughout the United States, producing famous athletes, including Babe Didrikson of the Golden Cyclones, and the All American Red Heads Team, which competed against men&#x27;s teams, using men&#x27;s rules. By 1938, the women&#x27;s national championship changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per team.

The NBA-backed Women&#x27;s National Basketball Association (WNBA) began in 1997. Though it had shaky attendance figures, several marquee players (Lisa Leslie, Diana Taurasi, and Candace Parker among others) have helped the league&#x27;s popularity and level of competition. Other professional women&#x27;s basketball leagues in the United States, such as the American Basketball League (1996–98), have folded in part because of the popularity of the WNBA. The WNBA has been looked at by many as a niche league. However, the league has recently taken steps forward. In June 2007, the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN. The new television deal ran from 2009 to 2016. Along with this deal, came the first-ever rights fees to be paid to a women&#x27;s professional sports league. Over the eight years of the contract, &quot;millions and millions of dollars&quot; were &quot;dispersed to the league&#x27;s teams.&quot; In a March 12, 2009, article, NBA commissioner David Stern said that in the bad economy, &quot;the NBA is far less profitable than the WNBA. We&#x27;re losing a lot of money among a large number of teams. We&#x27;re budgeting the WNBA to break even this year.&quot;

==Rules and regulations==

Measurements and time limits discussed in this section often vary among tournaments and organizations; international and NBA rules are used in this section.

The object of the game is to outscore one&#x27;s opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents&#x27; basket from above while preventing the opponents from doing so on their own. An attempt to score in this way is called a shot. A successful shot is worth two points, or three points if it is taken from beyond the three-point arc from the basket in international games and in NBA games. A one-point shot can be earned when shooting from the foul line after a foul is made. After a team has scored from a field goal or free throw, play is resumed with a throw-in awarded to the non-scoring team taken from a point beyond the endline of the court where the points were scored.

===Playing regulations===

Games are played in four quarters of 10 (FIBA) or 12 minutes (NBA). College men&#x27;s games use two 20-minute halves, college women&#x27;s games use 10-minute quarters, and most United States high school varsity games use 8-minute quarters; however, this varies from state to state. 15 minutes are allowed for a half-time break under FIBA, NBA, and NCAA rules and 10 minutes in United States high schools. Overtime periods are five minutes in length except for high school, which is four minutes in length. Teams exchange baskets for the second half. The time allowed is actual playing time; the clock is stopped while the play is not active. Therefore, games generally take much longer to complete than the allotted game time, typically about two hours.

Five players from each team may be on the court at one time. Substitutions are unlimited but can only be done when play is stopped. Teams also have a coach, who oversees the development and strategies of the team, and other team personnel such as assistant coaches, managers, statisticians, doctors and trainers.

For both men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s teams, a standard uniform consists of a pair of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number, unique within the team, printed on both the front and back. Players wear high-top sneakers that provide extra ankle support. Typically, team names, players&#x27; names and, outside of North America, sponsors are printed on the uniforms.

A limited number of time-outs, clock stoppages requested by a coach (or sometimes mandated in the NBA) for a short meeting with the players, are allowed. They generally last no longer than one minute (100 seconds in the NBA) unless, for televised games, a commercial break is needed.

The game is controlled by the officials consisting of the referee (referred to as crew chief in the NBA), one or two umpires (referred to as referees in the NBA) and the table officials. For college, the NBA, and many high schools, there are a total of three referees on the court. The table officials are responsible for keeping track of each team&#x27;s scoring, timekeeping, individual and team fouls, player substitutions, team possession arrow, and the shot clock.

===Equipment===


The only essential equipment in a basketball game is the ball and the court: a flat, rectangular surface with baskets at opposite ends. Competitive levels require the use of more equipment such as clocks, score sheets, scoreboards, alternating possession arrows, and whistle-operated stop-clock systems.
A regulation basketball court in international games is long and wide. In the NBA and NCAA the court is . Most courts have wood flooring, usually constructed from maple planks running in the same direction as the longer court dimension. The name and logo of the home team is usually painted on or around the center circle.

The basket is a steel rim diameter with an attached net affixed to a backboard that measures and one basket is at each end of the court. The white outlined box on the backboard is high and wide. At almost all levels of competition, the top of the rim is exactly above the court and inside the baseline. While variation is possible in the dimensions of the court and backboard, it is considered important for the basket to be of the correct height – a rim that is off by just a few inches can have an adverse effect on shooting. The net must &quot;check the ball momentarily as it passes through the basket&quot; to aid the visual confirmation that the ball went through. The act of checking the ball has the further advantage of slowing down the ball so the rebound does not go as far.

The size of the basketball is also regulated. For men, the official ball is in circumference (size 7, or a &quot;295 ball&quot;) and weighs . If women are playing, the official basketball size is in circumference (size 6, or a &quot;285 ball&quot;) with a weight of . In 3x3, a formalized version of the halfcourt 3-on-3 game, a dedicated ball with the circumference of a size 6 ball but the weight of a size 7 ball is used in all competitions (men&#x27;s, women&#x27;s, and mixed teams).

===Violations===

The ball may be advanced toward the basket by being shot, passed between players, thrown, tapped, rolled or dribbled (bouncing the ball while running).

The ball must stay within the court; the last team to touch the ball before it travels out of bounds forfeits possession. The ball is out of bounds if it touches a boundary line, or touches any player or object that is out of bounds.

There are limits placed on the steps a player may take without dribbling, which commonly results in an infraction known as traveling. Nor may a player stop their dribble and then resume dribbling. A dribble that touches both hands is considered stopping the dribble, giving this infraction the name double dribble. Within a dribble, the player cannot carry the ball by placing their hand on the bottom of the ball; doing so is known as carrying the ball. A team, once having established ball control in the front half of their court, may not return the ball to the backcourt and be the first to touch it. A violation of these rules results in loss of possession.

The ball may not be kicked, nor be struck with the fist. For the offense, a violation of these rules results in loss of possession; for the defense, most leagues reset the shot clock and the offensive team is given possession of the ball out of bounds.

There are limits imposed on the time taken before progressing the ball past halfway (8 seconds in FIBA and the NBA; 10 seconds in NCAA and high school for both sexes), before attempting a shot (24 seconds in FIBA, the NBA, and U Sports (Canadian universities) play for both sexes, and 30 seconds in NCAA play for both sexes), holding the ball while closely guarded (5 seconds), and remaining in the restricted area known as the free-throw lane, (or the &quot;key&quot;) (3 seconds). These rules are designed to promote more offense.

There are also limits on how players may block an opponent&#x27;s field goal attempt or help a teammate&#x27;s field goal attempt. Goaltending is a defender&#x27;s touching of a ball that is on a downward flight toward the basket, while the related violation of basket interference is the touching of a ball that is on the rim or above the basket, or by a player reaching through the basket from below. Goaltending and basket interference committed by a defender result in awarding the basket to the offense, while basket interference committed by an offensive player results in cancelling the basket if one is scored. The defense gains possession in all cases of goaltending or basket interference.

===Fouls===

An attempt to unfairly disadvantage an opponent through certain types of physical contact is illegal and is called a personal foul. These are most commonly committed by defensive players; however, they can be committed by offensive players as well. Players who are fouled either receive the ball to pass inbounds again, or receive one or more free throws if they are fouled in the act of shooting, depending on whether the shot was successful. One point is awarded for making a free throw, which is attempted from a line from the basket.

The referee is responsible for judging whether contact is illegal, sometimes resulting in controversy. The calling of fouls can vary between games, leagues and referees.

There is a second category of fouls called technical fouls, which may be charged for various rules violations including failure to properly record a player in the scorebook, or for unsportsmanlike conduct. These infractions result in one or two free throws, which may be taken by any of the five players on the court at the time. Repeated incidents can result in disqualification. A blatant foul involving physical contact that is either excessive or unnecessary is called an intentional foul (flagrant foul in the NBA). In FIBA and NCAA women&#x27;s basketball, a foul resulting in ejection is called a disqualifying foul, while in leagues other than the NBA, such a foul is referred to as flagrant.

If a team exceeds a certain limit of team fouls in a given period (quarter or half) – four for NBA, NCAA women&#x27;s, and international games – the opposing team is awarded one or two free throws on all subsequent non-shooting fouls for that period, the number depending on the league. In the US college men&#x27;s game and high school games for both sexes, if a team reaches 7 fouls in a half, the opposing team is awarded one free throw, along with a second shot if the first is made. This is called shooting &quot;one-and-one&quot;. If a team exceeds 10 fouls in the half, the opposing team is awarded two free throws on all subsequent fouls for the half.

When a team shoots foul shots, the opponents may not interfere with the shooter, nor may they try to regain possession until the last or potentially last free throw is in the air.

After a team has committed a specified number of fouls, the other team is said to be &quot;in the bonus&quot;. On scoreboards, this is usually signified with an indicator light reading &quot;Bonus&quot; or &quot;Penalty&quot; with an illuminated directional arrow or dot indicating that team is to receive free throws when fouled by the opposing team. (Some scoreboards also indicate the number of fouls committed.)

If a team misses the first shot of a two-shot situation, the opposing team must wait for the completion of the second shot before attempting to reclaim possession of the ball and continuing play.

If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is unsuccessful, the player is awarded a number of free throws equal to the value of the attempted shot. A player fouled while attempting a regular two-point shot thus receives two shots, and a player fouled while attempting a three-point shot receives three shots.

If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is successful, typically the player will be awarded one additional free throw for one point. In combination with a regular shot, this is called a &quot;three-point play&quot; or &quot;four-point play&quot; (or more colloquially, an &quot;and one&quot;) because of the basket made at the time of the foul (2 or 3 points) and the additional free throw (1 point).


==Common techniques and practices==

===Positions===
Although the rules do not specify any positions whatsoever, they have evolved as part of basketball. During the early years of basketball&#x27;s evolution, two guards, two forwards, and one center were used. In more recent times specific positions evolved, but the current trend, advocated by many top coaches including Mike Krzyzewski, is towards positionless basketball, where big players are free to shoot from outside and dribble if their skill allows it. Popular descriptions of positions include:

Point guard (often called the &quot;1&quot;) : usually the fastest player on the team, organizes the team&#x27;s offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time.

Shooting guard (the &quot;2&quot;) : creates a high volume of shots on offense, mainly long-ranged; and guards the opponent&#x27;s best perimeter player on defense.

Small forward (the &quot;3&quot;) : often primarily responsible for scoring points via cuts to the basket and dribble penetration; on defense seeks rebounds and steals, but sometimes plays more actively.

Power forward (the &quot;4&quot;): plays offensively often with their back to the basket; on defense, plays under the basket (in a zone defense) or against the opposing power forward (in man-to-man defense).

Center (the &quot;5&quot;): uses height and size to score (on offense), to protect the basket closely (on defense), or to rebound.

The above descriptions are flexible. For most teams today, the shooting guard and small forward have very similar responsibilities and are often called the wings, as do the power forward and center, who are often called post players. While most teams describe two players as guards, two as forwards, and one as a center, on some occasions teams choose to call them by different designations.

===Strategy===
There are two main defensive strategies: &quot;zone defense&quot; and &quot;man-to-man defense&quot;. In a zone defense, each player is assigned to guard a specific area of the court. Zone defenses often allow the defense to double team the ball, a manoeuver known as a trap. In a man-to-man defense, each defensive player guards a specific opponent.

Offensive plays are more varied, normally involving planned passes and movement by players without the ball. A quick movement by an offensive player without the ball to gain an advantageous position is known as a &quot;cut&quot;. A legal attempt by an offensive player to stop an opponent from guarding a teammate, by standing in the defender&#x27;s way such that the teammate cuts next to him, is a &quot;screen&quot; or &quot;pick&quot;. The two plays are combined in the &quot;pick and roll&quot;, in which a player sets a pick and then &quot;rolls&quot; away from the pick towards the basket. Screens and cuts are very important in offensive plays; these allow the quick passes and teamwork, which can lead to a successful basket. Teams almost always have several offensive plays planned to ensure their movement is not predictable. On court, the point guard is usually responsible for indicating which play will occur.

===Shooting===
Shooting is the act of attempting to score points by throwing the ball through the basket, methods varying with players and situations.

Typically, a player faces the basket with both feet facing the basket. A player will rest the ball on the fingertips of the dominant hand (the shooting arm) slightly above the head, with the other hand supporting the side of the ball. The ball is usually shot by jumping (though not always) and extending the shooting arm. The shooting arm, fully extended with the wrist fully bent, is held stationary for a moment following the release of the ball, known as a &quot;follow-through&quot;. Players often try to put a steady backspin on the ball to absorb its impact with the rim. The ideal trajectory of the shot is somewhat controversial, but generally a proper arc is recommended. Players may shoot directly into the basket or may use the backboard to redirect the ball into the basket.

The two most common shots that use the above described setup are the &quot;set shot&quot; and the &quot;jump shot&quot;. Both are preceded by a crouching action which preloads the muscles and increases the power of the shot. In a set shot, the shooter straightens up and throws from a standing position with neither foot leaving the floor; this is typically used for free throws. For a jump shot, the throw is taken in mid-air with the ball being released near the top of the jump. This provides much greater power and range, and it also allows the player to elevate over the defender. Failure to release the ball before the feet return to the floor is considered a traveling violation.

Another common shot is called the &quot;layup&quot;. This shot requires the player to be in motion toward the basket, and to &quot;lay&quot; the ball &quot;up&quot; and into the basket, typically off the backboard (the backboard-free, underhand version is called a &quot;finger roll&quot;). The most crowd-pleasing and typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the &quot;slam dunk&quot;, in which the player jumps very high and throws the ball downward, through the basket while touching it.

Another shot that is less common than the layup, is the &quot;circus shot&quot;. The circus shot is a low-percentage shot that is flipped, heaved, scooped, or flung toward the hoop while the shooter is off-balance, airborne, falling down or facing away from the basket. A back-shot is a shot taken when the player is facing away from the basket, and may be shot with the dominant hand, or both; but there is a very low chance that the shot will be successful.

A shot that misses both the rim and the backboard completely is referred to as an &quot;air ball&quot;. A particularly bad shot, or one that only hits the backboard, is jocularly called a brick. The &quot;hang time&quot; is the length of time a player stays in the air after jumping, either to make a slam dunk, layup or jump shot.

===Rebounding===

The objective of rebounding is to successfully gain possession of the basketball after a missed field goal or free throw, as it rebounds from the hoop or backboard. This plays a major role in the game, as most possessions end when a team misses a shot. There are two categories of rebounds: offensive rebounds, in which the ball is recovered by the offensive side and does not change possession, and defensive rebounds, in which the defending team gains possession of the loose ball. The majority of rebounds are defensive, as the team on defense tends to be in better position to recover missed shots; for example, about 75% of rebounds in the NBA are defensive.

===Passing===
A pass is a method of moving the ball between players. Most passes are accompanied by a step forward to increase power and are followed through with the hands to ensure accuracy.

A staple pass is the &quot;chest pass&quot;. The ball is passed directly from the passer&#x27;s chest to the receiver&#x27;s chest. A proper chest pass involves an outward snap of the thumbs to add velocity and leaves the defence little time to react.

Another type of pass is the &quot;bounce pass&quot;. Here, the passer bounces the ball crisply about two-thirds of the way from his own chest to the receiver. The ball strikes the court and bounces up toward the receiver. The bounce pass takes longer to complete than the chest pass, but it is also harder for the opposing team to intercept (kicking the ball deliberately is a violation). Thus, players often use the bounce pass in crowded moments, or to pass around a defender.

The &quot;overhead pass&quot; is used to pass the ball over a defender. The ball is released while over the passer&#x27;s head.

The &quot;outlet pass&quot; occurs after a team gets a defensive rebound. The next pass after the rebound is the &quot;outlet pass&quot;.

The crucial aspect of any good pass is it being difficult to intercept. Good passers can pass the ball with great accuracy and they know exactly where each of their other teammates prefers to receive the ball. A special way of doing this is passing the ball without looking at the receiving teammate. This is called a &quot;no-look pass&quot;.

Another advanced style of passing is the &quot;behind-the-back pass&quot;, which, as the description implies, involves throwing the ball behind the passer&#x27;s back to a teammate. Although some players can perform such a pass effectively, many coaches discourage no-look or behind-the-back passes, believing them to be difficult to control and more likely to result in turnovers or violations.

===Dribbling===

Dribbling is the act of bouncing the ball continuously with one hand and is a requirement for a player to take steps with the ball. To dribble, a player pushes the ball down towards the ground with the fingertips rather than patting it; this ensures greater control.

When dribbling past an opponent, the dribbler should dribble with the hand farthest from the opponent, making it more difficult for the defensive player to get to the ball. It is therefore important for a player to be able to dribble competently with both hands.

Good dribblers (or &quot;ball handlers&quot;) tend to keep their dribbling hand low to the ground, reducing the distance of travel of the ball from the floor to the hand, making it more difficult for the defender to &quot;steal&quot; the ball. Good ball handlers frequently dribble behind their backs, between their legs, and switch directions suddenly, making a less predictable dribbling pattern that is more difficult to defend against. This is called a crossover, which is the most effective way to move past defenders while dribbling.

A skilled player can dribble without watching the ball, using the dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball&#x27;s location. By not having to focus on the ball, a player can look for teammates or scoring opportunities, as well as avoid the danger of having someone steal the ball away from him/her.

===Blocking===

A block is performed when, after a shot is attempted, a defender succeeds in altering the shot by touching the ball. In almost all variants of play, it is illegal to touch the ball after it is in the downward path of its arc; this is known as &quot;goaltending&quot;. It is also illegal under NBA and Men&#x27;s NCAA basketball to block a shot after it has touched the backboard, or when any part of the ball is directly above the rim. Under international rules it is illegal to block a shot that is in the downward path of its arc or one that has touched the backboard until the ball has hit the rim. After the ball hits the rim, it is again legal to touch it even though it is no longer considered as a block performed.

To block a shot, a player has to be able to reach a point higher than where the shot is released. Thus, height can be an advantage in blocking. Players who are taller and playing the power forward or center positions generally record more blocks than players who are shorter and playing the guard positions. However, with good timing and a sufficiently high vertical leap, even shorter players can be effective shot blockers.

==Height==

At the professional level, most male players are above and most women above . Guards, for whom physical coordination and ball-handling skills are crucial, tend to be the smallest players. Almost all forwards in the top men&#x27;s pro leagues are or taller. Most centers are over tall. According to a survey given to all NBA teams, the average height of all NBA players is just under , with the average weight being close to . The tallest players ever in the NBA were Manute Bol and Gheorghe Mureșan, who were both tall. At , Margo Dydek was the tallest player in the history of the WNBA.

The shortest player ever to play in the NBA is Muggsy Bogues at . Other average-height or relatively short players have thrived at the pro level, including Anthony &quot;Spud&quot; Webb, who was tall, but had a vertical leap, giving him significant height when jumping, and Temeka Johnson, who won the WNBA Rookie of the Year Award and a championship with the Phoenix Mercury while standing only . While shorter players are often at a disadvantage in certain aspects of the game, their ability to navigate quickly through crowded areas of the court and steal the ball by reaching low are strengths.

Players regularly inflate their height in high school or college. Many prospects exaggerate their height while in high school or college to make themselves more appealing to coaches and scouts, who prefer taller players. Charles Barkley stated; &quot;I&#x27;ve been measured at 6–5, 6-. But I started in college at 6–6.&quot; Sam Smith, a former writer from the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, said: &quot;We sort of know the heights, because after camp, the sheet comes out. But you use that height, and the player gets mad. And then you hear from his agent. Or you file your story with the right height, and the copy desk changes it because they have the &#x27;official&#x27; N.B.A. media guide, which is wrong. So you sort of go along with the joke.&quot;

Since the 2019–20 NBA season heights of NBA players are recorded definitively by measuring players with their shoes off.

==Variations and similar games==
Variations of basketball are activities based on the game of basketball, using common basketball skills and equipment (primarily the ball and basket). Some variations only have superficial rule changes, while others are distinct games with varying degrees of influence from basketball. Other variations include children&#x27;s games, contests or activities meant to help players reinforce skills.

An earlier version of basketball, played primarily by women and girls, was six-on-six basketball. Horseball is a game played on horseback where a ball is handled and points are scored by shooting it through a high net (approximately 1.5m×1.5m). The sport is like a combination of polo, rugby, and basketball. There is even a form played on donkeys known as Donkey basketball, which has attracted criticism from animal rights groups.

=== Half-court ===
Perhaps the single most common variation of basketball is the half-court game, played in informal settings without referees or strict rules. Only one basket is used, and the ball must be &quot;taken back&quot; or &quot;cleared&quot; – passed or dribbled outside the three-point line each time possession of the ball changes from one team to the other. Half-court games require less cardiovascular stamina, since players need not run back and forth a full court. Half-court raises the number of players that can use a court or, conversely, can be played if there is an insufficient number to form full 5-on-5 teams.

Half-court basketball is usually played 1-on-1, 2-on-2 or 3-on-3. The last of these variations is gradually gaining official recognition as 3x3, originally known as FIBA 33. It was first tested at the 2007 Asian Indoor Games in Macau and the first official tournaments were held at the 2009 Asian Youth Games and the 2010 Youth Olympics, both in Singapore. The first FIBA 3x3 Youth World Championships were held in Rimini, Italy in 2011, with the first FIBA 3x3 World Championships for senior teams following a year later in Athens. The sport is highly tipped to become an Olympic sport as early as 2016. In the summer of 2017, the BIG3 basketball league, a professional 3x3 half court basketball league that features former NBA players, began. The BIG3 features several rule variants including a four-point field goal.

=== Other variations ===
Variations of basketball with their own page or subsection include:
* 21 (also known as American, cutthroat and roughhouse)
* 42
* Around the World
* Bounce
* Firing Squad
* Fives
* H-O-R-S-E
* Hotshot
* Knockout
* One-shot conquer
* Steal The Bacon
* Tip-it
* Tips
* &quot;The One&quot;
* Basketball War
* Water basketball
* Beach basketball
* Streetball

* One-on-one is a variation in which two players will use only a small section of the court (often no more than a half of a court) and compete to play the ball into a single hoop. Such games tend to emphasize individual dribbling and ball stealing skills over shooting and team play.
* Dunk Hoops is a variation played on basketball hoops with lowered (under basketball regulation 10 feet) rims. It originated when the popularity of the slam dunk grew and was developed to create better chances for dunks with lowered rims and using altered goaltending rules.
* Unicycle basketball is played using a regulation basketball on a regular basketball court with the same rules, for example, one must dribble the ball while riding. There are a number of rules that are particular to unicycle basketball as well, for example, a player must have at least one foot on a pedal when in-bounding the ball. Unicycle basketball is usually played using 24&quot; or smaller unicycles, and using plastic pedals, both to preserve the court and the players&#x27; shins. Popular unicycle basketball games are organized in North America.

Spin-offs from basketball that are now separate sports include:
* Ringball, a traditional South African sport that stems from basketball, has been played since 1907. The sport is now promoted in South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho, India, and Mauritius to establish Ringball as an international sport.
* Korfball (Dutch: Korfbal, &quot;korf&quot; meaning &#x27;basket&#x27;) started in the Netherlands and is now played worldwide as a mixed-gender team ball game, similar to mixed netball and basketball.
* Netball is a limited-contact team sport in which two teams of seven try to score points against one another by placing a ball through a high hoop. Australia New Zealand champions (so called ANZ Championship) is very famous in Australia and New Zealand as the premier netball league. Formerly played exclusively by women, netball today features mixed-gender competitions.
* Slamball, invented by television writer Mason Gordon, is a full-contact sport featuring trampolines. The main difference from basketball is the court; below the padded rim and backboard are four trampolines set into the floor, which serve to propel players to great heights for slam dunks. The rules also permit some physical contact between the members of the four-player teams. Professional games of Slamball aired on Spike TV in 2002, and the sport has since expanded to China and other countries.

==Social forms of basketball==
Basketball as a social and communal sport features environments, rules and demographics different from those seen in professional and televised basketball.

=== Recreational basketball ===
Basketball is played widely as an extracurricular, intramural or amateur sport in schools and colleges. Notable institutions of recreational basketball include:
* Basketball schools and academies, where students are trained in developing basketball fundamentals, undergo fitness and endurance exercises and learn various basketball skills. Basketball students learn proper ways of passing, ball handling, dribbling, shooting from various distances, rebounding, offensive moves, defense, layups, screens, basketball rules and basketball ethics. Also popular are the basketball camps organized for various occasions, often to get prepared for basketball events, and basketball clinics for improving skills.
* College and university basketball played in educational institutions of higher learning. This includes National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) intercollegiate basketball.

=== Disabled basketball ===
* Deaf basketball: One of several deaf sports, deaf basketball relies on signing for communication. Any deaf sporting event that happens, its purpose is to serve as a catalyst for the socialization of a low-incidence and geographically dispersed population.
* Wheelchair basketball: A sport based on basketball but designed for disabled people in wheelchairs and considered one of the major disabled sports practiced. There is a functional classification system that is used to help determine if the wheelchair basketball player classification system reflects the existing differences in the performance of elite female players. This system gives an analysis of the players&#x27; functional resources through field-testing and game observation. During this system&#x27;s process, players are assigned a score of 1 to 4.5.

=== Other forms ===
* Biddy basketball played by minors, sometimes in formal tournaments, around the globe.
* Midnight basketball, an initiative to curb inner-city crime in the United States and elsewhere by engaging youth in urban areas with sports as an alternative to drugs and crime.
* Rezball, short for reservation ball, is the avid Native American following of basketball, particularly a style of play particular to Native American teams of some areas.

==Fantasy basketball==
Fantasy basketball was popularized during the 1990s by ESPN Fantasy Sports, NBA.com, and Yahoo! Fantasy Sports. On the model of fantasy baseball and football, players create fictional teams, select professional basketball players to &quot;play&quot; on these teams through a mock draft or trades, then calculate points based on the players&#x27; real-world performance.

=== Basics of Fantasy Basketball ===

# League Setup:
#* You can join public leagues or create private leagues with friends.
#* Popular platforms include ESPN, Yahoo Sports, Sleeper, and Fantrax.
# Draft:
#* A draft (snake or auction) is held at the beginning of the season.
#* Participants select NBA players to form their teams.
# Scoring Formats:
#* Points League: Players earn points based on specific stats (e.g., 2 points per rebound, 1.5 points per assist).
#* Categories League: Teams compete in specific categories (e.g., best in assists, steals).
#* Rotisserie (Roto): Teams rank in each category, and rankings are combined to determine the overall score.
# Roster Management:
#* Teams set lineups daily or weekly, determining which players&#x27; stats will count.
#* You can trade players, pick up free agents, or drop underperforming players.
# Playoffs:
#* At the end of the regular NBA season, fantasy leagues often have playoffs to determine the champion.

==See also==
* Basketball moves
* Basketball National League
* Continental Basketball Association
* Glossary of basketball terms
* Index of basketball-related articles
* List of basketball films
* List of basketball leagues
* Timeline of women&#x27;s basketball
* ULEB, Union des Ligues Européennes de Basket, in English Union of European Leagues of Basketball

==References==

=== Citations ===
===General references===
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

===Historical===
* Basketball Hall of Fame – Springfield, MA
* National Basketball Foundationruns the Naismith Museum in Ontario
* Hometown Sports Heroes 

===Organizations===
* Basketball at the Olympic Games
* International Basketball Federation
* National Basketball Association
* Women&#x27;s National Basketball Association
* Continental Basketball Association (oldest professional basketball league in the world) 
* National Wheelchair Basketball Association

===Other sources===
* &quot;Basketball&quot;. &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; Online.
* Eurobasket website
* Basketball-Reference.com: Basketball Statistics, Analysis and History 
* Ontario&#x27;s Historical Plaques – Dr. James Naismith (1861–1939)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="0" end="10" title="Basketball" label="Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q216048" start="16" end="26" title="team sport" label="team sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341939" start="121" end="126" title="Basketball court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="166" end="171" title="#Shooting" label="shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q810345" start="177" end="187" title="basketball (ball)" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283464" start="244" end="248" title="Basket (basketball)" label="hoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784231" start="289" end="298" title="Backboard (basketball)" label="backboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991740" start="401" end="411" title="Field goal (basketball)" label="field goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341939" start="461" end="477" title="3 point line" label="three-point line"/>
<link wikidata="Q578998" start="581" end="595" title="technical foul" label="technical foul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191341" start="633" end="643" title="free throw" label="free throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="787" end="795" title="Overtime (sports)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q72698" start="1012" end="1017" title="layup" label="layup"/>
<link wikidata="Q838913" start="1023" end="1032" title="jump shot (basketball)" label="jump shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q870803" start="1039" end="1043" title="Slam dunk" label="dunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722555" start="1066" end="1071" title="Steal (basketball)" label="steal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423035" start="1119" end="1124" title="block (basketball)" label="block"/>
<link wikidata="Q654355" start="1172" end="1179" title="rebound (basketball)" label="rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q240936" start="1261" end="1322" title="Traveling (basketball)" label="lift or drag one&amp;#x27;s pivot foot without dribbling the ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046819" start="1327" end="1332" title="Carrying (basketball)" label="carry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242920" start="1343" end="1394" title="double dribble" label="hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148974" start="1442" end="1459" title="Basketball positions" label="playing positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q222052" start="1495" end="1501" title="Center (basketball)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q462471" start="1543" end="1556" title="power forward" label="power forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q308879" start="1606" end="1619" title="small forward" label="small forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q273199" start="1680" end="1694" title="shooting guard" label="shooting guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212413" start="1703" end="1714" title="point guard" label="point guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188962" start="1962" end="1976" title="James Naismith" label="James Naismith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="1980" end="2006" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="2130" end="2161" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="2192" end="2215" title="professional basketball" label="professional basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="2341" end="2359" title="college basketball" label="college basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q185982" start="2470" end="2480" title="EuroLeague" label="EuroLeague"/>
<link wikidata="Q68110978" start="2489" end="2525" title="Basketball Champions League Americas" label="Basketball Champions League Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26001" start="2531" end="2556" title="FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="FIBA Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2561" end="2601" title="Basketball at the Summer Olympics#Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Olympic Basketball Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q193141" start="2772" end="2782" title="EuroBasket" label="EuroBasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q810304" start="2787" end="2800" title="FIBA AmeriCup" label="FIBA AmeriCup"/>
<link wikidata="Q684138" start="2807" end="2845" title="FIBA Women&amp;#x27;s Basketball World Cup" label="FIBA Women&amp;#x27;s Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2850" end="2892" title="Basketball at the Summer Olympics#Women&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Olympic Basketball Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="2990" end="2994" title="WNBA" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948738" start="2996" end="3048" title="NCAA Women&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship" label="NCAA Women&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q521068" start="3123" end="3139" title="EuroLeague Women" label="EuroLeague Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q188962" start="3671" end="3685" title="James Naismith" label="James Naismith"/>
<link wikidata="Q243253" start="3720" end="3738" title="physical education" label="physical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="3775" end="3813" title="YMCA" label="Young Men&amp;#x27;s Christian Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809940" start="3835" end="3854" title="Springfield College" label="Springfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="3859" end="3885" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="4054" end="4065" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q14092" start="4153" end="4163" title="gymnasiums" label="gymnasiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538370" start="4338" end="4343" title="rules of basketball" label="rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="4357" end="4362" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365730" start="4684" end="4689" title="dowel" label="dowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q437187" start="4733" end="4747" title="Senda Berenson Abbott" label="Senda Berenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="4794" end="4807" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="5091" end="5115" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252328" start="5462" end="5473" title="ball (association football)" label="soccer ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="5504" end="5524" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="5934" end="5951" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993248" start="6140" end="6151" title="Paul D. &amp;quot;Tony&amp;quot; Hinkle" label="Tony Hinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040868" start="7401" end="7415" title="duck on a rock" label="duck on a rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="7717" end="7721" title="game" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058291" start="8074" end="8098" title="Young Men&amp;#x27;s Christian Association Building (Albany, New York)" label="YMCA gymnasium in Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q691875" start="8245" end="8255" title="Streetball" label="Streetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="8259" end="8290" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="8318" end="8324" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9164" end="9175" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="9181" end="9203" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="Amateur Athletic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="9212" end="9269" title="Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States" label="Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="9289" end="9293" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="9570" end="9588" title="college basketball" label="college basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532987" start="9730" end="9744" title="Geneva College" label="Geneva College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365002" start="9784" end="9804" title="Kansas Jayhawks men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088566" start="9863" end="9893" title="Phog Allen" label="Forrest &amp;quot;Phog&amp;quot; Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q474220" start="9920" end="9937" title="Amos Alonzo Stagg" label="Amos Alonzo Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="9964" end="9985" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q365505" start="9993" end="10004" title="Adolph Rupp" label="Adolph Rupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392428" start="10084" end="10106" title="Kentucky Wildcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="University of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366519" start="10181" end="10199" title="Hamline University" label="Hamline University"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="10277" end="10300" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="10381" end="10402" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="10404" end="10423" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="10425" end="10443" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="10445" end="10462" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="10468" end="10491" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="10497" end="10515" title="United States Naval Academy" label="U.S. Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="10521" end="10543" title="University of Colorado Boulder" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="10548" end="10563" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="10633" end="10641" title="College football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="10667" end="10685" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="10877" end="10917" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="10991" end="10995" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="10999" end="11007" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="11043" end="11060" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420038" start="11094" end="11117" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University at Kingston" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="11446" end="11495" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952237" start="11503" end="11513" title="NAIA national men&amp;#x27;s basketball championship" label="tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q571381" start="11590" end="11620" title="National Invitation Tournament" label="National Invitation Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="11667" end="11691" title="NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="NCAA national tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009665" start="11778" end="11782" title="CCNY point shaving scandal" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q747376" start="11841" end="11852" title="match fixing" label="game-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208291" start="11857" end="11870" title="point shaving" label="point shaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q398141" start="12017" end="12032" title="school district" label="school district"/>
<link wikidata="Q125758270" start="12393" end="12415" title="high school basketball" label="high school basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492112" start="12523" end="12543" title="Franklin Wonder Five" label="Franklin Wonder Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433767" start="12742" end="12749" title="Varsity team" label="varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972603" start="13176" end="13229" title="National Federation of State High School Associations" label="National Federation of State High School Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="13245" end="13253" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="13255" end="13262" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="13267" end="13275" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898580" start="13382" end="13398" title="Hoosier Hysteria" label="Hoosier Hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q784211" start="13447" end="13455" title="Hoosiers (film)" label="Hoosiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="13704" end="13725" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q474220" start="13772" end="13789" title="Amos Alonzo Stagg" label="Amos Alonzo Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972603" start="13966" end="14019" title="National Federation of State High School Associations" label="National Federation of State High School Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581648" start="14024" end="14073" title="North Central Association of Colleges and Schools" label="North Central Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537759" start="14462" end="14479" title="Loyola University Chicago" label="Loyola University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="14596" end="14615" title="Catholic University of America" label="Catholic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="14617" end="14627" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="14632" end="14644" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797817" start="14750" end="14767" title="Hampton University" label="Hampton Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682329" start="14876" end="14894" title="Tuskegee University" label="Tuskegee Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14921" end="14933" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782948" start="14948" end="14971" title="Tennessee State University" label="Tennessee State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="15044" end="15071" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q941524" start="15145" end="15166" title="Alabama State University" label="Alabama State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="15289" end="15312" title="professional basketball" label="professional basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861985" start="15525" end="15537" title="Barnstorm (sports)" label="Barnstorming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241412" start="15557" end="15573" title="Original Celtics" label="Original Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q933763" start="15614" end="15639" title="New York Renaissance" label="New York Renaissance Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q506754" start="15684" end="15704" title="Harlem Globetrotters" label="Harlem Globetrotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q810343" start="15782" end="15815" title="Basketball Association of America" label="Basketball Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="15863" end="15870" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143461" start="15900" end="15915" title="Toronto Huskies" label="Toronto Huskies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="15920" end="15943" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knickerbockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429493" start="16019" end="16045" title="National Basketball League (United States)" label="National Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="16064" end="16095" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="16246" end="16269" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="basketball hall of fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="16285" end="16296" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q463486" start="16602" end="16633" title="American Basketball Association" label="American Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650027" start="16709" end="16723" title="ABA-NBA merger" label="ABA-NBA merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q314185" start="16923" end="16935" title="George Mikan" label="George Mikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312643" start="17000" end="17009" title="Bob Cousy" label="Bob Cousy"/>
<link wikidata="Q242185" start="17031" end="17043" title="Bill Russell" label="Bill Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="17051" end="17065" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182455" start="17086" end="17102" title="Wilt Chamberlain" label="Wilt Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q506754" start="17147" end="17167" title="Harlem Globetrotters" label="Harlem Globetrotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q17717" start="17186" end="17201" title="Oscar Robertson" label="Oscar Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q311195" start="17206" end="17216" title="Jerry West" label="Jerry West"/>
<link wikidata="Q179051" start="17238" end="17257" title="Kareem Abdul-Jabbar" label="Kareem Abdul-Jabbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="17259" end="17280" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q273256" start="17282" end="17297" title="Hakeem Olajuwon" label="Hakeem Olajuwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q199896" start="17302" end="17313" title="Karl Malone" label="Karl Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213346" start="17326" end="17339" title="John Stockton" label="John Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q298512" start="17341" end="17353" title="Isiah Thomas" label="Isiah Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192955" start="17358" end="17368" title="Steve Nash" label="Steve Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q209921" start="17394" end="17407" title="Julius Erving" label="Julius Erving"/>
<link wikidata="Q192707" start="17412" end="17427" title="Charles Barkley" label="Charles Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44068" start="17444" end="17457" title="Dirk Nowitzki" label="Dirk Nowitzki"/>
<link wikidata="Q193052" start="17459" end="17468" title="Pau Gasol" label="Pau Gasol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193108" start="17473" end="17484" title="Tony Parker" label="Tony Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q213132" start="17507" end="17520" title="Manu Ginobili" label="Manu Ginobili"/>
<link wikidata="Q190094" start="17546" end="17559" title="Allen Iverson" label="Allen Iverson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25369" start="17561" end="17572" title="Kobe Bryant" label="Kobe Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193020" start="17574" end="17584" title="Tim Duncan" label="Tim Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="17586" end="17598" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q352159" start="17600" end="17613" title="Stephen Curry" label="Stephen Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8991894" start="17615" end="17636" title="Giannis Antetokounmpo" label="Giannis Antetokounmpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190152" start="17781" end="17791" title="Larry Bird" label="Larry Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q134183" start="17793" end="17825" title="Magic Johnson" label="Earvin &amp;quot;Magic&amp;quot; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="17831" end="17845" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="17900" end="17938" title="National Basketball Development League" label="National Basketball Development League"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="17985" end="17997" title="NBA G League" label="NBA G League"/>
<link wikidata="Q304992" start="18025" end="18033" title="Gatorade" label="Gatorade"/>
<link wikidata="Q46199" start="18121" end="18125" title="FIBA" label="FIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="18210" end="18219" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="18221" end="18235" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="18237" end="18243" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="18245" end="18250" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="18252" end="18258" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="18260" end="18268" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="18270" end="18277" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="18282" end="18293" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208137" start="18514" end="18522" title="Basketball at the Summer Olympics" label="included"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="18537" end="18557" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="18848" end="18854" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q156746" start="18858" end="18862" title="Basketball at the 1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q26001" start="19062" end="19087" title="FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="FIBA Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q684138" start="19193" end="19231" title="FIBA Women&amp;#x27;s Basketball World Cup" label="FIBA Women&amp;#x27;s Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="19330" end="19338" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="19378" end="19390" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q578316" start="19392" end="19398" title="Brazil women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q264536" start="19403" end="19412" title="Australia women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q787993" start="19426" end="19434" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q46199" start="19453" end="19457" title="FIBA" label="FIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="19555" end="19575" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q369529" start="19751" end="19761" title="1992 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="19770" end="19790" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Athens Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347419" start="19887" end="19898" title="Puerto Rico national basketball team" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q326843" start="19924" end="19933" title="Lithuania men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q499338" start="19992" end="20001" title="Argentina national basketball team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q734750" start="20090" end="20095" title="Italy national basketball team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612172" start="20101" end="20112" title="2008 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="Redeem Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q189816" start="20130" end="20143" title="Basketball at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211438" start="20177" end="20205" title="2010 FIBA World Championship" label="2010 FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q194209" start="20332" end="20345" title="Basketball at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q810339" start="20347" end="20366" title="2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="2014 FIBA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17759500" start="20375" end="20388" title="Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q209982" start="20723" end="20738" title="Dražen Petrović" label="Dražen Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q245222" start="20743" end="20753" title="Toni Kukoč" label="Toni Kukoč"/>
<link wikidata="Q94846" start="20763" end="20774" title="Vlade Divac" label="Vlade Divac"/>
<link wikidata="Q297750" start="20788" end="20803" title="Arvydas Sabonis" label="Arvydas Sabonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q348032" start="20808" end="20828" title="Šarūnas Marčiulionis" label="Šarūnas Marčiulionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q374536" start="20839" end="20848" title="Rik Smits" label="Rik Smits"/>
<link wikidata="Q61675" start="20860" end="20875" title="Detlef Schrempf" label="Detlef Schrempf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816551" start="20902" end="20935" title="Philippine Basketball Association" label="Philippine Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q625986" start="20990" end="21006" title="Araneta Coliseum" label="Araneta Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21010" end="21015" title="Quezon City#Cubao" label="Cubao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="21017" end="21028" title="Quezon City" label="Quezon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q427823" start="21425" end="21428" title="National Basketball League Australia" label="NBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578762" start="21528" end="21532" title="1979 NBL Season" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985224" start="21630" end="21634" title="1998 NBL Season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985225" start="21640" end="21647" title="1998–99 NBL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564379" start="21843" end="21882" title="Football in Australia" label="Australia&amp;#x27;s various football codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q705993" start="21974" end="21985" title="Luc Longley" label="Luc Longley"/>
<link wikidata="Q504835" start="21987" end="21998" title="Andrew Gaze" label="Andrew Gaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117654" start="22000" end="22010" title="Shane Heal" label="Shane Heal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076942" start="22012" end="22024" title="Chris Anstey" label="Chris Anstey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311546" start="22029" end="22041" title="Andrew Bogut" label="Andrew Bogut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378848" start="22127" end="22166" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball League" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="22269" end="22282" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q437187" start="22291" end="22305" title="Senda Berenson Abbott" label="Senda Berenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="22918" end="22942" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555271" start="23218" end="23232" title="Spalding (sports equipment)" label="A. G. Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="23300" end="23313" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628567" start="23318" end="23340" title="H. Sophie Newcomb Memorial College" label="Sophie Newcomb College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125991" start="23353" end="23371" title="Clara Gregory Baer" label="Clara Gregory Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49205" start="23471" end="23480" title="Wellesley College" label="Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093794" start="23482" end="23488" title="Vassar College" label="Vassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q995265" start="23494" end="23503" title="Bryn Mawr College" label="Bryn Mawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598727" start="23571" end="23579" title="Stanford Cardinal women&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020513" start="23593" end="23601" title="California Golden Bears women&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744677" start="23858" end="23897" title="American Physical Education Association" label="American Physical Education Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424317" start="23973" end="24017" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Sports Federation" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Sports Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952244" start="24217" end="24262" title="NAIA national women&amp;#x27;s basketball championship" label="national women&amp;#x27;s basketball championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339057" start="24300" end="24314" title="Edmonton Grads" label="Edmonton Grads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="24362" end="24370" title="Edmonton, Alberta" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="25064" end="25067" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="AAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q231983" start="25214" end="25228" title="Babe Zaharias" label="Babe Didrikson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579307" start="25236" end="25251" title="Golden Cyclones" label="Golden Cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612072" start="25261" end="25288" title="All American Red Heads Team" label="All American Red Heads Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636018" start="25438" end="25478" title="6 on 6 Basketball" label="two-court game with six players per team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="25496" end="25540" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q257980" start="25628" end="25639" title="Lisa Leslie" label="Lisa Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="25641" end="25654" title="Diana Taurasi" label="Diana Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q242278" start="25660" end="25674" title="Candace Parker" label="Candace Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031213" start="25762" end="25798" title="women&amp;#x27;s professional sports" label="professional women&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q463520" start="25841" end="25877" title="American Basketball League (1996–98)" label="American Basketball League (1996–98)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="26103" end="26107" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="26435" end="26438" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q347958" start="26452" end="26463" title="David Stern" label="David Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q746826" start="27134" end="27146" title="three-point field goal" label="three points"/>
<link wikidata="Q46199" start="27608" end="27612" title="FIBA" label="FIBA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27974" end="27982" title="Overtime (sports)#Basketball" label="Overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q784121" start="28385" end="28398" title="Substitution (sport)" label="Substitutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687904" start="28736" end="28742" title="jersey (clothing)" label="jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754762" start="28847" end="28855" title="high-top" label="high-top"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182752" start="29327" end="29336" title="Official (basketball)" label="officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q15073191" start="29695" end="29700" title="Personal foul (basketball)" label="fouls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250119" start="29729" end="29745" title="possession arrow" label="possession arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q261338" start="29755" end="29765" title="shot clock" label="shot clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341939" start="30103" end="30119" title="basketball court" label="basketball court"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="30168" end="30171" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="30176" end="30180" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q21141633" start="30213" end="30226" title="wood flooring" label="wood flooring"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="30253" end="30258" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q210550" start="31472" end="31475" title="3x3 (basketball)" label="3x3"/>
<link wikidata="Q772180" start="31949" end="31962" title="out of bounds" label="out of bounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q240936" start="32220" end="32229" title="traveling (basketball)" label="traveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242920" start="32396" end="32410" title="double dribble" label="double dribble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046819" start="32533" end="32550" title="Carrying (basketball)" label="carrying the ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032195" start="33242" end="33250" title="U Sports" label="U Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q219868" start="33474" end="33477" title="key (basketball)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423035" start="33590" end="33595" title="block (basketball)" label="block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533430" start="33680" end="33691" title="Goaltending" label="Goaltending"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867633" start="33811" end="33830" title="basket interference" label="basket interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191341" start="34606" end="34616" title="free throw" label="free throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q578998" start="35016" end="35030" title="technical foul" label="technical foul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350113" start="35336" end="35352" title="ejection (sports)" label="disqualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q434909" start="38252" end="38267" title="Mike Krzyzewski" label="Mike Krzyzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q212413" start="38436" end="38447" title="Point guard" label="Point guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q273199" start="38650" end="38664" title="Shooting guard" label="Shooting guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q308879" start="38816" end="38829" title="Small forward" label="Small forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q462471" start="39021" end="39034" title="Power forward" label="Power forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916881" start="39208" end="39226" title="man-to-man defense" label="man-to-man defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q222052" start="39230" end="39236" title="Center (basketball)" label="Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q219922" start="39877" end="39889" title="zone defense" label="zone defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916881" start="40051" end="40069" title="man-to-man defense" label="man-to-man defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q680499" start="40528" end="40534" title="screen (basketball)" label="screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391711" start="40602" end="40615" title="pick and roll" label="pick and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532181" start="42063" end="42071" title="set shot (basketball)" label="set shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q838913" start="42092" end="42101" title="Jump shot (basketball)" label="jump shot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42155" end="42163" title="Isometric exercise#Isometric presses as preparation for explosive power movements" label="preloads"/>
<link wikidata="Q72698" start="42716" end="42721" title="layup" label="layup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450241" start="42947" end="42958" title="finger roll" label="finger roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q870803" start="43051" end="43060" title="slam dunk" label="slam dunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752469" start="43722" end="43730" title="air ball" label="air ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532181" start="43822" end="43827" title="brick (basketball)" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q167380" start="47593" end="47602" title="crossover dribble" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431287" start="47763" end="47780" title="peripheral vision" label="peripheral vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533430" start="48264" end="48275" title="goaltending" label="goaltending"/>
<link wikidata="Q313479" start="49644" end="49654" title="Manute Bol" label="Manute Bol"/>
<link wikidata="Q460116" start="49659" end="49675" title="Gheorghe Mureșan" label="Gheorghe Mureșan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468364" start="49702" end="49713" title="Margo Dydek" label="Margo Dydek"/>
<link wikidata="Q150502" start="49813" end="49826" title="Muggsy Bogues" label="Muggsy Bogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q364295" start="49922" end="49951" title="Spud Webb" label="Anthony &amp;quot;Spud&amp;quot; Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q275307" start="50040" end="50054" title="Temeka Johnson" label="Temeka Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601876" start="50068" end="50097" title="WNBA Rookie of the Year Award" label="WNBA Rookie of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274643" start="50126" end="50141" title="Phoenix Mercury" label="Phoenix Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="50734" end="50749" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q63637259" start="51133" end="51151" title="2019–20 NBA season" label="2019–20 NBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636018" start="51751" end="51772" title="six-on-six basketball" label="six-on-six basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q204985" start="51774" end="51783" title="Horseball" label="Horseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="51956" end="51960" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="51962" end="51967" title="rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118515" start="52033" end="52050" title="Donkey basketball" label="Donkey basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="52511" end="52525" title="cardiovascular" label="cardiovascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q210550" start="52885" end="52888" title="3x3 (basketball)" label="3x3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195316" start="52946" end="52969" title="2007 Asian Indoor Games" label="2007 Asian Indoor Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="52973" end="52978" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364075" start="53031" end="53053" title="2009 Asian Youth Games" label="2009 Asian Youth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q170422" start="53062" end="53081" title="2010 Youth Olympics" label="2010 Youth Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="53160" end="53166" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53177" end="53181" title="2011 FIBA 3x3 Youth World Championships" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758692" start="53198" end="53226" title="FIBA 3x3 World Championships" label="FIBA 3x3 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955282" start="53254" end="53266" title="2012 FIBA 3x3 World Championships" label="a year later"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="53270" end="53276" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q212434" start="53318" end="53331" title="Olympic sport" label="Olympic sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="53344" end="53348" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229711" start="53377" end="53381" title="BIG3" label="BIG3"/>
<link wikidata="Q43079772" start="53542" end="53563" title="four-point field goal" label="four-point field goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857751" start="53661" end="53663" title="Twenty-one (basketball)" label="21"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53717" end="53719" title="Variations of basketball#42" label="42"/>
<link wikidata="Q455347" start="53722" end="53738" title="Around the World (basketball)" label="Around the World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53741" end="53747" title="Variations of basketball#Bounce" label="Bounce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53750" end="53762" title="Variations of basketball#Firing Squad" label="Firing Squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53765" end="53770" title="Variations of basketball#Fives" label="Fives"/>
<link wikidata="Q455347" start="53773" end="53782" title="H-O-R-S-E" label="H-O-R-S-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912458" start="53785" end="53792" title="Hotshot (game)" label="Hotshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q455347" start="53795" end="53803" title="Knockout (game)" label="Knockout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53806" end="53822" title="Variations of basketball#One-shot conquer" label="One-shot conquer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53825" end="53840" title="Variations of basketball#Steal The Bacon" label="Steal The Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53843" end="53849" title="Variations of basketball#Tip-it" label="Tip-it"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53852" end="53856" title="Variations of basketball#Tips" label="Tips"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53859" end="53878" title="Variations of basketball#&amp;quot;The One&amp;quot;" label="&amp;quot;The One&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53881" end="53895" title="Variations of basketball#War" label="Basketball War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462938" start="53898" end="53914" title="Water basketball" label="Water basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q455347" start="53917" end="53933" title="Beach basketball" label="Beach basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q691875" start="53936" end="53946" title="Streetball" label="Streetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533430" start="54489" end="54500" title="goaltending" label="goaltending"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55066" end="55091" title="Variations of basketball#More distantly related games" label="Spin-offs from basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939187" start="55132" end="55140" title="Ringball" label="Ringball"/>
<link wikidata="Q192937" start="55375" end="55383" title="Korfball" label="Korfball"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="55578" end="55585" title="Netball" label="Netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q392633" start="55951" end="55959" title="Slamball" label="Slamball"/>
<link wikidata="Q327911" start="56039" end="56050" title="trampolines" label="trampolines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784231" start="56127" end="56136" title="backboard (basketball)" label="backboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q870803" start="56229" end="56238" title="slam dunk" label="slam dunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="56371" end="56379" title="Spike TV" label="Spike TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q72698" start="57160" end="57165" title="layup" label="layup"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="57483" end="57523" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387242" start="57590" end="57605" title="Deaf basketball" label="Deaf basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128216" start="57848" end="57869" title="Wheelchair basketball" label="Wheelchair basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="57916" end="57924" title="disability" label="disabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="57935" end="57945" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q814517" start="57979" end="57994" title="disabled sports" label="disabled sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409116" start="58433" end="58449" title="Biddy basketball" label="Biddy basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842850" start="58521" end="58540" title="Midnight basketball" label="Midnight basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319860" start="58701" end="58708" title="Rezball" label="Rezball"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="58750" end="58765" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="58950" end="58954" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="58971" end="58978" title="NBA.com" label="NBA.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="58984" end="58990" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364863" start="59023" end="59039" title="fantasy baseball" label="fantasy baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q579987" start="59044" end="59052" title="Fantasy football (gridiron)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701924" start="60253" end="60269" title="Basketball moves" label="Basketball moves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963640" start="60272" end="60298" title="Basketball National League" label="Basketball National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q204348" start="60301" end="60335" title="Continental Basketball Association" label="Continental Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532181" start="60338" end="60366" title="Glossary of basketball terms" label="Glossary of basketball terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018818" start="60369" end="60405" title="Index of basketball-related articles" label="Index of basketball-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q97360064" start="60408" end="60432" title="List of basketball films" label="List of basketball films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471217" start="60435" end="60461" title="List of basketball leagues" label="List of basketball leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806474" start="60464" end="60499" title="Timeline of women&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Timeline of women&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q916134" start="60502" end="60506" title="ULEB" label="ULEB"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="61235" end="61258" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3926" wikidata="Q4928568" url="?curid=3926" title="Blowfish (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Blowfish]] are species of fish in the family Tetraodontidae.

Blowfish may also refer to:

* Porcupinefish, belonging to the family Diodontidae
* Blowfish (cipher), an encryption algorithm
* Blowfish (company), an American erotic goods supplier
* &quot;The Blowfish&quot;, a satirical newspaper at Brandeis University
* Lexington County Blowfish, a baseball team
* Vice President Blowfish, a character in the animated series &quot;Adventure Time&quot; episode &quot;President Porpoise Is Missing!&quot;

==See also==
* Hootie &amp; the Blowfish, an American rock band</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4928568" start="0" end="12" title="Blowfish (disambiguation)" label="[[Blowfish]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928568" start="64" end="72" title="Blowfish (disambiguation)" label="Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q329334" start="95" end="108" title="Porcupinefish" label="Porcupinefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q815853" start="148" end="165" title="Blowfish (cipher)" label="Blowfish (cipher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928569" start="193" end="211" title="Blowfish (company)" label="Blowfish (company)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="255" end="267" title="Brandeis University#Publications" label="The Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="300" end="319" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149620" start="322" end="347" title="Lexington County Blowfish" label="Lexington County Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985416" start="468" end="498" title="President Porpoise Is Missing!" label="President Porpoise Is Missing!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476499" start="521" end="546" title="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish" label="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3928" wikidata="Q18545" url="?curid=3928" title="Ball">
<text>A ball is a round object (usually spherical, but can sometimes be ovoid) with several uses. It is used in ball games, where the play of the game follows the state of the ball as it is hit, kicked or thrown by players. Balls can also be used for simpler activities, such as catch or juggling. Balls made from hard-wearing materials are used in engineering applications to provide very low friction bearings, known as ball bearings. Black-powder weapons use stone and metal balls as projectiles.

Although many types of balls are today made from rubber, this form was unknown outside the Americas until after the voyages of Columbus. The Spanish were the first Europeans to see the bouncing rubber balls (although solid and not inflated) which were employed most notably in the Mesoamerican ballgame. Balls used in various sports in other parts of the world prior to Columbus were made from other materials such as animal bladders or skins, stuffed with various materials.

As balls are one of the most familiar spherical objects to humans, the word &quot;ball&quot; may refer to or describe spherical or near-spherical objects.

&quot;Ball&quot; is used metaphorically sometimes to denote something spherical or spheroid, e.g., armadillos and human beings curl up into a ball, making a fist into a ball.

== Etymology ==
The first known use of the word &quot;ball&quot; in English in the sense of a globular body that is played with was in 1205 in &quot;Layamon&#x27;s Brut, or Chronicle of Britain&quot; in the phrase, &quot;&quot; (&quot;Some of them drove balls far across the fields.&quot;) The word came from the Middle English &quot;bal&quot; (inflected as &quot;ball-e, -es&quot;), in turn from Old Norse &quot;böllr&quot; (pronounced ; compare Old Swedish &quot;baller&quot;, and Swedish &quot;boll&quot;) from Proto-Germanic &quot;ballu-z&quot; (whence probably Middle High German &quot;bal, ball-es&quot;, Middle Dutch &quot;bal&quot;), a cognate with Old High German &quot;ballo, pallo&quot;, Middle High German balle from Proto-Germanic &quot;*ballon&quot; (weak masculine), and Old High German &quot;ballâ, pallâ&quot;, Middle High German &quot;balle&quot;, Proto-Germanic &quot;*ballôn&quot; (weak feminine). No Old English representative of any of these is known. (The answering forms in Old English would have been &quot;beallu, -a, -e&quot;—compare &quot;bealluc, ballock&quot;.) If &quot;ball-&quot; was native in Germanic, it may have been a cognate with the Latin &quot;foll-is&quot; in sense of a &quot;thing blown up or inflated.&quot; In the later Middle English spelling &quot;balle&quot; the word coincided graphically with the French &quot;balle&quot; &quot;ball&quot; and &quot;bale&quot; which has hence been erroneously assumed to be its source. French &quot;balle&quot; (but not &quot;boule&quot;) is assumed to be of Germanic origin, itself, however. In Ancient Greek the word πάλλα (&quot;palla&quot;) for &quot;ball&quot; is attested besides the word σφαίρα (&quot;sfaíra&quot;), &quot;sphere&quot;.

==History==

Some form of game with a ball is found portrayed on Egyptian monuments. In Homer, Nausicaa was playing at ball with her maidens when Odysseus first saw her in the land of the Phaeacians (Od. vi. 100). And Halios and Laodamas performed before Alcinous and Odysseus with ball play, accompanied with dancing (Od. viii. 370). The most ancient balls in Eurasia have been discovered in Karasahr, China and are 3000 years old. They were made of hair-filled leather.

===Ancient Greeks===
Among the ancient Greeks, games with balls (σφαῖραι) were regarded as a useful subsidiary to the more violent athletic exercises, as a means of keeping the body supple, and rendering it graceful, but were generally left to boys and girls. Of regular rules for the playing of ball games, little trace remains, if there were any such. The names in Greek for various forms, which have come down to us in such works as the Ὀνομαστικόν of Julius Pollux, imply little or nothing of such; thus, ἀπόρραξις (&quot;aporraxis&quot;) only means the putting of the ball on the ground with the open hand, οὐρανία (&quot;ourania&quot;), the flinging of the ball in the air to be caught by two or more players; φαινίνδα (&quot;phaininda&quot;) would seem to be a game of catch played by two or more, where feinting is used as a test of quickness and skill. Pollux (i. x. 104) mentions a game called episkyros (ἐπίσκυρος), which has often been looked on as the origin of football. It seems to have been played by two sides, arranged in lines; how far there was any form of &quot;goal&quot; seems uncertain. It was impossible to produce a ball that was perfectly spherical; children usually made their own balls by inflating pig&#x27;s bladders and heating them in the ashes of a fire to make them rounder, although Plato (fl. 420s BC – 340s BC) described &quot;balls which have leather coverings in twelve pieces&quot;.

===Ancient Romans===
Among the Romans, ball games were looked upon as an adjunct to the bath, and were graduated to the age and health of the bathers, and usually a place (sphaeristerium) was set apart for them in the baths (thermae). There appear to have been three types or sizes of ball, the pila, or small ball, used in catching games, the paganica, a heavy ball stuffed with feathers, and the follis, a leather ball filled with air, the largest of the three. This was struck from player to player, who wore a kind of gauntlet on the arm. There was a game known as trigon, played by three players standing in the form of a triangle, and played with the follis, and also one known as harpastum, which seems to imply a &quot;scrimmage&quot; among several players for the ball. These games are known to us through the Romans, though the names are Greek.

===Modern ball games===
The various modern games played with a ball or balls and subject to rules are treated under their various names, such as polo, cricket, football, etc.

==Physics==
In sports, many modern balls are pressurized. Some are pressurized at the factory (e.g. tennis, squash (sport)) and others are pressurized by users (e.g. volleyball, basketball, football). Almost all pressurized balls gradually leak air. If the ball is factory pressurized, there is usually a rule about whether the ball retains sufficient pressure to remain playable. Depressurized balls lack bounce and are often termed &quot;dead&quot;. In extreme cases, a dead ball becomes flaccid. If the ball is pressured on use, there are generally rules about how the ball is pressurized before the match, and when (or whether) the ball can be repressurized or replaced.

Due to the ideal gas law, ball pressure is a function of temperature, generally tracking ambient conditions. Softer balls that are struck hard (especially squash balls) increase in temperature due to inelastic collision.

In outdoor sports, wet balls play differently than dry balls. In indoor sports, balls may become damp due to hand sweat. Any form of humidity or dampness will affect a ball&#x27;s surface friction, which will alter a player&#x27;s ability to impart spin on the ball. The action required to apply spin to a ball is governed by the physics of angular momentum. Spinning balls travelling through air (technically a fluid) will experience the Magnus effect, which can produce lateral deflections in addition to the normal up-down curvature induced by a combination of wind resistance and gravity.
== Specifications ==

== See also ==
* Ball (mathematics)
* Buckminster Fullerene &quot;Bucky balls&quot;
* Dryer ball, used in a tumbling dryer
* Football (ball)
* Hockey puck, can also spin, bounce, and roll
* Kickball
* Marbles
* Penny floater
* Prisoner Ball
* Shuttlecock
* Super Ball

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18545" start="2" end="6" title="Ball" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="34" end="43" title="sphere" label="spherical"/>
<link wikidata="Q193410" start="66" end="71" title="ovoid" label="ovoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573502" start="106" end="115" title="ball game" label="ball game"/>
<link wikidata="Q194326" start="282" end="290" title="juggling" label="juggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="343" end="354" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="388" end="396" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432170" start="416" end="429" title="ball bearings" label="ball bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="431" end="443" title="Black powder" label="Black-powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="481" end="491" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="544" end="550" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="586" end="594" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="622" end="630" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q610098" start="776" end="797" title="Mesoamerican ballgame" label="Mesoamerican ballgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840543" start="1227" end="1237" title="armadillos" label="armadillos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505454" start="1453" end="1497" title="Layamon&amp;#x27;s Brut, or Chronicle of Britain" label="Layamon&amp;#x27;s Brut, or Chronicle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1617" end="1631" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1701" end="1710" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="1818" end="1832" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="1948" end="1955" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="1961" end="1976" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2884" end="2897" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="3018" end="3024" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="3098" end="3106" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3121" end="3126" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q135224" start="3128" end="3136" title="Nausicaa" label="Nausicaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="3179" end="3187" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944882" start="3221" end="3229" title="Phaeacia" label="Phaeacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q496595" start="3288" end="3296" title="Alcinous" label="Alcinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="3394" end="3401" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156662" start="3426" end="3434" title="Karasahr" label="Karasahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3436" end="3441" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3537" end="3551" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q548104" start="3961" end="3974" title="Julius Pollux" label="Julius Pollux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565742" start="4410" end="4419" title="episkyros" label="episkyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="4825" end="4830" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="4962" end="4968" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747100" start="5329" end="5335" title="Follis (ball game)" label="follis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432712" start="5453" end="5461" title="Gauntlet (glove)" label="gauntlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841766" start="5500" end="5506" title="Trigon (game)" label="trigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q764427" start="5618" end="5627" title="harpastum" label="harpastum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="5932" end="5936" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="5938" end="5945" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081491" start="5947" end="5955" title="football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="5978" end="5984" title="sports" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="6063" end="6069" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="6071" end="6085" title="squash (sport)" label="squash (sport)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="6129" end="6139" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="6141" end="6151" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081491" start="6153" end="6161" title="football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q191785" start="6650" end="6663" title="ideal gas law" label="ideal gas law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074917" start="6839" end="6858" title="inelastic collision" label="inelastic collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="7202" end="7218" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q172145" start="7273" end="7278" title="fluid mechanics" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q622975" start="7300" end="7313" title="Magnus effect" label="Magnus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="7425" end="7440" title="wind resistance" label="wind resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="7445" end="7452" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q838611" start="7493" end="7511" title="Ball (mathematics)" label="Ball (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075376" start="7514" end="7535" title="Buckminster Fullerene" label="Buckminster Fullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249314" start="7562" end="7572" title="Dryer ball" label="Dryer ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q262090" start="7601" end="7616" title="Football (ball)" label="Football (ball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q508918" start="7619" end="7630" title="Hockey puck" label="Hockey puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154146" start="7666" end="7674" title="Kickball" label="Kickball"/>
<link wikidata="Q200199" start="7677" end="7684" title="Marbles" label="Marbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956947" start="7687" end="7700" title="Penny floater" label="Penny floater"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933365" start="7703" end="7716" title="Prisoner Ball" label="Prisoner Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q874669" start="7719" end="7730" title="Shuttlecock" label="Shuttlecock"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156983" start="7733" end="7743" title="Super Ball" label="Super Ball"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3931" wikidata="Q130901" url="?curid=3931" title="Binary relation">
<text>In mathematics, a binary relation associates elements of one set called the &quot;domain&quot; with elements of another set called the &quot;codomain&quot;. Precisely, a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 is a set of ordered pairs formula_3 where formula_4 is in formula_1 and formula_6 is in formula_2. It encodes the common concept of relation: an element formula_4 is &quot;related&quot; to an element formula_6, if and only if the pair formula_3 belongs to the set of ordered pairs that defines the binary relation.

An example of a binary relation is the &quot;divides&quot; relation over the set of prime numbers formula_11 and the set of integers formula_12, in which each prime formula_13 is related to each integer formula_14 that is a multiple of formula_13, but not to an integer that is not a multiple of formula_13. In this relation, for instance, the prime number formula_17 is related to numbers such as formula_18, formula_19, formula_20, formula_21, but not to formula_22 or formula_23, just as the prime number formula_24 is related to formula_19, formula_20, and formula_23, but not to formula_28 or formula_29.

Binary relations, and especially homogeneous relations, are used in many branches of mathematics to model a wide variety of concepts. These include, among others:
* the &quot;is greater than&quot;, &quot;is equal to&quot;, and &quot;divides&quot; relations in arithmetic;
* the &quot;is congruent to&quot; relation in geometry;
* the &quot;is adjacent to&quot; relation in graph theory;
* the &quot;is orthogonal to&quot; relation in linear algebra.

A function may be defined as a binary relation that meets additional constraints. Binary relations are also heavily used in computer science.

A binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 is an element of the power set of formula_32 Since the latter set is ordered by inclusion (formula_33), each relation has a place in the lattice of subsets of formula_32 A binary relation is called a &quot;homogeneous relation&quot; when formula_35. A binary relation is also called a &quot;heterogeneous relation&quot; when it is not necessary that formula_35.

Since relations are sets, they can be manipulated using set operations, including union, intersection, and complementation, and satisfying the laws of an algebra of sets. Beyond that, operations like the converse of a relation and the composition of relations are available, satisfying the laws of a calculus of relations, for which there are textbooks by Ernst Schröder, Clarence Lewis, and Gunther Schmidt. A deeper analysis of relations involves decomposing them into subsets called &quot;concepts&quot;, and placing them in a complete lattice.

In some systems of axiomatic set theory, relations are extended to classes, which are generalizations of sets. This extension is needed for, among other things, modeling the concepts of &quot;is an element of&quot; or &quot;is a subset of&quot; in set theory, without running into logical inconsistencies such as Russell&#x27;s paradox.

A binary relation is the most studied special case formula_37 of an formula_38-ary relation over sets formula_39, which is a subset of the Cartesian product formula_40

== Definition ==
Given sets formula_1 and formula_2, the Cartesian product formula_43 is defined as formula_44 and its elements are called &quot;ordered pairs&quot;.

A formula_45 over sets formula_1 and formula_2 is a subset of formula_32 The set formula_1 is called the or of formula_45, and the set formula_2 the or of formula_45. In order to specify the choices of the sets formula_1 and formula_2, some authors define a or as an ordered triple formula_55, where formula_56 is a subset of formula_43 called the of the binary relation. The statement formula_58 reads &quot;formula_4 is formula_45-related to formula_6&quot; and is denoted by formula_62. The or of formula_45 is the set of all formula_4 such that formula_62 for at least one formula_6. The &quot;codomain of definition&quot;, , or of formula_45 is the set of all formula_6 such that formula_62 for at least one formula_4. The of formula_45 is the union of its domain of definition and its codomain of definition.

When formula_72 a binary relation is called a (or ). To emphasize the fact that formula_1 and formula_2 are allowed to be different, a binary relation is also called a heterogeneous relation. The prefix &quot;hetero&quot; is from the Greek ἕτερος (&quot;heteros&quot;, &quot;other, another, different&quot;).

A heterogeneous relation has been called a rectangular relation, suggesting that it does not have the square-like symmetry of a homogeneous relation on a set where formula_75 Commenting on the development of binary relations beyond homogeneous relations, researchers wrote, &quot;... a variant of the theory has evolved that treats relations from the very beginning as or , i.e. as relations where the normal case is that they are relations between different sets.&quot;

The terms &quot;correspondence&quot;, dyadic relation and two-place relation are synonyms for binary relation, though some authors use the term &quot;binary relation&quot; for any subset of a Cartesian product formula_43 without reference to formula_1 and formula_2, and reserve the term &quot;correspondence&quot; for a binary relation with reference to formula_1 and formula_2.

In a binary relation, the order of the elements is important; if formula_81 then formula_82 can be true or false independently of formula_62. For example, formula_24 divides formula_23, but formula_23 does not divide formula_24.

== Operations ==
=== Union ===

If formula_45 and formula_89 are binary relations over sets formula_1 and formula_2 then formula_92 is the of formula_45 and formula_89 over formula_1 and formula_2.

The identity element is the empty relation. For example, formula_97 is the union of &lt; and =, and formula_98 is the union of &gt; and =.

=== Intersection ===
If formula_45 and formula_89 are binary relations over sets formula_1 and formula_2 then formula_103 is the of formula_45 and formula_89 over formula_1 and formula_2.

The identity element is the universal relation. For example, the relation &quot;is divisible by 6&quot; is the intersection of the relations &quot;is divisible by 3&quot; and &quot;is divisible by 2&quot;.

=== Composition ===

If formula_45 is a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2, and formula_89 is a binary relation over sets formula_2 and formula_113 then formula_114 (also denoted by formula_115) is the of formula_45 and formula_89 over formula_1 and formula_113.

The identity element is the identity relation. The order of formula_45 and formula_89 in the notation formula_122 used here agrees with the standard notational order for composition of functions. For example, the composition (is parent of)formula_123(is mother of) yields (is maternal grandparent of), while the composition (is mother of)formula_123(is parent of) yields (is grandmother of). For the former case, if formula_4 is the parent of formula_6 and formula_6 is the mother of formula_14, then formula_4 is the maternal grandparent of formula_14.

=== Converse ===
If formula_45 is a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 then formula_134 is the , also called , of formula_45 over formula_2 and formula_1.

For example, formula_138 is the converse of itself, as is formula_139, and formula_140 and formula_141 are each other&#x27;s converse, as are formula_97 and formula_98. A binary relation is equal to its converse if and only if it is symmetric.

=== Complement ===

If formula_45 is a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 then formula_147 (also denoted by formula_148) is the of formula_45 over formula_1 and formula_2.

For example, formula_138 and formula_139 are each other&#x27;s complement, as are formula_33 and formula_155, formula_156 and formula_157, formula_158 and formula_159, and for total orders also formula_140 and formula_98, and formula_141 and formula_97.

The complement of the converse relation formula_164 is the converse of the complement: formula_165

If formula_72 the complement has the following properties:
* If a relation is symmetric, then so is the complement.
* The complement of a reflexive relation is irreflexive—and vice versa.
* The complement of a strict weak order is a total preorder—and vice versa.

=== Restriction ===

If formula_45 is a binary homogeneous relation over a set formula_1 and formula_89 is a subset of formula_1 then formula_171 is the of formula_45 to formula_89 over formula_1.

If formula_45 is a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 and if formula_89 is a subset of formula_1 then formula_180 is the of formula_45 to formula_89 over formula_1 and formula_2.

If a relation is reflexive, irreflexive, symmetric, antisymmetric, asymmetric, transitive, total, trichotomous, a partial order, total order, strict weak order, total preorder (weak order), or an equivalence relation, then so too are its restrictions.

However, the transitive closure of a restriction is a subset of the restriction of the transitive closure, i.e., in general not equal. For example, restricting the relation &quot;formula_4 is parent of formula_6&quot; to females yields the relation &quot;formula_4 is mother of the woman formula_6&quot;; its transitive closure does not relate a woman with her paternal grandmother. On the other hand, the transitive closure of &quot;is parent of&quot; is &quot;is ancestor of&quot;; its restriction to females does relate a woman with her paternal grandmother.

Also, the various concepts of completeness (not to be confused with being &quot;total&quot;) do not carry over to restrictions. For example, over the real numbers a property of the relation formula_97 is that every non-empty subset formula_190 with an upper bound in formula_191 has a least upper bound (also called supremum) in formula_192 However, for the rational numbers this supremum is not necessarily rational, so the same property does not hold on the restriction of the relation formula_97 to the rational numbers.
A binary relation formula_45 over sets formula_1 and formula_2 is said to be a relation formula_89 over formula_1 and formula_2, written formula_200 if formula_45 is a subset of formula_89, that is, for all formula_203 and formula_204 if formula_62, then formula_206. If formula_45 is contained in formula_89 and formula_89 is contained in formula_45, then formula_45 and formula_89 are called written formula_213. If formula_45 is contained in formula_89 but formula_89 is not contained in formula_45, then formula_45 is said to be than formula_89, written formula_220 For example, on the rational numbers, the relation formula_141 is smaller than formula_98, and equal to the composition formula_223.

=== Matrix representation ===
Binary relations over sets formula_1 and formula_2 can be represented algebraically by logical matrices indexed by formula_1 and formula_2 with entries in the Boolean semiring (addition corresponds to OR and multiplication to AND) where matrix addition corresponds to union of relations, matrix multiplication corresponds to composition of relations (of a relation over formula_1 and formula_2 and a relation over formula_2 and formula_113), the Hadamard product corresponds to intersection of relations, the zero matrix corresponds to the empty relation, and the matrix of ones corresponds to the universal relation. Homogeneous relations (when formula_35) form a matrix semiring (indeed, a matrix semialgebra over the Boolean semiring) where the identity matrix corresponds to the identity relation.

== Examples ==


== Types of binary relations ==

Some important types of binary relations formula_45 over sets formula_1 and formula_2 are listed below.

Uniqueness properties:
* Injective (also called left-unique): for all formula_236 and all formula_237 if formula_238 and formula_239 then formula_240. In other words, every element of the codomain has &quot;at most&quot; one preimage element. For such a relation, formula_2 is called &quot;a primary key&quot; of formula_45. For example, the green and blue binary relations in the diagram are injective, but the red one is not (as it relates both formula_243 and formula_22 to formula_22), nor the black one (as it relates both formula_243 and formula_22 to formula_19).
* Functional (also called right-unique or univalent): for all formula_203 and all formula_250 if formula_62 and formula_238 then formula_253. In other words, every element of the domain has &quot;at most&quot; one image element. Such a binary relation is called a or . For such a relation, formula_254 is called of formula_45. For example, the red and green binary relations in the diagram are functional, but the blue one is not (as it relates formula_22 to both formula_22 and formula_243), nor the black one (as it relates formula_19 to both formula_243 and formula_22).
* One-to-one: injective and functional. For example, the green binary relation in the diagram is one-to-one, but the red, blue and black ones are not.
* One-to-many: injective and not functional. For example, the blue binary relation in the diagram is one-to-many, but the red, green and black ones are not.
* Many-to-one: functional and not injective. For example, the red binary relation in the diagram is many-to-one, but the green, blue and black ones are not.
* Many-to-many: not injective nor functional. For example, the black binary relation in the diagram is many-to-many, but the red, green and blue ones are not.

Totality properties (only definable if the domain formula_1 and codomain formula_2 are specified):
* Total (also called left-total): for all formula_203 there exists a formula_265 such that formula_62. In other words, every element of the domain has &quot;at least&quot; one image element. In other words, the domain of definition of formula_45 is equal to formula_1. This property, is different from the definition of (also called by some authors) in Properties. Such a binary relation is called a . For example, the red and green binary relations in the diagram are total, but the blue one is not (as it does not relate formula_243 to any real number), nor the black one (as it does not relate formula_17 to any real number). As another example, formula_141 is a total relation over the integers. But it is not a total relation over the positive integers, because there is no formula_6 in the positive integers such that formula_273. However, formula_140 is a total relation over the positive integers, the rational numbers and the real numbers. Every reflexive relation is total: for a given formula_4, choose formula_276.
* Surjective (also called right-total): for all formula_265, there exists an formula_203 such that formula_62. In other words, every element of the codomain has &quot;at least&quot; one preimage element. In other words, the codomain of definition of formula_45 is equal to formula_2. For example, the green and blue binary relations in the diagram are surjective, but the red one is not (as it does not relate any real number to formula_243), nor the black one (as it does not relate any real number to formula_17).

Uniqueness and totality properties (only definable if the domain formula_1 and codomain formula_2 are specified):
* A function (also called mapping): a binary relation that is functional and total. In other words, every element of the domain has &quot;exactly&quot; one image element. For example, the red and green binary relations in the diagram are functions, but the blue and black ones are not.
* An injection: a function that is injective. For example, the green relation in the diagram is an injection, but the red one is not; the black and the blue relation is not even a function.
* A surjection: a function that is surjective. For example, the green relation in the diagram is a surjection, but the red one is not.
* A bijection: a function that is injective and surjective. In other words, every element of the domain has &quot;exactly&quot; one image element and every element of the codomain has &quot;exactly&quot; one preimage element. For example, the green binary relation in the diagram is a bijection, but the red one is not.

If relations over proper classes are allowed:
* Set-like (also called local): for all formula_203, the class of all formula_265 such that formula_82, i.e. formula_289, is a set. For example, the relation formula_158 is set-like, and every relation on two sets is set-like. The usual ordering &lt; over the class of ordinal numbers is a set-like relation, while its inverse &gt; is not.

== Sets versus classes ==
Certain mathematical &quot;relations&quot;, such as &quot;equal to&quot;, &quot;subset of&quot;, and &quot;member of&quot;, cannot be understood to be binary relations as defined above, because their domains and codomains cannot be taken to be sets in the usual systems of axiomatic set theory. For example, to model the general concept of &quot;equality&quot; as a binary relation formula_138, take the domain and codomain to be the &quot;class of all sets&quot;, which is not a set in the usual set theory.

In most mathematical contexts, references to the relations of equality, membership and subset are harmless because they can be understood implicitly to be restricted to some set in the context. The usual work-around to this problem is to select a &quot;large enough&quot; set formula_292, that contains all the objects of interest, and work with the restriction formula_293 instead of formula_138. Similarly, the &quot;subset of&quot; relation formula_33 needs to be restricted to have domain and codomain formula_296 (the power set of a specific set formula_292): the resulting set relation can be denoted by formula_298 Also, the &quot;member of&quot; relation needs to be restricted to have domain formula_292 and codomain formula_296 to obtain a binary relation formula_301 that is a set. Bertrand Russell has shown that assuming formula_158 to be defined over all sets leads to a contradiction in naive set theory, see &quot;Russell&#x27;s paradox&quot;.

Another solution to this problem is to use a set theory with proper classes, such as NBG or Morse–Kelley set theory, and allow the domain and codomain (and so the graph) to be proper classes: in such a theory, equality, membership, and subset are binary relations without special comment. (A minor modification needs to be made to the concept of the ordered triple formula_55, as normally a proper class cannot be a member of an ordered tuple; or of course one can identify the binary relation with its graph in this context.) With this definition one can for instance define a binary relation over every set and its power set.

== Homogeneous relation ==

A homogeneous relation over a set formula_1 is a binary relation over formula_1 and itself, i.e. it is a subset of the Cartesian product formula_306 It is also simply called a (binary) relation over formula_1.

A homogeneous relation formula_45 over a set formula_1 may be identified with a directed simple graph permitting loops, where formula_1 is the vertex set and formula_45 is the edge set (there is an edge from a vertex formula_4 to a vertex formula_6 if and only if formula_62).
The set of all homogeneous relations formula_315 over a set formula_1 is the power set formula_317 which is a Boolean algebra augmented with the involution of mapping of a relation to its converse relation. Considering composition of relations as a binary operation on formula_315, it forms a semigroup with involution.

Some important properties that a homogeneous relation formula_45 over a set formula_1 may have are:
* : for all formula_321 formula_322. For example, formula_98 is a reflexive relation but &gt; is not.
* : for all formula_321 not formula_322. For example, formula_141 is an irreflexive relation, but formula_98 is not.
* : for all formula_328 if formula_62 then formula_82. For example, &quot;is a blood relative of&quot; is a symmetric relation.
* : for all formula_328 if formula_62 and formula_82 then formula_334 For example, formula_98 is an antisymmetric relation.
* : for all formula_328 if formula_62 then not formula_82. A relation is asymmetric if and only if it is both antisymmetric and irreflexive. For example, &gt; is an asymmetric relation, but formula_98 is not.
* : for all formula_340 if formula_62 and formula_239 then formula_238. A transitive relation is irreflexive if and only if it is asymmetric. For example, &quot;is ancestor of&quot; is a transitive relation, while &quot;is parent of&quot; is not.
* : for all formula_328 if formula_81 then formula_62 or formula_82.
* : for all formula_328 formula_62 or formula_82.
* : for all formula_328 if formula_352 then some formula_353 exists such that formula_238 and formula_355.

A is a relation that is reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive. A is a relation that is irreflexive, asymmetric, and transitive. A is a relation that is reflexive, antisymmetric, transitive and connected. A is a relation that is irreflexive, asymmetric, transitive and connected.
An is a relation that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.
For example, &quot;formula_4 divides formula_6&quot; is a partial, but not a total order on natural numbers formula_358 &quot;formula_359&quot; is a strict total order on formula_358 and &quot;formula_4 is parallel to formula_6&quot; is an equivalence relation on the set of all lines in the Euclidean plane.

All operations defined in section also apply to homogeneous relations.
Beyond that, a homogeneous relation over a set formula_1 may be subjected to closure operations like:
; : the smallest reflexive relation over formula_1 containing formula_45,
; : the smallest transitive relation over formula_1 containing formula_45,
; : the smallest equivalence relation over formula_1 containing formula_45.

== Calculus of relations ==
Developments in algebraic logic have facilitated usage of binary relations. The calculus of relations includes the algebra of sets, extended by composition of relations and the use of converse relations. The inclusion formula_200 meaning that formula_371 implies formula_372, sets the scene in a lattice of relations. But since formula_373 the inclusion symbol is superfluous. Nevertheless, composition of relations and manipulation of the operators according to Schröder rules, provides a calculus to work in the power set of formula_374

In contrast to homogeneous relations, the composition of relations operation is only a partial function. The necessity of matching target to source of composed relations has led to the suggestion that the study of heterogeneous relations is a chapter of category theory as in the category of sets, except that the morphisms of this category are relations. The of the category Rel are sets, and the relation-morphisms compose as required in a category.

== Induced concept lattice ==
Binary relations have been described through their induced concept lattices:
A concept formula_375 satisfies two properties:
* The logical matrix of formula_376 is the outer product of logical vectors formula_377 logical vectors.
* formula_376 is maximal, not contained in any other outer product. Thus formula_376 is described as a &quot;non-enlargeable rectangle&quot;.

For a given relation formula_380 the set of concepts, enlarged by their joins and meets, forms an &quot;induced lattice of concepts&quot;, with inclusion formula_381 forming a preorder.

The MacNeille completion theorem (1937) (that any partial order may be embedded in a complete lattice) is cited in a 2013 survey article &quot;Decomposition of relations on concept lattices&quot;. The decomposition is
: formula_382, where formula_383 and formula_384 are functions, called or left-total, functional relations in this context. The &quot;induced concept lattice is isomorphic to the cut completion of the partial order formula_385 that belongs to the minimal decomposition formula_386 of the relation formula_45.&quot;

Particular cases are considered below: formula_385 total order corresponds to Ferrers type, and formula_385 identity corresponds to difunctional, a generalization of equivalence relation on a set.

Relations may be ranked by the Schein rank which counts the number of concepts necessary to cover a relation. Structural analysis of relations with concepts provides an approach for data mining.

== Particular relations ==
* &quot;Proposition&quot;: If formula_45 is a surjective relation and formula_391 is its transpose, then formula_392 where formula_393 is the formula_394 identity relation.
* &quot;Proposition&quot;: If formula_45 is a serial relation, then formula_396 where formula_393 is the formula_398 identity relation.

=== Difunctional ===

The idea of a difunctional relation is to partition objects by distinguishing attributes, as a generalization of the concept of an equivalence relation. One way this can be done is with an intervening set formula_399 of indicators. The partitioning relation formula_400 is a composition of relations using relations formula_401 Jacques Riguet named these relations difunctional since the composition formula_402 involves functional relations, commonly called &quot;partial functions&quot;.

In 1950 Riguet showed that such relations satisfy the inclusion:
: formula_403

In automata theory, the term rectangular relation has also been used to denote a difunctional relation. This terminology recalls the fact that, when represented as a logical matrix, the columns and rows of a difunctional relation can be arranged as a block matrix with rectangular blocks of ones on the (asymmetric) main diagonal. More formally, a relation formula_45 on formula_43 is difunctional if and only if it can be written as the union of Cartesian products formula_406, where the formula_407 are a partition of a subset of formula_1 and the formula_409 likewise a partition of a subset of formula_2.

Using the notation formula_411, a difunctional relation can also be characterized as a relation formula_45 such that wherever formula_413 and formula_414 have a non-empty intersection, then these two sets coincide; formally formula_415 implies formula_416

In 1997 researchers found &quot;utility of binary decomposition based on difunctional dependencies in database management.&quot; Furthermore, difunctional relations are fundamental in the study of bisimulations.

In the context of homogeneous relations, a partial equivalence relation is difunctional.

=== Ferrers type ===
A strict order on a set is a homogeneous relation arising in order theory.
In 1951 Jacques Riguet adopted the ordering of an integer partition, called a Ferrers diagram, to extend ordering to binary relations in general.

The corresponding logical matrix of a general binary relation has rows which finish with a sequence of ones. Thus the dots of a Ferrer&#x27;s diagram are changed to ones and aligned on the right in the matrix.

An algebraic statement required for a Ferrers type relation R is
formula_417

If any one of the relations formula_418 is of Ferrers type, then all of them are.
=== Contact ===
Suppose formula_419 is the power set of formula_292, the set of all subsets of formula_292. Then a relation formula_384 is a contact relation if it satisfies three properties: 
# formula_423
# formula_424
# formula_425
The set membership relation, formula_426 &quot;is an element of&quot;, satisfies these properties so formula_427 is a contact relation. The notion of a general contact relation was introduced by Georg Aumann in 1970.

In terms of the calculus of relations, sufficient conditions for a contact relation include
formula_428 
where formula_429 is the converse of set membership (formula_158).

== Preorder R\R ==
Every relation formula_45 generates a preorder formula_432 which is the left residual. In terms of converse and complements, formula_433 Forming the diagonal of formula_434, the corresponding row of formula_435 and column of formula_436 will be of opposite logical values, so the diagonal is all zeros. Then 
: formula_437, so that formula_432 is a reflexive relation.

To show transitivity, one requires that formula_439 Recall that formula_440 is the largest relation such that formula_441 Then 
: formula_442
: formula_443 (repeat)
: formula_444 (Schröder&#x27;s rule)
: formula_445 (complementation)
: formula_446 (definition)

The inclusion relation Ω on the power set of formula_447 can be obtained in this way from the membership relation formula_158 on subsets of formula_447:
: formula_450

== Fringe of a relation ==
Given a relation formula_45, its fringe is the sub-relation defined as
formula_452

When formula_45 is a partial identity relation, difunctional, or a block diagonal relation, then formula_454. Otherwise the formula_455 operator selects a boundary sub-relation described in terms of its logical matrix: formula_456 is the side diagonal if formula_45 is an upper right triangular linear order or strict order. formula_456 is the block fringe if formula_45 is irreflexive (formula_460) or upper right block triangular. formula_456 is a sequence of boundary rectangles when formula_45 is of Ferrers type.

On the other hand, formula_463 when formula_45 is a dense, linear, strict order.

== Mathematical heaps ==

Given two sets formula_292 and formula_419, the set of binary relations between them formula_467 can be equipped with a ternary operation formula_468 where formula_469 denotes the converse relation of formula_470. In 1953 Viktor Wagner used properties of this ternary operation to define semiheaps, heaps, and generalized heaps. The contrast of heterogeneous and homogeneous relations is highlighted by these definitions:
== See also ==

* Abstract rewriting system
* Additive relation, a many-valued homomorphism between modules
* Allegory (category theory)
* Category of relations, a category having sets as objects and binary relations as morphisms 
* Confluence (term rewriting), discusses several unusual but fundamental properties of binary relations
* Correspondence (algebraic geometry), a binary relation defined by algebraic equations
* Hasse diagram, a graphic means to display an order relation
* Incidence structure, a heterogeneous relation between set of points and lines
* Logic of relatives, a theory of relations by Charles Sanders Peirce
* Order theory, investigates properties of order relations
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* Ernst Schröder (1895) Algebra der Logik, Band III, via Internet Archive
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130901" start="18" end="33" title="Binary relation" label="binary relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="61" end="64" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="232" end="244" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="431" end="445" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="581" end="588" title="divides" label="divides"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="620" end="632" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="660" end="667" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="760" end="768" title="Divisibility" label="multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055293" start="820" end="828" title="Multiple (mathematics)" label="multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q54938846" start="1180" end="1200" title="homogeneous relation" label="homogeneous relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28113351" start="1322" end="1337" title="Inequality (mathematics)" label="is greater than"/>
<link wikidata="Q842346" start="1351" end="1362" title="Equality (mathematics)" label="is equal to"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="1407" end="1417" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154210" start="1431" end="1446" title="Congruence (geometry)" label="is congruent to"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="1465" end="1473" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="1520" end="1532" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="1549" end="1559" title="orthogonal" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82571" start="1581" end="1595" title="linear algebra" label="linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="1600" end="1608" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="1722" end="1738" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="1814" end="1823" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="1873" end="1882" title="Inclusion (set theory)" label="inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q595364" start="1930" end="1937" title="Lattice (order)" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1993" end="2025" title="#Homogeneous relation" label="&amp;quot;homogeneous relation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q185359" start="2238" end="2243" title="Union (set theory)" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185837" start="2245" end="2257" title="Intersection (set theory)" label="intersection"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="2263" end="2278" title="Complement (set theory)" label="complementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10565797" start="2310" end="2325" title="algebra of sets" label="algebra of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248241" start="2360" end="2368" title="converse relation" label="converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795123" start="2391" end="2415" title="composition of relations" label="composition of relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005222" start="2456" end="2477" title="calculus of relations" label="calculus of relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q77297" start="2512" end="2526" title="Ernst Schröder (mathematician)" label="Ernst Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q725642" start="2528" end="2542" title="Clarence Lewis" label="Clarence Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752214" start="2548" end="2563" title="Gunther Schmidt" label="Gunther Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362924" start="2686" end="2702" title="complete lattice" label="complete lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="2724" end="2744" title="axiomatic set theory" label="axiomatic set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="2772" end="2779" title="Class (mathematics)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33401" start="3018" end="3040" title="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q203066" start="3111" end="3134" title="Finitary relation" label="formula_38-ary relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="3182" end="3199" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4633" end="4662" title="#Homogeneous relation" label="homogeneous relation on a set"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="6772" end="6796" title="composition of functions" label="composition of functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q621461" start="7561" end="7570" title="Symmetric relation" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="7937" end="7948" title="total order" label="total order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248241" start="8038" end="8055" title="converse relation" label="converse relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414271" start="8326" end="8343" title="strict weak order" label="strict weak order"/>
<link wikidata="Q54938846" start="8428" end="8448" title="homogeneous relation" label="homogeneous relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q621850" start="8791" end="8800" title="Reflexive relation" label="reflexive"/>
<link wikidata="Q621461" start="8815" end="8824" title="Symmetric relation" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q583760" start="8826" end="8839" title="Antisymmetric relation" label="antisymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298831" start="8841" end="8851" title="Asymmetric relation" label="asymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="8853" end="8863" title="Transitive relation" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q54940067" start="8865" end="8870" title="Serial relation" label="total"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713184" start="8872" end="8884" title="Trichotomy (mathematics)" label="trichotomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="8888" end="8901" title="partial order" label="partial order"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="8903" end="8914" title="total order" label="total order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414271" start="8916" end="8933" title="strict weak order" label="strict weak order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8935" end="8949" title="Strict weak order#Total preorders" label="total preorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="8970" end="8990" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156540" start="9620" end="9632" title="Completeness (order theory)" label="completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="9740" end="9751" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="9805" end="9814" title="Empty set" label="non-empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="9842" end="9853" title="upper bound" label="upper bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="9875" end="9892" title="Supremum" label="least upper bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="10704" end="10719" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994977" start="10935" end="10951" title="Logical matrix" label="logical matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333055" start="11007" end="11023" title="Boolean semiring" label="Boolean semiring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264115" start="11085" end="11100" title="matrix addition" label="matrix addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049914" start="11136" end="11157" title="matrix multiplication" label="matrix multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406746" start="11294" end="11310" title="Hadamard product (matrices)" label="Hadamard product"/>
<link wikidata="Q338028" start="11357" end="11368" title="zero matrix" label="zero matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916484" start="11412" end="11426" title="matrix of ones" label="matrix of ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915729" start="11513" end="11528" title="matrix semiring" label="matrix semiring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915729" start="11540" end="11558" title="matrix semialgebra" label="matrix semialgebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q193794" start="11596" end="11611" title="identity matrix" label="identity matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="12031" end="12039" title="Image (mathematics)" label="preimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q934729" start="12098" end="12109" title="primary key" label="primary key"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="12379" end="12389" title="Functional relationship" label="Functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="12591" end="12596" title="Image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q106584784" start="13677" end="13682" title="Total relation" label="Total"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14028" end="14038" title="Homogeneous relation#Properties" label="Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="14365" end="14373" title="Integer" label="integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="15337" end="15345" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="15624" end="15633" title="Injective function" label="injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="15813" end="15823" title="Surjective function" label="surjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907197" start="15948" end="15957" title="Bijection, injection and surjection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="16368" end="16373" title="Class (set theory)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="16580" end="16594" title="ordinal number" label="ordinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="16951" end="16971" title="axiomatic set theory" label="axiomatic set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="17981" end="17997" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q903783" start="18090" end="18106" title="naive set theory" label="naive set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33401" start="18118" end="18140" title="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q278770" start="18234" end="18237" title="Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory" label="NBG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490369" start="18241" end="18264" title="Morse–Kelley set theory" label="Morse–Kelley set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="18325" end="18337" title="proper class" label="proper class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19097" end="19135" title="Graph theory#Directed graph" label="directed simple graph permitting loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="19371" end="19380" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="19404" end="19419" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="19439" end="19449" title="Involution (mathematics)" label="involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248241" start="19482" end="19499" title="converse relation" label="converse relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795123" start="19513" end="19537" title="composition of relations" label="composition of relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q164307" start="19543" end="19559" title="binary operation" label="binary operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449422" start="19587" end="19612" title="semigroup with involution" label="semigroup with involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="21306" end="21321" title="natural numbers" label="natural numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="21506" end="21521" title="Euclidean plane" label="Euclidean plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="21863" end="21883" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005222" start="21967" end="21982" title="algebraic logic" label="algebraic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005222" start="22031" end="22052" title="calculus of relations" label="calculus of relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q10565797" start="22066" end="22081" title="algebra of sets" label="algebra of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795123" start="22095" end="22119" title="composition of relations" label="composition of relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248241" start="22135" end="22152" title="converse relation" label="converse relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q595364" start="22247" end="22254" title="Lattice (order theory)" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22414" end="22428" title="composition of relations#Schröder rules" label="Schröder rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="22465" end="22474" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795123" start="22533" end="22557" title="composition of relations" label="composition of relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756942" start="22578" end="22594" title="partial function" label="partial function"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="22745" end="22760" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518298" start="22771" end="22787" title="category of sets" label="category of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="22805" end="22813" title="morphism" label="morphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051849" start="22867" end="22870" title="Category of relations" label="Rel"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="22933" end="22941" title="Category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437394" start="23033" end="23048" title="concept lattice" label="concept lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994977" start="23105" end="23119" title="logical matrix" label="logical matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268589" start="23142" end="23155" title="outer product" label="outer product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994977" start="23187" end="23201" title="logical vector" label="logical vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425985" start="23523" end="23531" title="preorder" label="preorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249756" start="23538" end="23566" title="MacNeille completion theorem" label="MacNeille completion theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362924" start="23619" end="23635" title="complete lattice" label="complete lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="23805" end="23813" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="24234" end="24254" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="24448" end="24459" title="data mining" label="data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q130901" start="24535" end="24554" title="surjective relation" label="surjective relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54940067" start="24708" end="24723" title="serial relation" label="serial relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="24952" end="24972" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208034" start="25041" end="25050" title="Indicator (research)" label="indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795123" start="25096" end="25120" title="composition of relations" label="composition of relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q52199726" start="25149" end="25163" title="Jacques Riguet" label="Jacques Riguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q214526" start="25395" end="25410" title="automata theory" label="automata theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994977" start="25558" end="25572" title="logical matrix" label="logical matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q884772" start="25643" end="25655" title="block matrix" label="block matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="26361" end="26369" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q866364" start="26456" end="26468" title="bisimulation" label="bisimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140366" start="26515" end="26543" title="partial equivalence relation" label="partial equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="26585" end="26597" title="strict order" label="strict order"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175351" start="26644" end="26656" title="order theory" label="order theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q52199726" start="26666" end="26680" title="Jacques Riguet" label="Jacques Riguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082910" start="26708" end="26725" title="integer partition" label="integer partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082910" start="26736" end="26751" title="Ferrers diagram" label="Ferrers diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="27219" end="27228" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="27260" end="27266" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="27415" end="27429" title="set membership" label="set membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739372" start="27606" end="27618" title="Georg Aumann" label="Georg Aumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425985" start="27859" end="27867" title="preorder" label="preorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27893" end="27906" title="Composition of relations#Quotients" label="left residual"/>
<link wikidata="Q621850" start="28170" end="28188" title="reflexive relation" label="reflexive relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="28199" end="28211" title="Transitive relation" label="transitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="28457" end="28466" title="inclusion (set theory)" label="inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="28485" end="28494" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="28547" end="28566" title="element (mathematics)" label="membership relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="29027" end="29039" title="linear order" label="linear order"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="29043" end="29055" title="strict order" label="strict order"/>
<link wikidata="Q194699" start="29303" end="29308" title="dense order" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524945" start="29479" end="29496" title="ternary operation" label="ternary operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248241" start="29539" end="29556" title="converse relation" label="converse relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q950880" start="29581" end="29594" title="Viktor Wagner" label="Viktor Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691503" start="29647" end="29656" title="Semiheap" label="semiheaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136420" start="29799" end="29824" title="Abstract rewriting system" label="Abstract rewriting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942302" start="29827" end="29844" title="Additive relation" label="Additive relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731385" start="29891" end="29917" title="Allegory (category theory)" label="Allegory (category theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051849" start="29920" end="29941" title="Category of relations" label="Category of relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140902" start="30014" end="30041" title="Confluence (term rewriting)" label="Confluence (term rewriting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090820" start="30118" end="30153" title="Correspondence (algebraic geometry)" label="Correspondence (algebraic geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q901446" start="30206" end="30219" title="Hasse diagram" label="Hasse diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q367329" start="30268" end="30287" title="Incidence structure" label="Incidence structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="30348" end="30366" title="Logic of relatives" label="Logic of relatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175351" start="30418" end="30430" title="Order theory" label="Order theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q77297" start="30528" end="30542" title="Ernst Schröder (mathematician)" label="Ernst Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="30583" end="30599" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
