<doc id="1950" wikidata="Q21637" url="?curid=1950" title="American Civil Liberties Union">
<text>The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) is an American nonprofit civil rights organization founded in 1920. ACLU affiliates are active in all 50 states, Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico. The budget of the ACLU in 2024 was $383 million.

The ACLU provides legal assistance in cases where it considers civil liberties at risk. Legal support from the ACLU can take the form of direct legal representation or preparation of &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs expressing legal arguments when another law firm is already providing representation. In addition to representing persons and organizations in lawsuits, the ACLU lobbies for policy positions established by its board of directors. 

The ACLU&#x27;s current positions include opposing the death penalty; supporting same-sex marriage and the right of LGBTQ+ people to adopt; supporting reproductive rights such as birth control and abortion rights; eliminating discrimination against women, minorities, and LGBTQ+ people; decarceration in the United States; protecting housing and employment rights of veterans; reforming sex offender registries and protecting housing and employment rights of convicted first-time offenders; supporting the rights of prisoners and opposing torture; upholding the separation of church and state by opposing government preference for religion over non-religion or for particular faiths over others; and supporting the legality of gender-affirming treatments, including those that are government funded, for trans youth.

==Leadership==
The ACLU is led by a president and an executive director, Deborah Archer and Anthony D. Romero, respectively, as of March 2024. The president acts as chair of the ACLU&#x27;s board of directors, leads fundraising, and facilitates policy-setting. The executive director manages the day-to-day operations of the organization. The board of directors consists of 80 persons, including representatives from each state affiliate and at-large delegates. The organization has its headquarters in 125 Broad Street, a 40-story skyscraper located in Lower Manhattan, New York City.

The leadership of the ACLU does not always agree on policy decisions; differences of opinion within the ACLU leadership have sometimes grown into major debates. In 1937, an internal debate erupted over whether to defend Henry Ford&#x27;s right to distribute anti-union literature. In 1939, a heated debate took place over whether to prohibit communists from serving in ACLU leadership roles. During the early 1950s and Cold War McCarthyism, the board was divided on whether to defend communists. In 1968, a schism formed over whether to represent Benjamin Spock&#x27;s anti-war activism. In 1973, as the Watergate Scandal continued to unfold, leadership was initially divided over whether to call for President Richard Nixon&#x27;s impeachment and removal from office. In 2005, there was internal conflict about whether or not a gag rule should be imposed on ACLU employees to prevent the publication of internal disputes.

==Funding==

In the year ending March 31, 2014, the ACLU and the ACLU Foundation had a combined income from support and revenue of $100.4 million, originating from grants (50.0%), membership donations (25.4%), donated legal services (7.6%), bequests (16.2%), and revenue (0.9%). Membership dues are treated as donations; members choose the amount they pay annually, averaging approximately $50 per member. In the year ending March 31, 2014, the combined expenses of the ACLU and ACLU Foundation were $133.4 million, spent on programs (86.2%), management (7.4%), and fundraising (8.2%). (After factoring in other changes in net assets of +$30.9 million, from sources such as investment income, the organization had an overall decrease in net assets of $2.1 million.) Over the period from 2011 to 2014, the ACLU Foundation, on average, has accounted for roughly 70% of the combined budget, and the ACLU roughly 30%.

The ACLU solicits donations to its charitable foundation. The local affiliates solicit their own funding; however, some also receive funds from the national ACLU, with the distribution and amount of such assistance varying from state to state. At its discretion, the national organization provides subsidies to smaller affiliates that lack sufficient resources to be self-sustaining; for example, the Wyoming ACLU chapter received such subsidies until April 2015, when, as part of a round of layoffs at the national ACLU, the Wyoming office was closed.

In October 2004, the ACLU rejected $1.5 million from both the Ford Foundation and Rockefeller Foundation because the foundations had adopted language from the USA PATRIOT Act in their donation agreements, including a clause stipulating that none of the money would go to &quot;underwriting terrorism or other unacceptable activities&quot;. The ACLU views this clause, both in federal law and in the donors&#x27; agreements, as a threat to civil liberties, saying it is overly broad and ambiguous.

Due to the nature of its legal work, the ACLU is often involved in litigation against governmental bodies, which are generally protected from adverse monetary judgments; a town, state, or federal agency may be required to change its laws or behave differently, but not to pay monetary damages except by an explicit statutory waiver. In some cases, the law permits plaintiffs who successfully sue government agencies to collect money damages or other monetary relief. In particular, the Civil Rights Attorney&#x27;s Fees Award Act of 1976 leaves the government liable in some civil rights cases. Fee awards under this civil rights statute are considered &quot;equitable relief&quot; rather than damages, and government entities are not immune from equitable relief. Under laws such as this, the ACLU and its state affiliates sometimes share in monetary judgments against government agencies. In 2006, the Public Expressions of Religion Protection Act sought to prevent monetary judgments in the particular case of violations of church-state separation.

The ACLU has received court-awarded fees from opponents; for example, the Georgia affiliate was awarded $150,000 in fees after suing a county demanding the removal of a Ten Commandments display from its courthouse; a second Ten Commandments case in the state, in a different county, led to a $74,462 judgment. The State of Tennessee was required to pay $50,000, the State of Alabama $175,000, and the State of Kentucky $121,500, in similar Ten Commandments cases.

==Policy positions==
The ACLU&#x27;s 2024 annual report states that it engages in legal advocacy in support of civil rights, including abortion rights, LGBTQ equality, immigrants’ rights, criminal law reform, free speech, and voting rights.

When the ACLU was formed in 1919, free speech was the civil right that it concentrated on. The ACLU has supported free speech, even when the speech is unpopular or offensive. The ACLU opposes limits on campaign contributions, since such limits generally limit free speech and could be used to restrict the rights of unions. The ACLU also opposes state censorship of the Confederate flag. Free speech on college campuses has been the subject of several lawsuits the ACLU has supported. In the employment realm, the ACLU has supported the rights of employees to engage in free speech. Protests outside religious buildings are supported by the ACLU, even when perceived as offensive.
Combating discrimination based on race, religion, ethnicity, or gender has been a focus of the ACLU since the civil rights era in the 1960s. The ACLU frequently participates in legal actions in support of the LGBTQ community.

Criminal justice has been long-standing goal of the ACLU, focusing on constitutional issues such as excessive punishment and the right to an attorney. Immigrant rights, for undocumented immigrants in particular, is an area of the law that the ACLU frequently acts as an advocate.

Many of the ACLU positions are rooted in the U.S. Constitution, such as the Second Amendment: the ACLU opposes any effort to create a national registry of gun owners and has worked with the National Rifle Association of America to prevent a registry from being created, and it has favored protecting the right to carry guns under the Second Amendment. The ACLU works to support the right to vote.

The ACLU supports womens&#x27; rights to make health care decisions, including access to abortions.

==Support and opposition==
A variety of persons and organizations support the ACLU. In 2024, the ACLU received $268M in grants and donations from supporters. Allies of the ACLU in legal actions have included the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the American Jewish Congress, the National Rifle Association of America, Planned Parenthood, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and Americans United for Separation of Church and State. 

The ACLU has been criticized by liberals, such as when it excluded communists from its leadership ranks, when it defended Neo-Nazis, when it declined to defend Paul Robeson, or when it opposed the passage of the National Labor Relations Act. In 2014, an ACLU affiliate supported anti-Islam protesters, and in 2018 the ACLU was criticized when it supported the NRA.

Conversely, it has been criticized by conservatives such as when it argued against official prayer in public schools or when it opposed the Patriot Act.

The ACLU has supported conservative figures such as Rush Limbaugh, George Wallace, Henry Ford and Oliver North; as well as liberal figures such as Dick Gregory, Rockwell Kent and Benjamin Spock.

The ACLU is often criticized when it represents an individual or organization that promotes offensive or unpopular viewpoints, such as the Ku Klux Klan, neo-Nazis, the Nation of Islam, the North American Man/Boy Love Association, the Westboro Baptist Church or the Unite the Right rally. The ACLU&#x27;s official policy is &quot;... [we have] represented or defended individuals engaged in some truly offensive speech. We have defended the speech rights of communists, Nazis, Ku Klux Klan members, accused terrorists, pornographers, anti-LGBTQ activists, and flag burners. That&#x27;s because the defense of freedom of speech is most necessary when the message is one most people find repulsive. Constitutional rights must apply to even the most unpopular groups if they&#x27;re going to be preserved for everyone.&quot;

==Organization and state affiliants ==

At the national level, the ACLU consists of two legal entities: the American Civil Liberties Union, a 501(c)(4) social welfare group; and the ACLU Foundation, a 501(c)(3) public charity. Both are non-profit organizations that engage in civil rights litigation, advocacy, and education. The two organizations are closely related, and share common goals and some common leadership. Donations to the 501(c)(3) foundation are tax-deductible, but donations to the 501(c)(4) are not. The 501(c)(4) group can engage in unlimited political advocacy (including lobbying), but the 501(c)(3) foundation cannot.
Most of the organization&#x27;s workload is performed by its local affiliates. There is at least one affiliate organization in each state, as well as one in Washington, D.C., and in Puerto Rico. California has three affiliates. The affiliates operate autonomously from the national organization; each affiliate has its own staff, executive director, board of directors, and budget. Each affiliate consists of two non-profit corporations: a 501(c)(3) corporation–called the ACLU Foundation–that does not perform lobbying, and a 501(c)(4) corporation–called ACLU–which is entitled to lobby. Both organizations share staff and offices.

ACLU affiliates are the basic unit of the ACLU&#x27;s organization and engage in litigation, lobbying, and public education. For example, in 2020, the ACLU&#x27;s New Jersey chapter argued 26 cases before the New Jersey Supreme Court, about one-third of the total cases heard in that court. They sent over 50,000 emails to officials or agencies and had 28 full-time staff. 

===List of ACLU state affiliates===
==History==
===1910s and 20s===
====Origins====
The ACLU developed from the National Civil Liberties Bureau (CLB), co-founded in 1917 during World War I by Crystal Eastman, an attorney activist, and Roger Nash Baldwin. The focus of the CLB was on freedom of speech, primarily anti-war speech, and on supporting conscientious objectors who did not want to serve in World War I. In 1918, Crystal Eastman resigned from the organization due to health issues. After assuming sole leadership of the CLB, Baldwin insisted that the organization be reorganized. He wanted to change its focus from litigation to direct action and public education.

The CLB directors concurred, and on January 19, 1920, they formed an organization under a new name, the American Civil Liberties Union. Although a handful of other organizations in the United States at that time focused on civil rights, such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and Anti-Defamation League (ADL), the ACLU was the first that did not represent a particular group of persons or a single theme. Like the CLB, the NAACP pursued litigation to work on civil rights, including efforts to overturn the disfranchisement of African Americans in the South that had taken place since the turn of the century.

During the first decades of the ACLU, Baldwin continued as its leader. His charisma and energy attracted many supporters to the ACLU board and leadership ranks. The ACLU was directed by an executive committee and was not particularly democratic or egalitarian. New Yorkers dominated the ACLU&#x27;s headquarters. Most ACLU funding came from philanthropies, such as the Garland Fund.

Lucille Bernheimer Milner was cofounder of the American Civil Liberties Union. She also served for a time as Executive Secretary.

====Free speech era====
During the 1920s, the ACLU&#x27;s primary focus was on freedom of speech in general and speech within the labor movement particularly. Because most of the ACLU&#x27;s efforts were associated with the labor movement, the ACLU itself came under heavy attack from conservative groups, such as the American Legion, the National Civic Federation, and Industrial Defense Association and the Allied Patriotic Societies. ACLU leadership was divided on how to challenge civil rights violations. One faction, including Baldwin, Arthur Garfield Hays, and Norman Thomas, believed that direct, militant action was the best path. Another group, including Walter Nelles and Walter Pollak, felt that lawsuits taken to the Supreme Court were the best way to achieve change.
In addition to labor, the ACLU also led efforts in non-labor arenas, for example, promoting free speech in public schools. The ACLU was banned from speaking in New York public schools in 1921. The ACLU, working with the NAACP, also supported racial discrimination cases. The ACLU defended free speech regardless of espoused opinions. For example, the reactionary, anti-Catholic, anti-black Ku Klux Klan (KKK) was a frequent target of ACLU efforts, but the ACLU defended the KKK&#x27;s right to hold meetings in 1923. There were some civil rights that the ACLU did not make an effort to defend in the 1920s, including censorship of the arts, government search and seizure issues, right to privacy, or wiretapping.

Government officials routinely hounded the Communist Party USA, leading it to be the primary client of the ACLU. At the same time, the Communists were very aggressive in their tactics, often engaging in illegal conduct such as denying their party membership under oath. This led to frequent conflicts between the Communists and ACLU. Communist leaders sometimes attacked the ACLU, particularly when the ACLU defended the free speech rights of conservatives, whereas Communists tried to disrupt speeches by critics of the USSR. This uneasy relationship between the two groups continued for decades.

====Public schools====
Five years after the ACLU was formed, the organization had virtually no success to show for its efforts. That changed in 1925, when the ACLU persuaded John T. Scopes to defy Tennessee&#x27;s anti-evolution law in &quot;The State of Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes&quot;. Clarence Darrow, a member of the ACLU National Committee, headed Scopes&#x27; legal team. The prosecution, led by William Jennings Bryan, contended that the Bible should be interpreted literally in teaching creationism in school. The ACLU lost the case, and Scopes was fined $100. The Tennessee Supreme Court later upheld the law. Still, it overturned the conviction on a technicality.

The Scopes trial was a phenomenal public relations success for the ACLU. The ACLU became well known across America, and the case led to the first endorsement of the ACLU by a major US newspaper. The ACLU continued to fight for the separation of church and state in schoolrooms, decade after decade, including the 1982 case &quot;McLean v. Arkansas&quot; and the 2005 case &quot;Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District&quot;.

Baldwin was involved in a significant free speech victory of the 1920s after he was arrested for attempting to speak at a rally of striking mill workers in New Jersey. Although the decision was limited to the state of New Jersey, the appeals court&#x27;s judgment in 1928 declared that constitutional guarantees of free speech must be given &quot;liberal and comprehensive construction&quot;, and it marked a major turning point in the civil rights movement, signaling the shift of judicial opinion in favor of civil rights.

The most important ACLU case of the 1920s was &quot;Gitlow v. New York&quot;, in which Benjamin Gitlow was arrested for violating a state law against inciting anarchy and violence when he distributed literature promoting communism. Although the Supreme Court did not overturn Gitlow&#x27;s conviction, it adopted the ACLU&#x27;s stance (later termed the incorporation doctrine) that the First Amendment freedom of speech applied to state laws, as well as federal laws.

The Oregon Compulsory Education Act required almost all children in Oregon between eight and sixteen years of age to attend public school by 1926. Associate Director Roger Nash Baldwin, a personal friend of Luke E. Hart, the then–Supreme Advocate and future Supreme Knight of the Knights of Columbus, offered to join forces with the Knights to challenge the law. The Knights of Columbus pledged an immediate $10,000 to fight the law and any additional funds necessary to defeat it. The case became known as &quot;Pierce v. Society of Sisters&quot;, a United States Supreme Court decision that significantly expanded coverage of the Due Process Clause in the Fourteenth Amendment. In a unanimous decision, the court held that the act was unconstitutional and that parents, not the state, had the authority to educate children as they thought best. It upheld the religious freedom of parents to educate their children in religious schools.

====Free speech expansion====
Leaders of the ACLU were divided on the best tactics to use to promote civil liberties. Felix Frankfurter felt that legislation was the best long-term solution because the Supreme Court could not mandate liberal interpretations of the Bill of Rights. But Walter Pollak, Morris Ernst, and other leaders felt that Supreme Court decisions were the best path to guarantee civil liberties. A series of Supreme Court decisions in the 1920s foretold a changing national atmosphere; anti-radical emotions were diminishing, and there was a growing willingness to protect freedom of speech and assembly via court decisions.

Starting in 1926, the ACLU expanded its free speech activities to encompass censorship of art and literature. In that year, H. L. Mencken deliberately broke Boston law by distributing copies of his banned &quot;American Mercury&quot; magazine; the ACLU defended him and won an acquittal. The ACLU went on to win additional victories, including the landmark case &quot;United States v. One Book Called Ulysses&quot; in 1933, which reversed a ban by the Customs Department against the book &quot;Ulysses&quot; by James Joyce. The ACLU only achieved mixed results in the early years, and it was not until 1966 that the Supreme Court finally clarified the obscenity laws in the &quot;Roth v. United States&quot; and &quot;Memoirs v. Massachusetts&quot; cases.

The Comstock laws banned the distribution of sex education information based on the premise that it was obscene and led to promiscuous behavior. Mary Ware Dennett was fined $300 in 1928 for distributing a pamphlet containing sex education material. The ACLU, led by Morris Ernst, appealed her conviction and won a reversal, in which judge Learned Hand ruled that the pamphlet&#x27;s primary purpose was to &quot;promote understanding&quot;. The success prompted the ACLU to broaden their freedom of speech efforts beyond labor and political speech to encompass movies, press, radio, and literature. The ACLU formed the National Committee on Freedom from Censorship in 1931 to coordinate this effort. By the early 1930s, censorship in the United States was diminishing.

Two major victories in the 1930s cemented the ACLU&#x27;s campaign to promote free speech. In &quot;Stromberg v. California&quot;, decided in 1931, the Supreme Court sided with the ACLU and affirmed the right of a communist party member to salute a communist flag. The result was the first time the Supreme Court used the Due Process Clause of the 14th amendment to subject states to the requirements of the First Amendment. In &quot;Near v. Minnesota&quot;, also decided in 1931, the Supreme Court ruled that states may not exercise prior restraint and prevent a newspaper from publishing, simply because the newspaper had a reputation for being scandalous.

===1930s===
The late 1930s saw the emergence of a new era of tolerance in the United States. National leaders hailed the Bill of Rights, particularly as it protected minorities, as the essence of democracy. The 1939 Supreme Court decision in &quot;Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization&quot; affirmed the right of communists to promote their cause. Even conservative elements, such as the American Bar Association, began to campaign for civil liberties, which were long considered to be the domain of left-leaning organizations. By 1940, the ACLU had achieved many of the goals it set in the 1920s, and many of its policies were the law of the land.

In 1929, after the Scopes and Dennett victories, Baldwin perceived that there was vast, untapped support for civil liberties in the United States. Baldwin proposed an expansion program for the ACLU, focusing on police brutality, Native American rights, African American rights, censorship in the arts, and international civil liberties. The board of directors approved Baldwin&#x27;s expansion plan, except for the international efforts.

The ACLU played a significant role in passing the 1932 Norris–La Guardia Act, a federal law that prohibited employers from preventing employees from joining unions and stopped the practice of outlawing strikes, marriages, and labor organizing activities with the use of injunctions. The ACLU also played a key role in initiating a nationwide effort to reduce misconduct (such as extracting false confessions) within police departments by publishing the report &quot;Lawlessness in Law Enforcement&quot; in 1931, under the auspices of Herbert Hoover&#x27;s Wickersham Commission. In 1934, the ACLU lobbied for the passage of the Indian Reorganization Act, which restored some autonomy to Native American tribes, and established penalties for kidnapping Native American children.

Although the ACLU deferred to the NAACP for litigation promoting civil liberties for African Americans, the ACLU engaged in educational efforts and published &quot;Black Justice&quot; in 1931, a report which documented institutional racism throughout the South, including lack of voting rights, segregation, and discrimination in the justice system. Funded by the Garland Fund, the ACLU also participated in producing the influential Margold Report, which outlined a strategy to fight for civil rights for blacks. The ACLU planned to demonstrate that the &quot;separate but equal&quot; policies governing the Southern discrimination were illegal because blacks were never, in fact, treated equally.

In 1932twelve years after the ACLU was foundedit had achieved significant success; the Supreme Court had embraced the free speech principles espoused by the ACLU, and the general public was becoming more supportive of civil rights in general. But the Great Depression brought new assaults on civil liberties; the year 1930 saw a large increase in the number of free speech prosecutions, a doubling of the number of lynchings, and all meetings of unemployed persons were banned in Philadelphia. The Franklin D. Roosevelt administration proposed the New Deal to combat the depression. ACLU leaders were of mixed opinions about the New Deal since many felt that it represented an increase in government intervention into personal affairs and because the National Recovery Administration suspended antitrust legislation.
The economic policies of the New Deal leaders were often aligned with ACLU goals, but social goals were not. In particular, movies were subject to a barrage of local ordinances that banned screenings deemed immoral or obscene. Even public health films portraying pregnancy and birth were banned, as was &quot;Life&quot; magazine&#x27;s April 11, 1938, issue, which included photos of the birth process. The ACLU fought these bans but did not prevail. The Catholic Church attained increasing political influence in the 1930s; it used its influence to promote the censorship of movies and to discourage the publication of birth control information. This conflict between the ACLU and the Catholic Church led to the resignation of the last Catholic priest from ACLU leadership in 1934; a Catholic priest would not be represented again until the 1970s.
The first decision that marked the Supreme Court&#x27;s major shift in policy—no longer applying strict constitutional limits to government programs, and taking a more active role in protecting civil liberties—was &quot;De Jonge v. Oregon&quot;, in which a communist labor organizer was arrested for calling a meeting to discuss unionization. The ACLU attorney Osmond Fraenkel, working with International Labor Defense, defended De Jonge in 1937 and won a major victory when the Supreme Court ruled that &quot;peaceable assembly for lawful discussion cannot be made a crime.&quot; The De Jonge case marked the start of an era lasting for a dozen years, during which Roosevelt appointees (led by Hugo Black, William O. Douglas, and Frank Murphy) established a body of civil liberties law. In 1938, Justice Harlan F. Stone wrote the famous &quot;footnote four&quot; in &quot;United States v. Carolene Products Co.&quot; in which he suggested that state laws which impede civil liberties wouldhenceforthrequire compelling justification.

Senator Robert F. Wagner proposed the National Labor Relations Act in 1935, which empowered workers to unionize. Ironically, after 15 years of fighting for workers&#x27; rights, the ACLU initially opposed the act (it later took no stand on the legislation) because some ACLU leaders feared the increased power the bill gave to the government. The newly formed National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) posed a dilemma for the ACLU because, in 1937, it issued an order to Henry Ford, prohibiting Ford from disseminating anti-union literature. Part of the ACLU leadership habitually took the side of labor, and that faction supported the NLRB&#x27;s action. But part of the ACLU supported Ford&#x27;s right to free speech. ACLU leader Arthur Garfield Hays proposed a compromise (supporting the auto workers union, yet also endorsing Ford&#x27;s right to express personal opinions), but the schism highlighted a deeper divide that would become more prominent in the years to come.

The ACLU&#x27;s support of the NLRB was a significant development for the ACLU because it marked the first time it accepted that a government agency could be responsible for upholding civil liberties. Until 1937, the ACLU felt that citizens and private organizations best upheld civil rights.

Some factions in the ACLU proposed new directions for the organization. In the late 1930s, some local affiliates proposed shifting their emphasis from civil liberties appellate actions to becoming a legal aid society centered on store front offices in low-income neighborhoods. The ACLU directors rejected that proposal. Other ACLU members wanted the ACLU to shift focus into the political arena and be more willing to compromise their ideals to strike deals with politicians. The ACLU leadership also rejected this initiative.

The ACLU&#x27;s support of defendants with unpopular, sometimes extreme, viewpoints has produced many landmark court cases and established new civil liberties. One such defendant was the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, who were involved in a large number of Supreme Court cases. The most important cases involved statutes requiring flag salutes. The Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses felt that saluting a flag was contrary to their religious beliefs. Two children were convicted in 1938 of not saluting the flag. The ACLU supported their appeal to the Supreme Court, but the court affirmed the conviction in 1940. But three years later, in &quot;West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette&quot;, the Supreme court reversed itself.

====Communism and totalitarianism====
The rise of totalitarian regimes in Germany, Russia, and other countries that rejected freedom of speech and association greatly impacted the civil liberties movement in the US; anti-Communist sentiment rose, and civil liberties were curtailed.

The ACLU leadership was divided over whether or not to defend pro-Nazi speech in the United States; pro-labor elements within the ACLU were hostile towards Nazism and fascism and objected when the ACLU defended Nazis. The ACLU defended numerous pro-Nazi groups, defending their rights to free speech and free association. In the late 1930s, the ACLU allied itself with the Popular Front, a coalition of liberal organizations coordinated by the United States Communist Party. The ACLU benefited because affiliates from the Popular Front could often fight local civil rights battles much more effectively than the New York-based ACLU. The association with the Communist Party led to accusations that the ACLU was a &quot;Communist front&quot;, particularly because Harry F. Ward was both chairman of the ACLU and chairman of the American League Against War and Fascism, a Communist organization.

The House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) was created in 1938 to uncover sedition and treason within the United States. When witnesses testified at its hearings, the ACLU was mentioned several times, leading the HUAC to mention the ACLU prominently in its 1939 report. This damaged the ACLU&#x27;s reputation severely, even though the report said that it could not &quot;definitely state whether or not&quot; the ACLU was a Communist organization. While the ACLU rushed to defend its image against allegations of being a Communist front, it also protected witnesses harassed by the HUAC. The ACLU was one of the few organizations to protest (unsuccessfully) against the passage of the Smith Act in 1940, which would later be used to imprison many persons who supported Communism. The ACLU defended many persons who were prosecuted under the Smith Act, including labor leader Harry Bridges.

ACLU leadership was split on whether to purge its leadership of Communists. Norman Thomas, John Haynes Holmes, and Morris Ernst were anti-Communists who wanted to distance the ACLU from Communism; opposing them were Harry F. Ward, Corliss Lamont, and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, who rejected any political test for ACLU leadership. A bitter struggle ensued throughout 1939, and the anti-Communists prevailed in February 1940 when the board voted to prohibit anyone who supported totalitarianism from ACLU leadership roles. Ward immediately resigned, andfollowing a contentious six-hour debateFlynn was voted off the ACLU&#x27;s board. The 1940 resolution was considered by many to be a betrayal of its fundamental principles. The resolution was rescinded in 1968, and Flynn was posthumously reinstated to the ACLU in 1970.

===1940s===
====World War II====
The ACLU had a decidedly mixed civil liberties record during World War II. While there were far fewer sedition prosecutions than in World War I, this did not mean that President Roosevelt was more tolerant of dissent than Wilson had been. The primary explanation was that prosecutors, working under similar laws, had fewer plausible targets because almost everyone rallied to the war effort after the attack on Pearl Harbor.

Roosevelt put constant pressure on Attorney General Francis Biddle to take legal action against his prominent pre-war critics. Partly to appease the president, Biddle finally charged thirty lesser-known individuals for violating the Smith Act. Although many of the defendants did not know each other, and most lived in scattered locations in the U.S., they were all tried at once in Washington, D.C., in the Sedition Trial of 1944 Despite efforts by Roger N. Baldwin, Norman Thomas, Thurgood Marshall, and others in the leadership to get the ACLU to go on record condemning the trial (Baldwin called it &quot;monstrous,&quot;) the board of directors overruled them.

The ACLU also had a mixed record on fighting wartime restrictions on the press. It was silent when the U.S. Post Office revoked the second class mailing privileges of &quot;Social Justice&quot;, the magazine of Father Charles E. Coughlin. On the other hand, it extended legal aid to the publishers of the Militant of the Socialist Workers Party and the Boise Valley Herald when their mailing rights were revoked. The ACLU was unable to prevent extensive extralegal harassment of the black press by the FBI and other agencies. The ACLU&#x27;s shortcomings in defending civil liberties inspired the contemporary saying &quot;born in World War I and died in World War II.&quot;
Two months after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Roosevelt authorized the creation of military &quot;exclusion zones&quot; with Executive Order 9066, paving the way for the detention of all West Coast Japanese Americans in inland camps. In addition to the non-citizen Issei (prohibited from naturalization as members of an &quot;unassimilable&quot; race), over two-thirds of those swept up were American-born citizens. Opinions within the organization became increasingly divided as the Army began the &quot;evacuation&quot; of the West Coast. The board decided not to challenge the eviction of Japanese American citizens; on June 22, instructions were sent to West Coast branches not to support cases that argued the government had no constitutional right to do so. The ACLU offices on the West Coast had been more directly involved in addressing the tide of anti-Japanese prejudice from the start, as they were geographically closer to the issue and were already working on cases challenging the exclusion by this time. The Seattle office, assisting in Gordon Hirabayashi&#x27;s lawsuit, created an unaffiliated committee to continue the work the ACLU had started, while in Los Angeles, attorney A.L. Wirin continued to represent Ernest Kinzo Wakayama but without addressing the case&#x27;s constitutional questions. Wirin would lose private clients because of his defense of Wakayama and other Japanese Americans; however, the San Francisco branch, led by Ernest Besig, refused to discontinue its support for Fred Korematsu, whose case had been taken on before the June 22 directive, and attorney Wayne Collins, with Besig&#x27;s full support, centered his defense on the illegality of Korematsu&#x27;s exclusion.

The West Coast offices had wanted a test case to take to court. However, they had a difficult time finding a Japanese American who was both willing to violate the internment orders and able to meet the ACLU&#x27;s desired criteria of a sympathetic, Americanized plaintiff. Of the 120,000 Japanese Americans affected by the order, only 12 disobeyed, and Korematsu, Hirabayashi, and two others were the only resisters whose cases eventually made it to the Supreme Court. &quot;Hirabayashi v. United States&quot; came before the Court in May 1943, and the justices upheld the government&#x27;s right to exclude Japanese Americans from the West Coast; although it had earlier forced its local office in L.A. to stop aiding Hirabayashi, the ACLU donated $1,000 to the case (over a third of the legal team&#x27;s total budget) and submitted an &quot;amicus&quot; brief. Besig, dissatisfied with Osmond Fraenkel&#x27;s tamer defense, filed an additional &quot;amicus&quot; brief that directly addressed Hirabayashi&#x27;s constitutional rights. In the meantime, A.L. Wirin served as one of the attorneys in &quot;Yasui v. United States&quot; (decided the same day as the Hirabayashi case and with the same results). Still, he kept his arguments within the national office&#x27;s parameters. The only case to receive a favorable ruling, &quot;ex parte Endo&quot;, was also aided by two &quot;amicus&quot; briefs from the ACLU, one from the more conservative Fraenkel and another from the more putative Wayne Collins.

&quot;Korematsu v. United States&quot; proved to be the most controversial of these cases, as Besig and Collins refused to bow to the national ACLU office&#x27;s pressure to pursue the case without challenging the government&#x27;s right to remove citizens from their homes. The ACLU board threatened to revoke the San Francisco branch&#x27;s national affiliation. At the same time, Baldwin tried unsuccessfully to convince Collins to step down so he could replace him as lead attorney in the case. Eventually, Collins agreed to present the case alongside Charles Horsky; however, their arguments before the Supreme Court remained based on the unconstitutionality of the exclusion order Korematsu had disobeyed. The case was decided in December 1944, when the Court once again upheld the government&#x27;s right to relocate Japanese Americans, although Korematsu&#x27;s, Hirabayashi&#x27;s and Yasui&#x27;s convictions were later overturned in &quot;coram nobis&quot; proceedings in the 1980s. Legal scholar Peter Irons later asserted that the national office of the ACLU&#x27;s decision not to challenge the constitutionality of Executive Order 9066 directly had &quot;crippled the effective presentation of these appeals to the Supreme Court&quot;.

The national office of the ACLU was even more reluctant to defend anti-war protesters. A majority of the board passed a resolution in 1942 that declared the ACLU unwilling to defend anyone who interfered with the United States&#x27; war effort. Included in this group were the thousands of Nisei who renounced their US citizenship during the war but later regretted the decision and tried to revoke their applications for &quot;repatriation&quot;. (A significant number of those slated to &quot;go back&quot; to Japan had never actually been to the country and were being deported rather than repatriated.) Ernest Besig had in 1944 visited the Tule Lake Segregation Center, where the majority of these &quot;renunciants&quot; were concentrated, and subsequently enlisted Wayne Collins&#x27; help to file a lawsuit on their behalf, arguing the renunciations had been given under duress. The national organization prohibited local branches from representing the renunciants, forcing Collins to pursue the case independently, although Besig and the Northern California office provided some support.

====Cold War era====
Anti-Communist sentiment gripped the United States during the Cold War beginning in 1946. Federal investigations caused many persons with Communist or left-leaning affiliations to lose jobs, become blocklisted, or be jailed. The ACLU was internally divided when it purged Communists from its leadership in 1940, and that ambivalence continued as it decided whether to defend alleged Communists during the late 1940s. Some ACLU leaders were anti-Communist and felt that the ACLU should not defend any victims. Some ACLU leaders felt that Communists were entitled to free speech protections and that the ACLU should defend them. Other ACLU leaders were uncertain about the threat posed by Communists and tried to establish a compromise between the two extremes. This ambivalent state of affairs would last until 1954, when the civil liberties faction prevailed, leading to most anti-Communist leaders&#x27; resignations.
In 1947, President Truman issued Executive Order 9835, which created the Federal Loyalty Program. This program authorized the Attorney General to create a list of organizations that were deemed to be subversive. Listed organizations were not notified that they were being considered for the list, nor did they have an opportunity to present counterarguments; nor did the government divulge any factual basis for inclusion in the list. Although ACLU leadership was divided on whether to challenge the Federal Loyalty Program, some challenges were successfully made.

Also in 1947, the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) subpoenaed ten Hollywood directors and writers, the &quot;Hollywood Ten&quot;, intending to ask them to identify Communists, but the witnesses refused to testify. All were imprisoned for contempt of Congress. The ACLU supported several artists&#x27; appeals but lost on appeal. The Hollywood establishment panicked after the HUAC hearings and created a blacklist that prohibited anyone with leftist associations from working. The ACLU supported legal challenges to the blocklist, but those challenges failed. The ACLU was more successful with an education effort; the 1952 report &quot;The Judges and the Judged&quot;, prepared at the ACLU&#x27;s direction in response to the blocklisting of actress Jean Muir, described the unfair and unethical actions behind the blocklisting process, and it helped gradually turn public opinion against McCarthyism.
The federal government took direct aim at the US Communist Party in 1948 when it indicted its top twelve leaders in the Foley Square trial. The case hinged on whether or not mere membership in a totalitarian political party was sufficient to conclude that members advocated the overthrow of the United States government. The ACLU chose not to represent any of the defendants, and they were all found guilty. In a change of heart, the ACLU supported the party leaders during their appeal process. The Supreme Court upheld the convictions in the &quot;Dennis v. United States&quot; decision by softening the free speech requirements from a &quot;clear and present danger&quot; test to a &quot;grave and probable&quot; test. The ACLU issued a public condemnation of the &quot;Dennis&quot; decision, and resolved to fight it. One reason for the Supreme Court&#x27;s support of Cold War legislation was the 1949 deaths of Supreme Court justices Frank Murphy and Wiley Rutledge, leaving Hugo Black and William O. Douglas as the only remaining civil libertarians on the Court.

The &quot;Dennis&quot; decision paved the way for the prosecution of hundreds of other Communist party members. The ACLU supported many Communists during their appeals (although most of the initiative originated with local ACLU affiliates, not the national headquarters), but most convictions were upheld. The two California affiliates, in particular, felt the national ACLU headquarters was not supporting civil liberties strongly enough, and they initiated more cold war cases than the national headquarters did.

The ACLU challenged many loyalty oath requirements across the country, but the courts upheld most loyalty oath laws. The Supreme Court, until 1957, upheld nearly every law which restricted the liberties of Communists. The ACLU, even though it scaled back its defense of Communists during the Cold War, still came under heavy criticism as a &quot;front&quot; for Communism. Critics included the American Legion, Senator Joseph McCarthy, the HUAC, and the FBI. Several ACLU leaders were sympathetic to the FBI, and as a consequence, the ACLU rarely investigated any of the many complaints alleging abuse of power by the FBI during the Cold War.

===1950s===
In 1950, the ACLU board of directors asked executive director Baldwin to resign, feeling he lacked the organizational skills to lead the 9,000 (and growing) member organization. Baldwin objected, but a majority of the board elected to remove him from the position, and he was replaced by Patrick Murphy Malin. Under Malin&#x27;s guidance, membership tripled to 30,000 by 1955the start of 24 years of continual growth leading to 275,000 members in 1974. Malin also presided over an expansion of local ACLU affiliates.

The ACLU, controlled by an elite of a few dozen New Yorkers, became more democratic in the 1950s. In 1951, the ACLU amended its bylaws to permit the local affiliates to participate directly in voting on ACLU policy decisions. A bi-annual conference, open to the entire membership, was instituted in the same year; in later decades, it became a pulpit for activist members, who suggested new directions for the ACLU, including abortion rights, death penalty, and rights of the poor.

====McCarthy era====
During the early 1950s, the ACLU continued to steer a moderate course through the Cold War. When singer Paul Robeson was denied a passport in 1950, even though he was not accused of any illegal acts, the ACLU chose not to defend him. The ACLU later reversed their stance and supported William Worthy and Rockwell Kent in their passport confiscation cases, which resulted in legal victories in the late 1950s.

In response to communist witch-hunts, many witnesses and employees chose to use the fifth amendment protection against self-incrimination to avoid divulging information about their political beliefs. Government agencies and private organizations, in response, established policies which inferred communist party membership for anyone who invoked the fifth amendment. The national ACLU was divided on whether to defend employees who had been fired merely for pleading the fifth amendment, but the New York affiliate successfully assisted teacher Harry Slochower in his Supreme Court case, which reversed his termination.

The fifth amendment issue became the catalyst for a watershed event in 1954, which finally resolved the ACLU&#x27;s ambivalence by ousting the anti-communists from ACLU leadership. In 1953, the anti-communists, led by Norman Thomas and James Fly, proposed a set of resolutions that inferred guilt of persons that invoked the fifth amendment. These resolutions were the first that fell under the ACLU&#x27;s new organizational rules permitting local affiliates to participate in the vote; the affiliates outvoted the national headquarters and rejected the anti-communist resolutions. Anti-communist leaders refused to accept the results of the vote and brought the issue up for discussion again at the 1954 bi-annual convention. ACLU member Frank Graham, president of the University of North Carolina, attacked the anti-communists with a counter-proposal, which stated that the ACLU &quot;stand[s] against guilt by association, judgment by accusation, the invasion of privacy of personal opinions and beliefs, and the confusion of dissent with disloyalty&quot;. The anti-communists continued to battle Graham&#x27;s proposal but were outnumbered by the affiliates. The anti-communists finally gave up and departed the board of directors in late 1954 and 1955, ending an eight-year ambivalence within the ACLU leadership ranks. After that, the ACLU proceeded with firmer resolve against Cold War anti-communist legislation. The period from the 1940 resolution (and the purge of Elizabeth Flynn) to the 1954 resignation of the anti-communist leaders is considered by many to be an era in which the ACLU abandoned its core principles.

McCarthyism declined in late 1954 after television journalist Edward R. Murrow and others publicly chastised McCarthy. The controversies over the Bill of Rights that the Cold War generated ushered in a new era in American Civil liberties. In 1954, in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;, the Supreme Court unanimously overturned state-sanctioned school segregation, and after that, a flood of civil rights victories dominated the legal landscape.

The Supreme Court handed the ACLU two key victories in 1957, in &quot;Watkins v. United States&quot; and &quot;Yates v. United States&quot;, both of which undermined the Smith Act and marked the beginning of the end of communist party membership inquiries. In 1965, the Supreme Court produced some decisions, including &quot;Lamont v. Postmaster General&quot; (in which the plaintiff was Corliss Lamont, a former ACLU board member), which upheld fifth amendment protections and brought an end to restrictions on political activity.

===1960s===
The decade from 1954 to 1964 was the most successful period in the ACLU&#x27;s history. Membership rose from 30,000 to 80,000, and by 1965 it had affiliates in seventeen states. During the ACLU&#x27;s bi-annual conference in Colorado in 1964, the Supreme Court issued rulings on eight cases involving the ACLU; the ACLU prevailed on seven of the eight. The ACLU played a role in Supreme Court decisions reducing censorship of literature and arts, protecting freedom of association, prohibiting racial segregation, excluding religion from public schools, and providing due process protection to criminal suspects. The ACLU&#x27;s success arose from changing public attitudes; the American populace was more educated, tolerant, and willing to accept unorthodox behavior.

Legal battles concerning the separation of church and state originated in laws dating to 1938, which required religious instruction in school or provided state funding for religious schools. The Catholic church was a leading proponent of such laws, and the primary opponents (the &quot;separationists&quot;) were the ACLU, Americans United for Separation of Church and State, and the American Jewish Congress. The ACLU led the challenge in the 1947 &quot;Everson v. Board of Education&quot; case, in which Justice Hugo Black wrote &quot;[t]he First Amendment has erected a wall between church and state... That wall must be kept high and impregnable.&quot; It was not clear that the Bill of Rights forbid state governments from supporting religious education, and strong legal arguments were made by religious proponents, arguing that the Supreme Court should not act as a &quot;national school board&quot;, and that the Constitution did not govern social issues. However, the ACLU and other advocates of church/state separation persuaded the Court to declare such activities unconstitutional. Historian Samuel Walker writes that the ACLU&#x27;s &quot;greatest impact on American life&quot; was its role in persuading the Supreme Court to &quot;constitutionalize&quot; so many public controversies.

In 1948, the ACLU prevailed in the &quot;McCollum v. Board of Education&quot; case, which challenged public school religious classes taught by clergy paid for by private funds. The ACLU also won cases challenging schools in New Mexico that were taught by clergy and had crucifixes hanging in the classrooms. In the 1960s, the ACLU, in response to member insistence, turned its attention to the in-class promotion of religion. In 1960, 42 percent of American schools included Bible reading. In 1962, the ACLU published a policy statement condemning in-school prayers, observation of religious holidays, and Bible reading. The Supreme Court concurred with the ACLU&#x27;s position when it prohibited New York&#x27;s in-school prayers in the 1962 &quot;Engel v. Vitale&quot; decision. Religious factions across the country rebelled against the anti-prayer decisions, leading them to propose the School Prayer Constitutional Amendment, which declared in-school prayer legal. The ACLU participated in a lobbying effort against the amendment, and the 1966 congressional vote failed to obtain the required two-thirds majority.

However, not all cases were victories; ACLU lost cases in 1949 and 1961 which challenged state laws requiring commercial businesses to close on Sunday, the Christian Sabbath. The Supreme Court has never overturned such laws, although some states subsequently revoked many of the laws under pressure from commercial interests.

Cities across America routinely banned movies because they were deemed to be &quot;harmful&quot;, &quot;offensive&quot;, or &quot;immoral&quot;censorship which was validated by the 1915 &quot;Mutual v. Ohio&quot; Supreme Court decision which held movies to be mere commerce, undeserving of first amendment protection. The film &quot;The Miracle&quot; was banned in New York in 1951 at the behest of the Catholic Church, but the ACLU supported the film&#x27;s distributor in an appeal of the ban, and won a major victory in the 1952 decision &quot;Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson&quot;. Further legal actions by the ACLU successfully defended films such as &quot;M&quot; and &quot;la Ronde&quot;, leading the eventual dismantling of movie censorship. Hollywood continued employing self-censorship with its own Production Code, but in 1956 the ACLU called on Hollywood to abolish the Code.
The ACLU lost an important press censorship case when, in 1957, the Supreme Court upheld the obscenity conviction of publisher Samuel Roth for distributing adult magazines. As late as 1953, books such as &quot;Tropic of Cancer&quot; and &quot;From Here to Eternity&quot; were still banned. But public standards rapidly became more liberal through the 1960s, and obscenity was notoriously difficult to define, so by 1971, obscenity prosecutions had halted.

====Racial discrimination====
Several civil liberties organizations worked together for progress on the civil rights movement, including the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), the ACLU, and the American Jewish Congress. The NAACP took primary responsibility for Supreme Court cases (often led by lead NAACP attorney Thurgood Marshall), with the ACLU focusing on police misconduct, and supporting the NAACP with amicus briefs. In 1954, the ACLU filed an amicus brief in the case of &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;, which led to the ban on racial segregation in US public schools. Southern states instituted a McCarthyism-style witch-hunt against the NAACP, attempting to force it to disclose membership lists. The ACLU&#x27;s fight against racism was not limited to segregation; in 1964, the ACLU provided key support to plaintiffs, primarily lower-income urban residents, in &quot;Reynolds v. Sims&quot;, which required states to establish the voting districts following the &quot;one person, one vote&quot; principle.

====Police misconduct====
The ACLU regularly tackled police misconduct issues, starting with the 1932 case &quot;Powell v. Alabama&quot; (right to an attorney), and including 1942&#x27;s &quot;Betts v. Brady&quot; (right to an attorney), and 1951&#x27;s &quot;Rochin v. California&quot; (involuntary stomach pumping). In the late 1940s, several ACLU local affiliates established permanent committees to address policing issues. During the 1950s and 1960s, the ACLU was responsible for substantially advancing the legal protections against police misconduct. In 1958, the Philadelphia affiliate was responsible for causing the City of Philadelphia to create the nation&#x27;s first civilian police review board. In 1959, the Illinois affiliate published the first report in the nation, &quot;Secret Detention by the Chicago Police&quot; which documented unlawful detention by police.

Some of the most notable ACLU successes came in the 1960s when the ACLU prevailed in a string of cases limiting the power of police to gather evidence; in 1961&#x27;s &quot;Mapp v. Ohio&quot;, the Supreme court required states to obtain a warrant before searching a person&#x27;s home. The &quot;Gideon v. Wainwright&quot; decision in 1963 provided legal representation to indigents. In 1964, the ACLU persuaded the Court, in &quot;Escobedo v. Illinois&quot;, to permit suspects to have an attorney present during questioning. And, in 1966, &quot;Miranda v. Arizona&quot; federal decision required police to notify suspects of their constitutional rights, which was later extended to juveniles in the following year&#x27;s &quot;in re Gault&quot; (1967) federal ruling. Although many law enforcement officials criticized the ACLU for expanding the rights of suspects, police officers also used the services of the ACLU. For example, when the ACLU represented New York City policemen in their lawsuit, which objected to searches of their workplace lockers. In the late 1960s, civilian review boards in New York City and Philadelphia were abolished, over the ACLU&#x27;s objection.

====Civil liberties revolution====
The 1960s was a tumultuous era in the United States, and public interest in civil liberties underwent explosive growth. Civil liberties actions in the 1960s were often led by young people and often employed tactics such as sit ins and marches. Protests were often peaceful but sometimes employed militant tactics. The ACLU played a central role in all major civil liberties debates of the 1960s, including new fields such as gay rights, prisoner&#x27;s rights, abortion, rights of the poor, and the death penalty. Membership in the ACLU increased from 52,000 at the beginning of the decade to 104,000 in 1970. In 1960, there were affiliates in seven states, and by 1974 there were affiliates in 46 states. During the 1960s, the ACLU underwent a major transformation in tactics; it shifted emphasis from legal appeals (generally involving amicus briefs submitted to the Supreme Court) to direct representation of defendants when they were initially arrested. At the same time, the ACLU transformed its style from &quot;disengaged and elitist&quot; to &quot;emotionally engaged&quot;. The ACLU published a breakthrough document in 1963, titled &quot;How Americans Protest&quot;, which was borne of frustration with the slow progress in battling racism, and which endorsed aggressive, even militant protest techniques.

After four African-American college students staged a sit-in in a segregated North Carolina department store, the sit-in movement gained momentum across the United States. During 1960–61, the ACLU defended black students arrested for demonstrating in North Carolina, Florida, and Louisiana. The ACLU also provided legal help for the Freedom Rides in 1961, the integration of the University of Mississippi, the Birmingham campaign in 1963, and the 1964 Freedom Summer. The NAACP was responsible for managing most sit-in related cases that made it to the Supreme Court, winning nearly every decision. But it fell to the ACLU and other legal volunteer efforts to provide legal representation to hundreds of protestorswhite and blackwho were arrested while protesting in the South. The ACLU joined with other civil liberties groups to form the Lawyers Constitutional Defense Committee (LCDC), which provided legal representation to many protesters. The ACLU provided the majority of the funding for the LCDC.

In 1964, the ACLU opened up a major office in Atlanta, Georgia, dedicated to serving Southern issues. Much of the ACLU&#x27;s progress in the South was due to Charles Morgan Jr., the charismatic leader of the Atlanta office. Morgan was responsible for desegregating juries (&quot;Whitus v. Georgia&quot;), desegregating prisons (&quot;Lee v. Washington&quot;), and reforming election laws. In 1966, the southern office successfully represented African-American congressman Julian Bond in &quot;Bond v. Floyd&quot;, after the Georgia House of Representatives refused to admit Bond into the legislature on the basis that he was an admitted pacifist opposed to the ongoing Vietnam War. Another widely publicized case defended by Morgan was that of Army doctor Howard Levy, who was convicted of refusing to train Green Berets. Despite raising the defense that the Green Berets were committing war crimes in Vietnam, Levy lost on appeal in &quot;Parker v. Levy&quot;, 417 US 733 (1974).

In 1969, the ACLU won a significant victory for free speech when it defended Dick Gregory after he was arrested for peacefully protesting against the mayor of Chicago. The court ruled in &quot;Gregory v. Chicago&quot; that a speaker cannot be arrested for disturbing the peace when hostility is initiated by someone in the audience, as that would amount to a &quot;heckler&#x27;s veto&quot;.

====Vietnam War====
The ACLU was at the center of several legal aspects of the Vietnam war: defending draft resisters, challenging the constitutionality of the war, the potential impeachment of Richard Nixon, and the use of national security concerns to preemptively censor newspapers.

David J. Miller was the first person prosecuted for burning his draft card. The New York affiliate of the ACLU appealed his 1965 conviction (367 F.2d 72: &quot;United States of America v. David J. Miller&quot;, 1966), but the Supreme Court refused to hear the appeal. Two years later, the Massachusetts affiliate took the card-burning case of David O&#x27;Brien to the Supreme Court, arguing that the act of burning was a form of symbolic speech, but the Supreme Court upheld the conviction in &quot;United States v. O&#x27;Brien&quot;, 391 US 367 (1968). Thirteen-year-old Junior High student Mary Tinker wore a black armband to school in 1965 to object to the war and was suspended from school. The ACLU appealed her case to the Supreme Court and won a victory in &quot;Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District&quot;. This critical case established that the government may not establish &quot;enclaves&quot; such as schools or prisons where all rights are forfeited.
The ACLU defended Sydney Street, who was arrested for burning an American flag to protest the reported assassination of civil rights leader James Meredith. In the &quot;Street v. New York&quot; decision, the court agreed with the ACLU that encouraging the country to abandon one of its national symbols was a constitutionally protected form of expression. The ACLU successfully defended Paul Cohen, who was arrested for wearing a jacket with the words &quot;fuck the draft&quot; on its back while he walked through the Los Angeles courthouse. The Supreme Court, in &quot;Cohen v. California&quot;, held that the vulgarity of the wording was essential to convey the intensity of the message.

Non-war-related free speech rights were also advanced during the Vietnam war era; in 1969, the ACLU defended a Ku Klux Klan member who advocated long-term violence against the government, and the Supreme Court concurred with the ACLU&#x27;s argument in the landmark decision &quot;Brandenburg v. Ohio&quot;, which held that only speech which advocated &quot;imminent&quot; violence could be outlawed.

A major crisis gripped the ACLU in 1968 when a debate erupted over whether to defend Benjamin Spock and the Boston Five against federal charges that they encouraged draftees to avoid the draft. The ACLU board was deeply split over whether to defend the activists; half the board harbored anti-war sentiments and felt that the ACLU should lend its resources to the cause of the Boston Five. The other half of the board believed that civil liberties were not at stake and the ACLU would be taking a political stance. Behind the debate was the longstanding ACLU tradition that it was politically impartial and provided legal advice without regard to the defendants&#x27; political views. The board finally agreed to a compromise solution that permitted the ACLU to defend the anti-war activists without endorsing the activist&#x27;s political views. Some critics of the ACLU suggest that the ACLU became a partisan political organization following the Spock case. After the Kent State shootings in 1970, ACLU leaders took another step toward politics by passing a resolution condemning the Vietnam War. The resolution was based on various legal arguments, including civil liberties violations and claiming that the war was illegal.

Also in 1968, the ACLU held an internal symposium to discuss its dual roles: providing &quot;direct&quot; legal support (defense for accused in their initial trial, benefiting only the individual defendant) and appellate support (providing amicus briefs during the appeal process, to establish widespread legal precedent). Historically, the ACLU was known for its appellate work, which led to landmark Supreme Court decisions, but by 1968, 90% of the ACLU&#x27;s legal activities involved direct representation. The symposium concluded that both roles were valid for the ACLU.

===1970s===
====Watergate era====
The ACLU supported &quot;The New York Times&quot; in its 1971 suit against the government, requesting permission to publish the Pentagon Papers. The court upheld the &quot;Times&quot; and ACLU in the &quot;New York Times Co. v. United States&quot; ruling, which held that the government could not preemptively prohibit the publication of classified information and had to wait until after it was published to take action.

On September 30, 1973, the ACLU became first national organization to publicly call for the impeachment and removal from office of President Richard Nixon. Six civil liberties violations were cited as grounds: &quot;specific proved violations of the rights of political dissent; usurpation of Congressional war-making powers; establishment of a personal secret police which committed crimes; attempted interference in the trial of Daniel Ellsberg; distortion of the system of justice and perversion of other Federal agencies&quot;. One month later, after the House of Representatives began an impeachment inquiry against him, the organization released a 56-page handbook detailing &quot;17 things citizens could do to bring about the impeachment of President Nixon&quot;. This resolution, when placed beside the earlier resolution opposing the Vietnam war, convinced many ACLU critics, particularly conservatives, that the organization had transformed into a liberal political organization.

====Enclaves and new civil liberties====
The decade from 1965 to 1975 saw an expansion of civil liberties. Administratively, the ACLU responded by appointing Aryeh Neier to take over from Pemberton as executive director in 1970. Neier embarked on an ambitious program to expand the ACLU; he created the ACLU Foundation to raise funds and created several new programs to focus the ACLU&#x27;s legal efforts. By 1974, ACLU membership had reached 275,000.

During those years, the ACLU worked to expand legal rights in three directions: new rights for persons within government-run &quot;enclaves&quot;, new rights for members of what it called &quot;victim groups&quot;, and privacy rights for citizens in general. At the same time, the organization grew substantially. The ACLU helped develop the field of constitutional law that governs &quot;enclaves&quot;, which are groups of persons that live in conditions under government control. Enclaves include mental hospital patients, military members, prisoners, and students (while at school). The term enclave originated with Supreme Court justice Abe Fortas&#x27;s use of the phrase &quot;schools may not be enclaves of totalitarianism&quot; in the &quot;Tinker v. Des Moines&quot; decision.

The ACLU initiated the legal field of student&#x27;s rights with the &quot;Tinker v. Des Moines&quot; case and expanded it with cases such as &quot;Goss v. Lopez&quot;, which required schools to provide students an opportunity to appeal suspensions.

As early as 1945, the ACLU had taken a stand to protect the rights of the mentally ill when it drafted a model statute governing mental commitments. In the 1960s, the ACLU opposed involuntary commitments unless it could be demonstrated that the person was a danger to himself or the community. In the landmark 1975 &quot;O&#x27;Connor v. Donaldson&quot; decision, the ACLU represented a non-violent mental health patient who had been confined against his will for 15 years and persuaded the Supreme Court to rule such involuntary confinements illegal. The ACLU has also defended the rights of mentally ill individuals who are not dangerous but create disturbances. The New York chapter of the ACLU defended Billie Boggs, a woman with mental illness who exposed herself and defecated and urinated in public.

Before 1960, prisoners had virtually no recourse to the court system because courts considered prisoners to have no civil rights. That changed in the late 1950s, when the ACLU began representing prisoners subject to police brutality or deprived of religious reading material. In 1968, the ACLU successfully sued to desegregate the Alabama prison system; in 1969, the New York affiliate adopted a project to represent prisoners in New York prisons. Private attorney Phil Hirschkop discovered degrading conditions in Virginia prisons following the Virginia State Penitentiary strike and won an important victory in 1971&#x27;s &quot;Landman v. Royster&quot; which prohibited Virginia from treating prisoners in inhumane ways. In 1972, the ACLU consolidated several prison rights efforts across the nation and created the National Prison Project. The ACLU&#x27;s efforts led to landmark cases such as &quot;Ruiz v. Estelle&quot; (requiring reform of the Texas prison system), and in 1996 US Congress enacted the Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA) which codified prisoners&#x27; rights.

====Victim groups====
During the 1960s and 1970s, the ACLU expanded its scope to include what it referred to as &quot;victim groups&quot;, namely women, the poor, and homosexuals. Heeding the call of female members, the ACLU endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment in 1970 and created the Women&#x27;s Rights Project in 1971. The Women&#x27;s Rights Project dominated the legal field, handling more than twice as many cases as the National Organization for Women, including breakthrough cases such as &quot;Reed v. Reed&quot;, &quot;Frontiero v. Richardson&quot;, and &quot; Taylor v. Louisiana&quot;.

ACLU leader Harriet Pilpel raised the issue of the rights of homosexuals in 1964, and two years later, the ACLU formally endorsed gay rights. In 1972, ACLU cooperating attorneys in Oregon filed the first federal civil rights case involving a claim of unconstitutional discrimination against a gay or lesbian public school teacher. The US District Court held that a state statute that authorized school districts to fire teachers for &quot;immorality&quot; was unconstitutionally vague, and awarded monetary damages to the teacher. The court refused to reinstate the teacher, and the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed that refusal by a 2-to-1 vote. In 1973, the ACLU created the Sexual Privacy Project (later the Gay and Lesbian Rights Project), which combated discrimination against homosexuals. This support continued into the 2000s. For example, after then-Senator Larry Craig was arrested for soliciting sex in a public restroom in 2007, the ACLU wrote an amicus brief for Craig, saying that sex between consenting adults in public places was protected under privacy rights.

The rights of the poor were another area that the ACLU expanded. In 1966 and again in 1968, activists within the ACLU encouraged the organization to adopt a policy overhauling the welfare system and guaranteeing low-income families a baseline income; but the ACLU board did not approve the proposals. However, the ACLU played a key role in the 1968 &quot;King v. Smith&quot; decision, where the Supreme Court ruled that welfare benefits for children could not be denied by a state simply because the mother cohabited with a boyfriend.

==== Reproductive Freedom Project ====
The ACLU founded the Reproductive Freedom Project in 1974 to defend individuals the government obstructs in cases involving access to abortions, birth control, or sexual education. According to its mission statement, the project works to provide access to reproductive health care for individuals. The project also opposes abstinence-only sex education, arguing that it promotes an unwillingness to use contraceptives.

In 1980, the Project filed &quot;Poe v. Lynchburg Training School &amp; Hospital&quot; which attempted to overturn &quot;Buck v. Bell&quot;, the 1927 US Supreme Court decision which had allowed the Commonwealth of Virginia to legally sterilize persons it deemed to be mentally defective without their permission. Though the Court did not overturn &quot;Buck v.Bell&quot;, in 1985, the state agreed to provide counseling and medical treatment to the survivors among the 7,200 to 8,300 people sterilized between 1927 and 1979. In 1977, the ACLU took part in and litigated &quot;Walker v. Pierce&quot;, the federal circuit court case that led to federal regulations to prevent Medicaid patients from being sterilized without their knowledge or consent. In 1981–1990, the Project litigated &quot;Hodgson v. Minnesota&quot;, which resulted in the Supreme Court overturning a state law requiring both parents to be notified before a minor could legally have an abortion. In the 1990s, the Project provided legal assistance and resource kits to those who were being challenged for educating about sexuality and AIDS. In 1995, the Project filed an amicus brief in &quot;Curtis v. School Committee of Falmouth&quot;, which allowed for the distribution of condoms in a public school.

The Reproductive Freedom Project focuses on three ideas: (1) to &quot;reverse the shortage of trained abortion providers throughout the country&quot; (2) to &quot;block state and federal welfare &quot;reform&quot; proposals that cut off benefits for children who are born to women already receiving welfare, unmarried women, or teenagers&quot; and (3) to &quot;stop the elimination of vital reproductive health services as a result of hospital mergers and health care networks&quot;. The Project proposes to achieve these goals through legal action and litigation.

====Privacy====
The right to privacy is not explicitly identified in the US Constitution, but the ACLU led the charge to establish such rights in the indecisive &quot;Poe v. Ullman&quot; (1961) case, which addressed a state statute outlawing contraception. The issue arose again in &quot;Griswold v. Connecticut&quot; (1965), and this time the Supreme Court adopted the ACLU&#x27;s position and formally declared a right to privacy. The New York affiliate of the ACLU pushed to eliminate anti-abortion laws starting in 1964, a year before &quot;Griswold&quot; was decided; in 1967 the ACLU itself formally adopted the right to abortion as a policy. The ACLU led the defense in &quot;United States v. Vuitch&quot; (1971), which expanded the right of physicians to determine when abortions were necessary. These efforts culminated in one of the most controversial Supreme Court decisions, &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot; (1973), which legalized abortion throughout the United States. The ACLU successfully argued against state bans on interracial marriage, in the case of &quot;Loving v. Virginia&quot; (1967).

Related to privacy, the ACLU engaged in several battles to ensure that government records about individuals were kept private and to give individuals the right to review their records. The ACLU supported several measures, including the 1970 Fair Credit Reporting Act, which required credit agencies to divulge credit information to individuals; the 1973 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, which provided students the right to access their records; and the 1974 Privacy Act, which prevented the federal government from disclosing personal information without good cause.

====Allegations of bias====
In the early 1970s, conservatives and libertarians began to criticize the ACLU for being too political and too liberal. Legal scholar Joseph W. Bishop wrote that the ACLU&#x27;s trend to partisanship started with its defense of Spock&#x27;s anti-war protests. Critics also blamed the ACLU for encouraging the Supreme Court to embrace judicial activism. Critics claimed that the ACLU&#x27;s support of controversial decisions like &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot; and &quot;Griswold v. Connecticut&quot; violated the intention of the authors of the Bill of Rights. The ACLU became an issue in the 1988 presidential campaign, when Republican candidate George H. W. Bush accused Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis (a member of the ACLU) of being a &quot;card carrying member of the ACLU&quot;.

====Skokie case====

In 1977, the National Socialist Party of America, led by Frank Collin, applied to the town of Skokie, Illinois, for a permit to hold a demonstration in the town park. Skokie at the time had a majority population of Jews, totaling 40,000 of 70,000 citizens, some of whom were survivors of Nazi concentration camps. Skokie refused to grant the NSPA a permit and passed ordinances against hate speech and military wear, in addition to requiring an insurance bond. Skokie&#x27;s Village Council ordered village attorney, Harvey Schwartz, to seek an injunction to stop the demonstration. The ACLU assisted Collin and appealed to federal court, eventually prevailing in NSPA v. Village of Skokie.

The Skokie case was heavily publicized across America, partially because Jewish groups such as the Jewish Defense League and Anti Defamation League strenuously objected to the demonstration, leading many members of the ACLU to cancel their memberships. The Illinois affiliate of the ACLU lost about 25% of its membership and nearly one-third of its budget. The financial strain from the controversy led to layoffs at local chapters. After the membership crisis died down, the ACLU sent out a fund-raising appeal which explained their rationale for the Skokie case and raised over $500,000 ($ in dollars).

===1980s===
====Reagan era====
The inauguration of Ronald Reagan as president in 1981 ushered in an eight-year period of conservative leadership in the US government. Under Reagan&#x27;s leadership, the government pushed a conservative social agenda.

The Arkansas 1981 creationism statute, which required schools to teach the biblical account of creation as a scientific alternative to evolution. The ACLU won the case in the &quot;McLean v. Arkansas&quot; decision.

In 1982, the ACLU became involved in a case involving the distribution of child pornography (&quot;New York v. Ferber&quot;). In an amicus brief, the ACLU argued that child pornography that violates the three prong obscenity test should be outlawed. However, the law was overly restrictive because it banned artistic displays and non-obscene material. The court did not adopt the ACLU&#x27;s position.

During the 1988 presidential election, Vice President George H. W. Bush noted that his opponent Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis had described himself as a &quot;card-carrying member of the ACLU&quot; and used that as evidence that Dukakis was &quot;a strong, passionate liberal&quot; and &quot;out of the mainstream&quot;. The phrase subsequently was used by the organization in an advertising campaign.

===1990s===
==== Free speech ====
In 1997, ruling unanimously in the case of &quot;Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union&quot;, the Supreme Court voided the anti-indecency provisions of the Communications Decency Act (the CDA), finding they violated the freedom of speech provisions of the First Amendment. In their decision, the Supreme Court held that the CDA&#x27;s &quot;use of the undefined terms &#x27;indecent&#x27; and &#x27;patently offensive&#x27; will provoke uncertainty among speakers about how the two standards relate to each other and just what they mean.&quot;
In 2000, Marvin Johnson, a legislative counsel for the ACLU, stated that proposed anti-spam legislation infringed on free speech by denying anonymity and by forcing spam to be labeled as such, &quot;Standardized labeling is compelled speech.&quot; He also stated, &quot;It&#x27;s relatively simple to click and delete.&quot; The debate found the ACLU joining with the Direct Marketing Association and the Center for Democracy and Technology in 2000 in criticizing a bipartisan bill in the House of Representatives. As early as 1997, the ACLU had taken a strong position that nearly all spam legislation was improper, although it has supported &quot;opt-out&quot; requirements in some cases. The ACLU opposed the 2003 CAN-SPAM act suggesting that it could have a chilling effect on speech in cyberspace. It has been criticized for this position.

===2000s===
In 2006, the ACLU of Washington State joined with a pro-gun rights organization, the Second Amendment Foundation, and prevailed in a lawsuit against the North Central Regional Library District (NCRL) in Washington for its policy of refusing to disable restrictions upon an adult patron&#x27;s request. Library patrons attempting to access pro-gun web sites were blocked, and the library refused to remove the blocks. In 2012, the ACLU sued the same library system for refusing to disable temporarily, at the request of an adult patron, Internet filters which blocked access to Google Images.
In 2006, the ACLU challenged a Missouri law prohibiting picketing outside veterans&#x27; funerals. The ACLU filed the suit in support of the Westboro Baptist Church and Shirley Phelps-Roper, who were threatened with arrest. The Westboro Baptist Church is well known for its picket signs that contain messages such as &quot;God Hates Fags&quot;, &quot;Thank God for Dead Soldiers&quot;, and &quot;Thank God for 9/11&quot;. The ACLU issued a statement calling the legislation a &quot;law that infringes on Shirley Phelps-Roper&#x27;s rights to religious liberty and free speech.&quot; The ACLU prevailed in the lawsuit.

The ACLU argued in an amicus brief to the Supreme Court that a decision on the constitutionality of a Massachusetts law required the consideration of additional evidence because lower courts have undervalued the right to engage in sidewalk counseling. The law prohibited sidewalk counselors from approaching women outside abortion facilities and offering them alternatives to abortion but allowed escorts to speak with them and accompany them into the building. In overturning the law in &quot;McCullen v. Coakley&quot;, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that it violated the counselors&#x27; freedom of speech and constituted viewpoint discrimination.

In 2009, the ACLU filed an amicus brief in &quot;Citizens United v. FEC&quot;, arguing that the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 violated the First Amendment right to free speech by curtailing political speech. This stance on the landmark &quot;Citizens United&quot; case caused considerable disagreement within the organization, resulting in a discussion about its future stance during a quarterly board meeting in 2010. On March 27, 2012, the ACLU reaffirmed its stance in support of the Supreme Court&#x27;s &quot;Citizens United&quot; ruling, at the same time voicing support for expanded public financing of election campaigns and stating the organization would firmly oppose any future constitutional amendment limiting free speech.

===2010s===
In 2012, the ACLU filed suit on behalf of the Ku Klux Klan of Georgia, claiming that the KKK was unfairly rejected from the state&#x27;s &quot;Adopt-a-Highway&quot; program. The ACLU prevailed in the lawsuit.

====Allegations of prioritizing civil rights over civil liberties====

Some have claimed the ACLU is reducing its support of unpopular free speech (specifically, by declining to defend speech made by conservatives) in favor of identity politics, political correctness, and progressivism. Instead, critics contend that the organization has become a progressive advocacy organization intensely focused on identity politics.

One basis of these allegations was a 2017 statement the ACLU president made to a reporter after the death of a counter-protester during the 2017 Unite the Right rally in Virginia, where Romero told a reporter that the ACLU would no longer support legal cases of activists that wish to carry guns at their protests. Another basis for these claims was an internal ACLU memo dated June 2018, discussing factors to evaluate when deciding whether to take a case. The memo listed several factors to consider, including &quot;the extent to which the speech may assist in advancing the goals of white supremacists or others whose views are contrary to our values.&quot;

Some analysts viewed this as a retreat from the ACLU&#x27;s historically strong support of First Amendment rights, regardless of whether minorities were negatively impacted by the speech, citing the ACLU&#x27;s past support for certain KKK and Nazi legal cases. The memo&#x27;s authors stated that the memo did not define a change in official ACLU policy, but was intended as a guideline to assist ACLU affiliates in deciding which cases to take.

===2020s===
In 2021, the ACLU responded to the criticisms by denying that they are reducing their support for unpopular First Amendment causes and listing 27 cases from 2017 to 2021 where the ACLU supported a party holding an unpopular or repugnant viewpoint. The cases included one which challenged college restrictions on hate speech; a case defending a Catholic school&#x27;s right to discriminate in hiring; and a case that defended antisemitic protesters who marched outside a synagogue.

In 2024, the National Labor Relations Board sued the ACLU in an unfair labor practice case after the ACLU fired an Asian attorney for criticizing her Black bosses. The ACLU contended that the employee&#x27;s use of phrases like &quot;the beatings will continue until morale improves&quot; was racially coded and that it &quot;caused serious harm to Black members of the ACLU community.&quot; According to Jeremy W. Peters of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, critics of the ACLU saw the firing as &quot;a sign of how far the group has strayed from its core mission — defending free speech — and has instead aligned itself with a progressive politics that is intensely focused on identity.&quot;

==== LGBTQ issues ====
In 2000, the ACLU lost the &quot;Boy Scouts of America v. Dale&quot; case, which had asked the Supreme Court to require the Boy Scouts of America to drop their policy of prohibiting homosexuals from becoming Boy Scout leaders.

In March 2004, the ACLU, along with Lambda Legal and the National Center for Lesbian Rights, sued the state of California on behalf of six same-sex couples who were denied marriage licenses. That case, &quot;Woo v. Lockyer&quot;, was eventually consolidated into &quot;In re Marriage Cases&quot;, the California Supreme Court case which led to same-sex marriage being available in that state from June 16, 2008, until Proposition 8 was passed on November 4, 2008. The ACLU, Lambda Legal and the National Center for Lesbian Rights then challenged Proposition 8 and won.
In 2011, the ACLU started its Don&#x27;t Filter Me project, countering LGBT-related Internet censorship in public schools in the United States.

On January 7, 2013, the ACLU settled with the federal government in &quot;Collins v. United States&quot; that provided for the payment of full separation pay to servicemembers discharged under &quot;don&#x27;t ask, don&#x27;t tell&quot; since November 10, 2004, who had previously been granted only half that.

In 2021, the ACLU filed a brief siding with a school district that had a policy of using preferred pronouns for transgender students. Some analysts felt this was a retreat from the ACLU&#x27;s historical defense of the First Amendment because the ACLU was opposing the teachers who were disciplined for refusing to use the preferred pronouns.

====Anti-terrorism issues====
After the September 11 attacks, the federal government instituted a broad range of new measures to combat terrorism, including the passage of the Patriot Act. The ACLU challenged many of the measures, claiming that they violated rights regarding due process, privacy, illegal searches, and cruel and unusual punishment. An ACLU policy statement states:

During the ensuing debate regarding the proper balance of civil liberties and security, the membership of the ACLU increased by 20%, bringing the group&#x27;s total enrollment to 330,000. The growth continued, and by August 2008 ACLU membership was greater than 500,000. It remained at that level through 2011.

The ACLU has been a vocal opponent of the Patriot Act of 2001, the PATRIOT 2 Act of 2003, and associated legislation made in response to the threat of domestic terrorism. In response to a requirement of the USA PATRIOT Act, the ACLU withdrew from the Combined Federal Campaign charity drive. The campaign required ACLU employees to be checked against a federal anti-terrorism watch list. The ACLU has stated that it would &quot;reject $500,000 in contributions from private individuals rather than submit to a government &#x27;blacklist&#x27; policy&quot;.

In 2004, the ACLU sued the federal government in &quot;American Civil Liberties Union v. Ashcroft&quot; on behalf of Nicholas Merrill, owner of an Internet service provider. Under the provisions of the Patriot Act, the government had issued national security letters to Merrill to compel him to provide private Internet access information from some of his customers. In addition, the government placed a gag order on Merrill, forbidding him from discussing the matter with anyone.

In January 2006, the ACLU filed a lawsuit, &quot;ACLU v. NSA&quot;, in a federal district court in Michigan, challenging government spying in the NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–2007) controversy. On August 17, 2006, that court ruled that the warrantless wiretapping program was unconstitutional and ordered it ended immediately. However, the order was stayed pending an appeal. The Bush administration did suspend the program while the appeal was being heard. In February 2008, the US Supreme Court turned down an appeal from the ACLU to let it pursue a lawsuit against the program that began shortly after the September 11 terror attacks.

The ACLU and other organizations also filed separate lawsuits against telecommunications companies. The ACLU filed a lawsuit in Illinois (&quot;Terkel v. AT&amp;T&quot;), which was dismissed because of the state secrets privilege and two others in California requesting injunctions against AT&amp;T and Verizon. On August 10, 2006, the lawsuits against the telecommunications companies were transferred to a federal judge in San Francisco.

The ACLU represents a Muslim-American who was detained but never accused of a crime in &quot;Ashcroft v. al-Kidd&quot;, a civil suit against former Attorney General John Ashcroft. In January 2010, the American military released the names of 645 detainees held at the Bagram Theater Internment Facility in Afghanistan, modifying its long-held position against publicizing such information. This list was prompted by a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit filed in September 2009 by the ACLU, whose lawyers had also requested detailed information about conditions, rules, and regulations.

On August 10, 2020, in an opinion article for &quot;USA Today&quot; by Anthony D. Romero, the ACLU called for the dismantling of the United States Department of Homeland Security over the deployment of federal forces in July 2020 during the George Floyd protests. On August 26, 2020, the ACLU filed a lawsuit on behalf of seven protesters and three veterans following the protests in Portland, Oregon, which accused the Trump Administration of using excessive force and unlawful arrests with federal officers.

==== Trump administration ====

Following Donald Trump&#x27;s election as president on November 8, 2016, the ACLU responded on Twitter by saying: &quot;Should President-elect Donald Trump attempt to implement his unconstitutional campaign promises, we&#x27;ll see him in court.&quot; On January 27, 2017, President Trump signed an executive order indefinitely barring &quot;Syrian refugees from entering the United States, suspended all refugee admissions for 120 days and blocked citizens of seven Muslim-majority countries, refugees or otherwise, from entering the United States for 90 days: Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen&quot;. The ACLU responded by filing a lawsuit against the ban on behalf of Hameed Khalid Darweesh and Haider Sameer Abdulkhaleq Alshawi, who had been detained at JFK International Airport. On January 28, 2017, District Court Judge Ann Donnelly granted a temporary injunction against the immigration order, saying it was difficult to see any harm from allowing the newly arrived immigrants to remain in the country. In response to Trump&#x27;s order, the ACLU raised more than $24 million from more than 350,000 individual online donations in two days. This amounted to six times what the ACLU normally receives in online donations in a year. Celebrities donating included Chris Sacca (who offered to match other people&#x27;s donations and ultimately gave $150,000), Rosie O&#x27;Donnell, Judd Apatow, Sia, John Legend, and Adele. The number of members of the ACLU doubled in the time from the election to end of January to 1 million.

Grants and contributions increased from US$106 million reported by the 2016 year-end income statement to $274 million by the 2017 year-end statement. The segment&#x27;s primary revenue source came from individual contributions in response to the Trump presidency&#x27;s infringements on civil liberties. Besides filing more lawsuits than during previous presidential administrations, the ACLU has spent more money on advertisements and messaging as well, weighing in on elections and pressing political concerns. This increased public profile has drawn some accusations that the organization has become more politically partisan than in previous decades.

==== Israel–Palestine ====
In 2022, the ACLU petitioned the US Supreme Court to overturn an Arkansas law mandating that companies pledge not to boycott Israel in order to do business with the state.

During the Israel–Hamas war, the New York chapter of the ACLU sued Columbia University for banning its campus chapters of Jewish Voice for Peace and Students for Justice in Palestine on the grounds of First Amendment violations. In February 2024, the ACLU signed a letter to US Secretary of Education Miguel Cardona calling on him to reject redefining antisemitism to include political criticism of the government of the state of Israel, saying it would lead to First Amendment violations. The ACLU also rejected a staff petition urging the organization to oppose U.S. military aid to Israel and divest from potential financial ties to the country. In a 50-4 vote, with one abstention, the board stated that their mission focuses on U.S. civil rights, as an ACLU spokesperson stated &quot;it is not the ACLU&#x27;s practice to take positions on overseas conflicts.&quot; Nearly 700 staff members stated that the ACLU had previously taken stances on global issues like the Vietnam War and South African apartheid.

==== Social media ====
In 2024, the ACLU spoke out against governments banning the social media platform TikTok. The organization specifically condemned a U.S. House bill banning the platform in March 2024, calling the legislation &quot;unconstitutional.&quot; In December 2024, the ACLU criticized a federal appeals court ruling that upheld the law, claiming it &quot;sets a flawed and dangerous precedent, one that gives the government far too much power to silence Americans&#x27; speech online.&quot;

The ACLU has also lobbied against the Kids Online Safety Act, a bill meant to protect children online. The organization claims it would censor important conversations online, particularly among marginalized groups.

==See also==

* American Civil Rights Union
* British Columbia Civil Liberties Association
* Canadian Civil Liberties Association
* Common Cause
* Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression (FIRE)
* Institute for Justice
* Liberty, a British equivalent
* List of court cases involving the American Civil Liberties Union
* National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee
* Political freedom
* Southern Poverty Law Center
== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* Bodenhamer, David, and Ely, James, Editors (2008). &quot;The Bill of Rights in Modern America&quot;, second edition. Indiana University Press. .
* Donohue, William (1985). &quot;The Politics of the American Civil Liberties Union&quot;. Transaction Books. .
* Kaminer, Wendy (2009). &quot;Worst Instincts: Cowardice, Conformity, and the ACLU&quot;. Beacon Press. . A dissident member of the ACLU criticizes its post-9/11 actions as betraying the core principles of its founders.
* Lamson, Peggy (1976). &quot;Roger Baldwin: Founder of the American Civil Liberties Union&quot;. Houghton Mifflin Company. .
* Walker, Samuel (1990). &quot;In Defense of American Liberties: A History of the ACLU&quot;. Oxford University Press. .

==Further reading==
* Klein Woody, and Baldwin, Roger Nash (2006). &quot;Liberties lost: the endangered legacy of the ACLU&quot;. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2006. A collection of essays by Baldwin, each accompanied by commentary from a modern analyst.
* Krannawitter, Thomas L. and Palm, Daniel C. (2005). &quot;A Nation Under God?: The ACLU and religion in American politics&quot;. Rowman &amp; Littlefield.
* Sears, Alan, and Osten, Craig (2005). &quot;The ACLU vs America: Exposing the Agenda to Redefine Moral Values&quot;. B&amp;H Publishing Group.
* Smith, Frank LaGard (1996). &quot;ACLU: The Devil&#x27;s Advocate: The Seduction of Civil Liberties in America&quot;. Marcon Publishers.

===Archives===
* American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California records. 754 boxes. UCLA Library Special Collections.
* American Civil Liberties Union of Washington. 1917–2019. 188.31 cubic feet (including 13 microfilm reels and 1 videocassette) plus 62 cartons and 2 rolled posters. &quot;Labor Archives of Washington&quot;. University of Washington Special Collections.
* American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan: Detroit Branch Records 1952–1966. This collection documents the early years of the Detroit ACLU branch. The collection contains documents related to academic freedom; censorship; church and state; civil liberties; police brutality; HUAC; and legal assistance to prisoners. Walter P. Reuther Library, Detroit, Michigan.
* American Civil Liberties Union of Oakland County, Michigan 1970–1984. This collection illustrates that the branch was formed to address Oakland County jail conditions, lie detector use, senior housing rights, and attempts to reinstate the death penalty. Walter P. Reuther Library, Detroit, Michigan.
* American Civil Liberties Union Records, Princeton University. Document archive 1917–1950, including the history of the ACLU.
* Debs Pamphlet Collection , Indiana State University Library. An array of annual ACLU reports in PDF.
* List of 100 most important ACLU victories (through 2002) by New Hampshire Civil Liberties Union
* De-classified records on the ACLU, FBI

===Selected works sponsored or published by the ACLU===
* &quot;Annual Report – American Civil Liberties Union&quot;, American Civil Liberties Union, 1921.
* &quot;Black Justice&quot;, ACLU, 1931.
* &quot;How Americans Protest&quot;, American Civil Liberties Union, 1963.
* &quot;Secret detention by the Chicago police: a report&quot;, American Civil Liberties Union, 1959.
* &quot;Report on lawlessness in law enforcement&quot;, Wickersham Commission, Patterson Smith, 1931. This report was written by the ACLU but published under the auspices of the Wickersham Commission.
* Miller, Merle, (1952), &quot; The Judges and the Judged&quot;, Doubleday.
* &quot; ACLU organization records, 1947–1995&quot;. Princeton University Library, Mudd Manuscript Library.
* &quot;The Dangers of Domestic Spying by Federal Law Enforcement&quot;, American Civil Liberties Union, 2002.
* &quot;Engines of Liberty: The Power of Citizen Activists to Make Constitutional Law&quot;, David D. Cole, 2016

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="4" end="34" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="36" end="40" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="ACLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="67" end="79" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="155" end="171" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="177" end="188" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="303" end="318" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="429" end="442" title="amicus curiae" label="amicus curiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967012" start="449" end="455" title="brief (law)" label="briefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="743" end="756" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q17476" start="769" end="786" title="Same-sex marriage in the United States" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457816" start="795" end="826" title="LGBT adoption in the United States" label="right of LGBTQ+ people to adopt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536343" start="839" end="858" title="reproductive rights" label="reproductive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917008" start="867" end="880" title="Birth control in the United States" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q283681" start="885" end="900" title="Abortion in the United States" label="abortion rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282083" start="914" end="928" title="Discrimination in the United States" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="944" end="954" title="minority group" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="960" end="966" title="LGBT" label="LGBTQ+"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376105" start="975" end="1009" title="decarceration in the United States" label="decarceration in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247867" start="1022" end="1029" title="housing" label="housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="1034" end="1044" title="employment" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q193891" start="1055" end="1062" title="veteran" label="veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404298" start="1075" end="1098" title="Sex offender registry" label="sex offender registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q59717" start="1194" end="1213" title="Prisoners&amp;#x27; rights in the United States" label="rights of prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111391" start="1227" end="1234" title="Torture and the United States" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166064" start="1250" end="1280" title="Separation of church and state in the United States" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q105215625" start="1579" end="1593" title="Deborah Archer" label="Deborah Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568107" start="1598" end="1615" title="Anthony D. Romero" label="Anthony D. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822613" start="2009" end="2025" title="125 Broad Street" label="125 Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="2060" end="2075" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="2313" end="2323" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2435" end="2445" title="communism" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2512" end="2520" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="2521" end="2532" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q310694" start="2640" end="2654" title="Benjamin Spock" label="Benjamin Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="2697" end="2714" title="Watergate Scandal" label="Watergate Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="2804" end="2817" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q109743287" start="2922" end="2930" title="gag rule" label="gag rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="4548" end="4563" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="4568" end="4590" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124540" start="5470" end="5521" title="Civil Rights Attorney&amp;#x27;s Fees Award Act of 1976" label="Civil Rights Attorney&amp;#x27;s Fees Award Act of 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923590" start="5888" end="5933" title="Veterans&amp;#x27; Memorials, Boy Scouts, Public Seals, and Other Public Expressions of Religion Protection Act of 2006" label="Public Expressions of Religion Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="6206" end="6222" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="6351" end="6369" title="State of Tennessee" label="State of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q913583" start="7114" end="7130" title="Confederate flag" label="Confederate flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="8009" end="8025" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="8123" end="8160" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="8644" end="8702" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q465330" start="8708" end="8732" title="American Jewish Congress" label="American Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="8738" end="8775" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553262" start="8777" end="8795" title="Planned Parenthood" label="Planned Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="8801" end="8831" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378366" start="8837" end="8888" title="Americans United for Separation of Church and State" label="Americans United for Separation of Church and State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="8924" end="8932" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="8959" end="8969" title="communists" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="9014" end="9023" title="Neo-Nazis" label="Neo-Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="9052" end="9064" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="9104" end="9132" title="National Labor Relations Act" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="9296" end="9309" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q221689" start="9398" end="9409" title="Patriot Act" label="Patriot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q319072" start="9464" end="9477" title="Rush Limbaugh" label="Rush Limbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="9479" end="9493" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="9495" end="9505" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q431223" start="9510" end="9522" title="Oliver North" label="Oliver North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209674" start="9559" end="9571" title="Dick Gregory" label="Dick Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q114405" start="9573" end="9586" title="Rockwell Kent" label="Rockwell Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q310694" start="9591" end="9605" title="Benjamin Spock" label="Benjamin Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="9747" end="9759" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220222" start="9776" end="9791" title="Nation of Islam" label="Nation of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048570" start="9797" end="9836" title="North American Man/Boy Love Association" label="North American Man/Boy Love Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q692942" start="9842" end="9865" title="Westboro Baptist Church" label="Westboro Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q36248530" start="9873" end="9894" title="Unite the Right rally" label="Unite the Right rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q240625" start="10572" end="10581" title="501(c)(4)" label="501(c)(4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="10631" end="10640" title="501(c)(3)" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="10641" end="10655" title="public charity" label="public charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="10706" end="10718" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="11022" end="11030" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="11227" end="11243" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="11252" end="11263" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="11265" end="11275" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="11510" end="11519" title="501(c)(3)" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q240625" start="11597" end="11606" title="501(c)(4)" label="501(c)(4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743405" start="11855" end="11885" title="American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey" label="ACLU&amp;#x27;s New Jersey chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001120" start="11913" end="11937" title="New Jersey Supreme Court" label="New Jersey Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971518" start="12191" end="12222" title="National Civil Liberties Bureau" label="National Civil Liberties Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12256" end="12267" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945589" start="12271" end="12286" title="Crystal Eastman" label="Crystal Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439311" start="12314" end="12332" title="Roger Nash Baldwin" label="Roger Nash Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="12362" end="12379" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="12426" end="12448" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="13003" end="13061" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="13063" end="13068" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="13074" end="13096" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="13301" end="13317" title="Disfranchisement after Reconstruction era (United States)" label="disfranchisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523416" start="13774" end="13786" title="Garland Fund" label="Garland Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720491" start="13789" end="13814" title="Lucille Bernheimer Milner" label="Lucille Bernheimer Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="14238" end="14253" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091495" start="14259" end="14284" title="National Civic Federation" label="National Civic Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798786" start="14462" end="14482" title="Arthur Garfield Hays" label="Arthur Garfield Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q162820" start="14488" end="14501" title="Norman Thomas" label="Norman Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965711" start="14585" end="14598" title="Walter Nelles" label="Walter Nelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q44433852" start="14603" end="14616" title="Walter Pollak" label="Walter Pollak"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="14921" end="14926" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="15091" end="15103" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="15342" end="15371" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="government search and seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q839447" start="15380" end="15396" title="Privacy laws of the United States" label="right to privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="15401" end="15412" title="wiretapping" label="wiretapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="15458" end="15477" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q935427" start="16188" end="16202" title="John T. Scopes" label="John T. Scopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="16233" end="16242" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q642342" start="16256" end="16300" title="Scopes Trial" label="The State of Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q449791" start="16308" end="16323" title="Clarence Darrow" label="Clarence Darrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="16422" end="16444" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="16515" end="16526" title="creationism" label="creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009794" start="17024" end="17042" title="McLean v. Arkansas" label="McLean v. Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089030" start="17073" end="17113" title="Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District" label="Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="17558" end="17579" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565132" start="17700" end="17718" title="Gitlow v. New York" label="Gitlow v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888712" start="17735" end="17750" title="Benjamin Gitlow" label="Benjamin Gitlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="18002" end="18024" title="incorporation doctrine" label="incorporation doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101150" start="18122" end="18153" title="Oregon Compulsory Education Act" label="Oregon Compulsory Education Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="18242" end="18255" title="Public school (government funded)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439311" start="18284" end="18302" title="Roger Nash Baldwin" label="Roger Nash Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701933" start="18325" end="18337" title="Luke E. Hart" label="Luke E. Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645049" start="18376" end="18390" title="Supreme Knight of the Knights of Columbus" label="Supreme Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046799" start="18398" end="18417" title="Knights of Columbus" label="Knights of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191839" start="18631" end="18659" title="Pierce v. Society of Sisters" label="Pierce v. Society of Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="18669" end="18696" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="18750" end="18768" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="18776" end="18796" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q44433852" start="19342" end="19355" title="Walter Pollak" label="Walter Pollak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913689" start="19357" end="19369" title="Morris Ernst" label="Morris Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="19826" end="19839" title="H. L. Mencken" label="H. L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713514" start="19913" end="19929" title="American Mercury" label="American Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895062" start="20070" end="20110" title="United States v. One Book Called Ulysses" label="United States v. One Book Called Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="20196" end="20203" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="20213" end="20224" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370388" start="20382" end="20403" title="Roth v. United States" label="Roth v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815291" start="20420" end="20444" title="Memoirs v. Massachusetts" label="Memoirs v. Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122799" start="20463" end="20476" title="Comstock laws" label="Comstock laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779314" start="20604" end="20621" title="Mary Ware Dennett" label="Mary Ware Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q493155" start="20798" end="20810" title="Learned Hand" label="Learned Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028541" start="21179" end="21210" title="censorship in the United States" label="censorship in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097124" start="21329" end="21352" title="Stromberg v. California" label="Stromberg v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="21551" end="21569" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="21577" end="21591" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="14th amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="21637" end="21652" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984410" start="21663" end="21680" title="Near v. Minnesota" label="Near v. Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546654" start="21763" end="21778" title="prior restraint" label="prior restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="22010" end="22024" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638833" start="22137" end="22183" title="Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization" label="Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="22287" end="22311" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053354" start="23043" end="23064" title="Norris–La Guardia Act" label="Norris–La Guardia Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="23522" end="23536" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998346" start="23544" end="23565" title="Wickersham Commission" label="Wickersham Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q897793" start="23616" end="23641" title="Indian Reorganization Act" label="Indian Reorganization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q848745" start="23986" end="24006" title="institutional racism" label="institutional racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523416" start="24131" end="24143" title="Garland Fund" label="Garland Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q47010303" start="24201" end="24215" title="Margold Report" label="Margold Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974008" start="24328" end="24346" title="separate but equal" label="separate but equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="24718" end="24734" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="24965" end="24986" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="25015" end="25023" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967656" start="25218" end="25250" title="National Recovery Administration" label="National Recovery Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="25593" end="25597" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777143" start="26189" end="26210" title="The switch in time that saved nine" label="major shift in policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244462" start="26353" end="26371" title="De Jonge v. Oregon" label="De Jonge v. Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010472" start="26494" end="26509" title="Osmond Fraenkel" label="Osmond Fraenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051683" start="26524" end="26551" title="International Labor Defense" label="International Labor Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q459752" start="26828" end="26838" title="Hugo Black" label="Hugo Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391996" start="26840" end="26858" title="William O. Douglas" label="William O. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q887724" start="26864" end="26876" title="Frank Murphy" label="Frank Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q942386" start="26938" end="26953" title="Harlan F. Stone" label="Harlan F. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893240" start="27006" end="27044" title="United States v. Carolene Products Co." label="United States v. Carolene Products Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q213721" start="27176" end="27192" title="Robert F. Wagner" label="Robert F. Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="27206" end="27234" title="National Labor Relations Act" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="27528" end="27558" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="27635" end="27645" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798786" start="27897" end="27917" title="Arthur Garfield Hays" label="Arthur Garfield Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="29153" end="29177" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644869" start="29202" end="29237" title="United States Supreme Court cases involving Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="large number of Supreme Court cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986912" start="29597" end="29647" title="West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette" label="West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="29741" end="29753" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="30041" end="30045" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30348" end="30361" title="Popular Front#United States" label="Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="30419" end="30448" title="Communist Party USA" label="United States Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15436540" start="30738" end="30751" title="Harry F. Ward" label="Harry F. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744316" start="30802" end="30841" title="American League Against War and Fascism" label="American League Against War and Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="30874" end="30912" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541283" start="31563" end="31572" title="Smith Act" label="Smith Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586314" start="31753" end="31766" title="Harry Bridges" label="Harry Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q162820" start="31845" end="31858" title="Norman Thomas" label="Norman Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460850" start="31860" end="31878" title="John Haynes Holmes" label="John Haynes Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913689" start="31884" end="31896" title="Morris Ernst" label="Morris Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478543" start="32000" end="32014" title="Corliss Lamont" label="Corliss Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q463265" start="32020" end="32042" title="Elizabeth Gurley Flynn" label="Elizabeth Gurley Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q706147" start="33100" end="33114" title="Francis Biddle" label="Francis Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541283" start="33281" end="33290" title="Smith Act" label="Smith Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q162820" start="33516" end="33529" title="Norman Thomas" label="Norman Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="33531" end="33548" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550688" start="33888" end="33902" title="Social Justice (periodical)" label="Social Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q181249" start="33933" end="33952" title="Charles E. Coughlin" label="Charles E. Coughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751424" start="34016" end="34028" title="the Militant" label="the Militant"/>
<link wikidata="Q581177" start="34036" end="34059" title="Socialist Workers Party (United States)" label="Socialist Workers Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34068" end="34087" title="Boise Valley Herald" label="Boise Valley Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="34411" end="34442" title="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159918" start="34523" end="34543" title="Executive Order 9066" label="Executive Order 9066"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="34596" end="34613" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q159090" start="34663" end="34668" title="Issei" label="Issei"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="34686" end="34700" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585299" start="35450" end="35468" title="Gordon Hirabayashi" label="Gordon Hirabayashi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35593" end="35603" title="A.L. Wirin" label="A.L. Wirin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35627" end="35648" title="Ernest Kinzo Wakayama" label="Ernest Kinzo Wakayama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35854" end="35866" title="Ernest Besig" label="Ernest Besig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086883" start="35907" end="35921" title="Fred Korematsu" label="Fred Korematsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976433" start="35995" end="36008" title="Wayne M. Collins" label="Wayne Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843430" start="36588" end="36616" title="Hirabayashi v. United States" label="Hirabayashi v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="36951" end="36975" title="Amicus brief" label="&amp;quot;amicus&amp;quot; brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010472" start="37002" end="37017" title="Osmond Fraenkel" label="Osmond Fraenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050005" start="37219" end="37241" title="Yasui v. United States" label="Yasui v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419187" start="37448" end="37461" title="ex parte Endo" label="ex parte Endo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24307" start="37629" end="37655" title="Korematsu v. United States" label="Korematsu v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075164" start="38179" end="38193" title="Charles Antone Horsky" label="Charles Horsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q444278" start="38573" end="38584" title="coram nobis" label="coram nobis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174449" start="38631" end="38642" title="Peter Irons" label="Peter Irons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204751" start="39175" end="39205" title="Renunciation Act of 1944" label="renounced their US citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944942" start="39519" end="39547" title="Tule Lake Unit, World War II Valor in the Pacific National Monument" label="Tule Lake Segregation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="40055" end="40063" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419906" start="40945" end="40965" title="Executive Order 9835" label="Executive Order 9835"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419906" start="40985" end="41008" title="Federal Loyalty Program" label="Federal Loyalty Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864771" start="41600" end="41613" title="Hollywood Ten" label="Hollywood Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165041" start="41729" end="41749" title="contempt of Congress" label="contempt of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q111658718" start="41895" end="41904" title="blacklist" label="blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q541069" start="42242" end="42251" title="Jean Muir (actress)" label="Jean Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545067" start="42514" end="42532" title="Foley Square trial" label="Foley Square trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259108" start="42944" end="42967" title="Dennis v. United States" label="Dennis v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q887724" start="43334" end="43346" title="Frank Murphy" label="Frank Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626713" start="43351" end="43365" title="Wiley Rutledge" label="Wiley Rutledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q459752" start="43375" end="43385" title="Hugo Black" label="Hugo Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391996" start="43390" end="43408" title="William O. Douglas" label="William O. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="44375" end="44390" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="44400" end="44415" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147292" start="44925" end="44945" title="Patrick Murphy Malin" label="Patrick Murphy Malin"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="45763" end="45775" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020578" start="45944" end="45958" title="William Worthy" label="William Worthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q114405" start="45963" end="45976" title="Rockwell Kent" label="Rockwell Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="46153" end="46168" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="fifth amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920224" start="46188" end="46206" title="self-incrimination" label="self-incrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586786" start="46614" end="46629" title="Harry Slochower" label="Harry Slochower"/>
<link wikidata="Q162820" start="46908" end="46921" title="Norman Thomas" label="Norman Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137851" start="46926" end="46935" title="James Fly" label="James Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489054" start="47430" end="47442" title="Frank Porter Graham" label="Frank Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="47461" end="47489" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q353935" start="48384" end="48400" title="Edward R. Murrow" label="Edward R. Murrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="48579" end="48606" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974717" start="48844" end="48868" title="Watkins v. United States" label="Watkins v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050221" start="48885" end="48907" title="Yates v. United States" label="Yates v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541283" start="48944" end="48953" title="Smith Act" label="Smith Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482231" start="49099" end="49127" title="Lamont v. Postmaster General" label="Lamont v. Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478543" start="49162" end="49176" title="Corliss Lamont" label="Corliss Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378366" start="50412" end="50463" title="Americans United for Separation of Church and State" label="Americans United for Separation of Church and State"/>
<link wikidata="Q465330" start="50473" end="50497" title="American Jewish Congress" label="American Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417348" start="50544" end="50573" title="Everson v. Board of Education" label="Everson v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51193" end="51206" title="Samuel Walker (historian)" label="Samuel Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800439" start="51430" end="51460" title="McCollum v. Board of Education" label="McCollum v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377485" start="52139" end="52154" title="Engel v. Vitale" label="Engel v. Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432295" start="52281" end="52319" title="School Prayer Amendment" label="School Prayer Constitutional Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944162" start="53029" end="53043" title="Mutual Film Corp. v. Industrial Commission of Ohio" label="Mutual v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250653" start="53170" end="53181" title="L&amp;#x27;Amore (film)" label="The Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281824" start="53384" end="53414" title="Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson" label="Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273366" start="53498" end="53499" title="M (1951 film)" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196452" start="53516" end="53524" title="La Ronde (1950 film)" label="la Ronde"/>
<link wikidata="Q610292" start="53645" end="53660" title="Production Code" label="Production Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370388" start="53741" end="53772" title="Roth v. United States" label="important press censorship case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583905" start="53851" end="53862" title="Samuel Roth" label="Samuel Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501700" start="53934" end="53950" title="Tropic of Cancer (novel)" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469771" start="53967" end="53988" title="From Here to Eternity (novel)" label="From Here to Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="54285" end="54306" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="54322" end="54380" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q465330" start="54408" end="54432" title="American Jewish Congress" label="American Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="54530" end="54547" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="54625" end="54637" title="amicus brief" label="amicus brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="54667" end="54679" title="amicus brief" label="amicus brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="54701" end="54728" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54785" end="54799" title="public school (government funded)#United States" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349350" start="55103" end="55119" title="Reynolds v. Sims" label="Reynolds v. Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236102" start="55355" end="55372" title="Powell v. Alabama" label="Powell v. Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898664" start="55435" end="55449" title="Betts v. Brady" label="Betts v. Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354091" start="55502" end="55522" title="Rochin v. California" label="Rochin v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754149" start="56299" end="56311" title="Mapp v. Ohio" label="Mapp v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559684" start="56422" end="56442" title="Gideon v. Wainwright" label="Gideon v. Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397317" start="56558" end="56578" title="Escobedo v. Illinois" label="Escobedo v. Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642249" start="56673" end="56691" title="Miranda v. Arizona" label="Miranda v. Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q170079" start="56810" end="56819" title="Minor (law)" label="juveniles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011680" start="56855" end="56866" title="in re Gault" label="in re Gault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="57565" end="57571" title="sit in" label="sit in"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="57767" end="57777" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245839" start="57779" end="57801" title="prisoner&amp;#x27;s rights" label="prisoner&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="58180" end="58193" title="amicus briefs" label="amicus briefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604469" start="58704" end="58719" title="Greensboro sit-ins" label="staged a sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325637" start="58773" end="58788" title="sit-in movement" label="sit-in movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q538790" start="58992" end="59005" title="Freedom Riders" label="Freedom Rides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59019" end="59063" title="Civil rights movement#Integration of Mississippi universities, 1956–1965" label="integration of the University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935359" start="59069" end="59088" title="Birmingham campaign" label="Birmingham campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024031" start="59111" end="59125" title="Freedom Summer" label="Freedom Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081070" start="59824" end="59842" title="Charles Morgan Jr." label="Charles Morgan Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7996949" start="59945" end="59962" title="Whitus v. Georgia" label="Whitus v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515707" start="60000" end="60017" title="Lee v. Washington" label="Lee v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="60030" end="60053" title="Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction era" label="reforming election laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306998" start="60138" end="60149" title="Julian Bond" label="Julian Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941328" start="60159" end="60172" title="Bond v. Floyd" label="Bond v. Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494564" start="60190" end="60222" title="Georgia House of Representatives" label="Georgia House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="60474" end="60486" title="Green Berets" label="Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209674" start="60725" end="60737" title="Dick Gregory" label="Dick Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086182" start="60841" end="60859" title="Gregory v. Chicago" label="Gregory v. Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379902" start="61143" end="61157" title="draft resister" label="draft resister"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="61210" end="61248" title="Watergate scandal" label="potential impeachment of Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="61308" end="61314" title="Censorship" label="censor"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="61392" end="61402" title="draft card" label="draft card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893418" start="61828" end="61857" title="United States v. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="United States v. O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808335" start="62100" end="62158" title="Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District" label="Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040" start="62455" end="62469" title="James Meredith" label="James Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623063" start="62484" end="62502" title="Street v. New York" label="Street v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141332" start="62886" end="62905" title="Cohen v. California" label="Cohen v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="63118" end="63130" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956667" start="63288" end="63307" title="Brandenburg v. Ohio" label="Brandenburg v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q310694" start="63494" end="63508" title="Benjamin Spock" label="Benjamin Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="64380" end="64400" title="Kent State shootings" label="Kent State shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="65276" end="65294" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9724" start="65379" end="65394" title="Pentagon Papers" label="Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014761" start="65457" end="65492" title="New York Times Co. v. United States" label="New York Times Co. v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="65815" end="65828" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711778" start="66267" end="66298" title="Impeachment process against Richard Nixon" label="impeachment inquiry against him"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802687" start="66824" end="66835" title="Aryeh Neier" label="Aryeh Neier"/>
<link wikidata="Q318143" start="67762" end="67772" title="Abe Fortas" label="Abe Fortas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808335" start="67870" end="67890" title="Tinker v. Des Moines" label="Tinker v. Des Moines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587461" start="68056" end="68069" title="Goss v. Lopez" label="Goss v. Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092097" start="68480" end="68506" title="O&amp;#x27;Connor v. Donaldson" label="O&amp;#x27;Connor v. Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q120719251" start="68866" end="68878" title="Billie Boggs" label="Billie Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="69183" end="69199" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69432" end="69446" title="Phil Hirschkop" label="Phil Hirschkop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69513" end="69547" title="Virginia State Penitentiary strike" label="Virginia State Penitentiary strike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69598" end="69616" title="Landman v. Royster" label="Landman v. Royster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69786" end="69809" title="National Prison Project" label="National Prison Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378820" start="69871" end="69886" title="Ruiz v. Estelle" label="Ruiz v. Estelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="69952" end="69963" title="United States Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245748" start="69976" end="70004" title="Prison Litigation Reform Act" label="Prison Litigation Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q429923" start="70290" end="70312" title="Equal Rights Amendment" label="Equal Rights Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967556" start="70479" end="70510" title="National Organization for Women" label="National Organization for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306724" start="70555" end="70567" title="Reed v. Reed" label="Reed v. Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506056" start="70581" end="70604" title="Frontiero v. Richardson" label="Frontiero v. Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690204" start="70623" end="70642" title="Taylor v. Louisiana" label="Taylor v. Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561609" start="70663" end="70677" title="Harriet Pilpel" label="Harriet Pilpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q664194" start="70781" end="70791" title="LGBT rights in the United States" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q371025" start="71524" end="71535" title="Larry Craig" label="Larry Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412414" start="72091" end="72104" title="King v. Smith" label="King v. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370501" start="72634" end="72663" title="abstinence-only sex education" label="abstinence-only sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207275" start="72764" end="72811" title="Poe v. Lynchburg Training School &amp;amp; Hospital" label="Poe v. Lynchburg Training School &amp;amp; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891943" start="72852" end="72864" title="Buck v. Bell" label="Buck v. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73307" end="73323" title="Walker v. Pierce" label="Walker v. Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="73335" end="73361" title="United States courts of appeals" label="federal circuit court case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="73405" end="73413" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876208" start="73523" end="73543" title="Hodgson v. Minnesota" label="Hodgson v. Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="73573" end="73586" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="73835" end="73839" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="73871" end="73883" title="Amicus curiae" label="amicus brief"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73893" end="73931" title="Curtis v. School Committee of Falmouth" label="Curtis v. School Committee of Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q839447" start="74592" end="74608" title="Privacy laws of the United States" label="right to privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="74645" end="74660" title="United States Constitution" label="US Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207276" start="74739" end="74752" title="Poe v. Ullman" label="Poe v. Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053373" start="74860" end="74883" title="Griswold v. Connecticut" label="Griswold v. Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="75060" end="75078" title="Opposition to the legalization of abortion" label="anti-abortion laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="75190" end="75207" title="Support for the legalization of abortion" label="right to abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893512" start="75255" end="75278" title="United States v. Vuitch" label="United States v. Vuitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="75465" end="75476" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="75597" end="75617" title="interracial marriage" label="interracial marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345835" start="75640" end="75658" title="Loving v. Virginia" label="Loving v. Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429774" start="75915" end="75940" title="Fair Credit Reporting Act" label="Fair Credit Reporting Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433102" start="76028" end="76069" title="Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act" label="Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246010" start="76138" end="76154" title="Privacy Act of 1974" label="1974 Privacy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="76319" end="76331" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330176" start="76615" end="76632" title="judicial activism" label="judicial activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="76717" end="76728" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053373" start="76745" end="76768" title="Griswold v. Connecticut" label="Griswold v. Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102599" start="76788" end="76812" title="Original intent" label="intention of the authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="76868" end="76894" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76922" end="76939" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="76969" end="76984" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978512" start="77100" end="77135" title="National Socialist Party of America" label="National Socialist Party of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246732" start="77144" end="77156" title="Frank Collin" label="Frank Collin"/>
<link wikidata="Q985536" start="77181" end="77197" title="Skokie, Illinois" label="Skokie, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="77375" end="77398" title="Nazi concentration camp" label="Nazi concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123536" start="77586" end="77602" title="village attorney" label="village attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895452" start="77751" end="77776" title="National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie" label="NSPA v. Village of Skokie"/>
<link wikidata="Q275445" start="77878" end="77899" title="Jewish Defense League" label="Jewish Defense League"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="77904" end="77926" title="Anti Defamation League" label="Anti Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401697" start="78420" end="78449" title="First inauguration of Ronald Reagan" label="inauguration of Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="78485" end="78529" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="eight-year period of conservative leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="78558" end="78564" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="78641" end="78649" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009794" start="78818" end="78836" title="McLean v. Arkansas" label="McLean v. Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="78928" end="78945" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015136" start="78953" end="78971" title="New York v. Ferber" label="New York v. Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q246748" start="79057" end="79083" title="three prong obscenity test" label="three prong obscenity test"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="79268" end="79294" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79311" end="79328" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="79353" end="79375" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="79376" end="79391" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313418" start="79752" end="79790" title="Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union" label="Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q23749400" start="79832" end="79841" title="indecency" label="indecency"/>
<link wikidata="Q366701" start="79860" end="79886" title="Communications Decency Act" label="Communications Decency Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="79960" end="79975" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q83058" start="80335" end="80339" title="Spamming" label="spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377037" start="80472" end="80488" title="compelled speech" label="compelled speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280290" start="80616" end="80644" title="Direct Marketing Association (USA)" label="Direct Marketing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059580" start="80653" end="80688" title="Center for Democracy and Technology" label="Center for Democracy and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="80737" end="80761" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368455" start="80897" end="80904" title="opt-out" label="opt-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008702" start="80965" end="80973" title="CAN-SPAM Act of 2003" label="CAN-SPAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072991" start="81010" end="81025" title="Chilling effect (term)" label="chilling effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443015" start="81191" end="81218" title="Second Amendment Foundation" label="Second Amendment Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q521550" start="81683" end="81696" title="Google Images" label="Google Images"/>
<link wikidata="Q692942" start="81839" end="81862" title="Westboro Baptist Church" label="Westboro Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498823" start="81867" end="81887" title="Shirley Phelps-Roper" label="Shirley Phelps-Roper"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151447" start="82811" end="82830" title="McCullen v. Coakley" label="McCullen v. Coakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841819" start="82946" end="82970" title="viewpoint discrimination" label="viewpoint discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="83000" end="83012" title="amicus brief" label="amicus brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092602" start="83022" end="83044" title="Citizens United v. FEC" label="Citizens United v. FEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904291" start="83069" end="83099" title="Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act" label="Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="83777" end="83789" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684557" start="83874" end="83889" title="Adopt-a-Highway" label="Adopt-a-Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="84141" end="84154" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="84168" end="84185" title="identity politics" label="identity politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="84187" end="84208" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="84214" end="84227" title="progressivism" label="progressivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="84344" end="84361" title="identity politics" label="identity politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36248530" start="84504" end="84542" title="Unite the Right rally" label="2017 Unite the Right rally in Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="85982" end="86012" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q43272805" start="86374" end="86390" title="Jeremy W. Peters" label="Jeremy W. Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q251251" start="86719" end="86748" title="Boy Scouts of America v. Dale" label="Boy Scouts of America v. Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="86810" end="86831" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643587" start="86950" end="86962" title="Lambda Legal" label="Lambda Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971347" start="86971" end="87005" title="National Center for Lesbian Rights" label="National Center for Lesbian Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847744" start="87183" end="87203" title="In re Marriage Cases" label="In re Marriage Cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="87215" end="87239" title="California Supreme Court" label="California Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q589889" start="87332" end="87345" title="California Proposition 8 (2008)" label="Proposition 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643587" start="87388" end="87400" title="Lambda Legal" label="Lambda Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971347" start="87409" end="87443" title="National Center for Lesbian Rights" label="National Center for Lesbian Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q589889" start="87460" end="87473" title="California Proposition 8 (2008)" label="Proposition 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864711" start="87513" end="87533" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Filter Me" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Filter Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="87554" end="87558" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="87567" end="87586" title="Internet censorship" label="Internet censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="87590" end="87604" title="American public schools" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147419" start="87702" end="87726" title="Collins v. United States" label="Collins v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q135475" start="87827" end="87858" title="don&amp;#x27;t ask, don&amp;#x27;t tell" label="don&amp;#x27;t ask, don&amp;#x27;t tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="88323" end="88343" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="88419" end="88428" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221689" start="88459" end="88470" title="Patriot Act" label="Patriot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="88559" end="88570" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374304" start="88603" end="88631" title="cruel and unusual punishment" label="cruel and unusual punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q221689" start="89021" end="89032" title="Patriot Act" label="Patriot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197019" start="89046" end="89055" title="Domestic Security Enhancement Act of 2003" label="PATRIOT 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150854" start="89230" end="89255" title="Combined Federal Campaign" label="Combined Federal Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743404" start="89592" end="89634" title="American Civil Liberties Union v. Ashcroft" label="American Civil Liberties Union v. Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214089" start="89654" end="89670" title="Nicholas Merrill" label="Nicholas Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="89684" end="89709" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777765" start="89778" end="89802" title="national security letter" label="national security letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134118" start="89941" end="89950" title="gag order" label="gag order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743407" start="90068" end="90079" title="ACLU v. NSA" label="ACLU v. NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023116" start="90165" end="90205" title="NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–2007)" label="NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–2007)"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="90405" end="90409" title="George W. Bush" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791366" start="90870" end="90893" title="state secrets privilege" label="state secrets privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="90954" end="90962" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="90967" end="90974" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735001" start="91127" end="91142" title="Muslim-American" label="Muslim-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804767" start="91198" end="91217" title="Ashcroft v. al-Kidd" label="Ashcroft v. al-Kidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q311141" start="91270" end="91283" title="John Ashcroft" label="John Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="91306" end="91323" title="American military" label="American military"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056534" start="91372" end="91406" title="Bagram Theater Internment Facility" label="Bagram Theater Internment Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="91522" end="91548" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="91743" end="91752" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="91824" end="91869" title="United States Department of Homeland Security" label="United States Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q97516262" start="91879" end="91907" title="2020 deployment of federal forces in the United States" label="deployment of federal forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="91932" end="91953" title="George Floyd protests" label="George Floyd protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q95966035" start="92063" end="92091" title="George Floyd protests in Portland, Oregon" label="protests in Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20121517" start="92244" end="92256" title="Donald Trump presidential campaign, 2016" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q28543928" start="92533" end="92548" title="Executive Order 13769" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q18685770" start="93078" end="93090" title="Ann Donnelly" label="Ann Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107961" start="93519" end="93530" title="Chris Sacca" label="Chris Sacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q272929" start="93614" end="93634" title="Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q325396" start="93636" end="93647" title="Judd Apatow" label="Judd Apatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q181484" start="93649" end="93652" title="Sia" label="Sia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44857" start="93654" end="93665" title="John Legend" label="John Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="93671" end="93676" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="93868" end="93884" title="income statement" label="income statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="94070" end="94085" title="civil liberty" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="94650" end="94666" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="94706" end="94725" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900848" start="94761" end="94783" title="Jewish Voice for Peace" label="Jewish Voice for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627966" start="94788" end="94821" title="Students for Justice in Palestine" label="Students for Justice in Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q104244043" start="94940" end="94954" title="Miguel Cardona" label="Miguel Cardona"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275512" start="94980" end="95003" title="Working definition of antisemitism" label="redefining antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="95101" end="95116" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="95758" end="95764" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q121335795" start="96197" end="96219" title="Kids Online Safety Act" label="Kids Online Safety Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743411" start="96391" end="96418" title="American Civil Rights Union" label="American Civil Rights Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969683" start="96421" end="96465" title="British Columbia Civil Liberties Association" label="British Columbia Civil Liberties Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029859" start="96468" end="96504" title="Canadian Civil Liberties Association" label="Canadian Civil Liberties Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197252" start="96507" end="96519" title="Common Cause" label="Common Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006246" start="96522" end="96569" title="Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression" label="Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039446" start="96579" end="96600" title="Institute for Justice" label="Institute for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189606" start="96603" end="96610" title="Liberty (advocacy group)" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614422" start="96635" end="96699" title="List of court cases involving the American Civil Liberties Union" label="List of court cases involving the American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972420" start="96702" end="96746" title="National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee" label="National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="96749" end="96766" title="Political freedom" label="Political freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="96769" end="96796" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744091" start="97000" end="97016" title="William A. Donohue" label="Donohue, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567250" start="97112" end="97126" title="Wendy Kaminer" label="Kaminer, Wendy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636199" start="98972" end="98997" title="Walter P. Reuther Library" label="Walter P. Reuther Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636199" start="99274" end="99299" title="Walter P. Reuther Library" label="Walter P. Reuther Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="99685" end="99688" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1955" wikidata="Q11463" url="?curid=1955" title="Adobe Inc.">
<text>Adobe Inc. ( ), formerly Adobe Systems Incorporated, is an American computer software company based in San Jose, California. It offers a wide range of programs from web design tools, photo manipulation and vector creation, through to video/audio editing, mobile app development, print layout and animation software. It has historically specialized in software for the creation and publication of a wide range of content, including graphics, photography, illustration, animation, multimedia/video, motion pictures, and print. Its flagship products include Adobe Photoshop image editing software; Adobe Illustrator vector-based illustration software; Adobe Acrobat Reader and the Portable Document Format (PDF); and a host of tools primarily for audio-visual content creation, editing and publishing. Adobe offered a bundled solution of its products named Adobe Creative Suite, which evolved into a subscription software as a service (SaaS) offering named Adobe Creative Cloud. The company also expanded into digital marketing software and in 2021 was considered one of the top global leaders in Customer Experience Management (CXM).

Adobe was founded in December 1982 by John Warnock and Charles Geschke, who established the company after leaving Xerox PARC to develop and sell the PostScript page description language. In 1985, Apple Computer licensed PostScript for use in its LaserWriter printers, which helped spark the desktop publishing revolution. Adobe later developed animation and multimedia through its acquisition of Macromedia, from which it acquired Macromedia Flash; video editing and compositing software with Adobe Premiere, later known as Adobe Premiere Pro; low-code web development with Adobe Muse; and a suite of software for digital marketing management.

 Adobe has more than 26,000 employees worldwide. Adobe also has major development operations in the United States in Newton, New York City, Arden Hills, Lehi, Seattle, Austin and San Francisco. It also has major development operations in Noida and Bangalore in India. The company has long been the dominant tech firm in design and creative software, despite attracting criticism for its policies and practices particularly around Adobe Creative Cloud&#x27;s switch to subscription only pricing and its early termination fees for its most promoted Creative Cloud plan, the latter of which attracted a joint civil lawsuit from the US Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice in 2024.

==History==
===PostScript (1982–1986)===
The company was started in John Warnock&#x27;s garage. The name of the company, Adobe, comes from Adobe Creek in Los Altos, California, a stream which ran behind Warnock&#x27;s house. That creek is named because of the type of clay found there (Adobe being a Spanish word for &quot;Mudbrick&quot;). Adobe&#x27;s corporate logo features a stylized &quot;A&quot; and was designed by graphic designer Marva Warnock, John Warnock&#x27;s wife. Steve Jobs attempted to buy the company for $5 million in 1982, but Warnock and Geschke refused. Their investors urged them to work something out with Jobs, so they agreed to sell him shares worth 19 percent of the company. Jobs paid a five-times multiple of their company&#x27;s valuation at the time, plus a five-year license fee for PostScript, in advance. The purchase and advance made Adobe the first company in the history of Silicon Valley to become profitable in its first year.

Warnock and Geschke considered various business options including a copy-service business and a turnkey system for office printing. Then they chose to focus on developing specialized printing software and created the Adobe PostScript page description language.

PostScript was the first international standard for computer printing as it included algorithms describing the letter-forms of many languages. Adobe added kanji printer products in 1988. Warnock and Geschke were also able to bolster the credibility of PostScript by connecting with a typesetting manufacturer. They weren&#x27;t able to work with Compugraphic, but then worked with Linotype to license the Helvetica and Times Roman fonts (through the Linotron 100). By 1987, PostScript had become the industry-standard printer language with more than 400 third-party software programs and licensing agreements with 19 printer companies.

Adobe&#x27;s first products after PostScript were digital fonts which they released in a proprietary format called Type 1, worked on by Bill Paxton after he left Stanford. Apple subsequently developed a competing standard, TrueType, which provided full scalability and precise control of the pixel pattern created by the font&#x27;s outlines, and licensed it to Microsoft.

=== Introduction of creative software (1986–1996) ===
Starting in the mid-1980s, Adobe entered the consumer software market, starting with Adobe Illustrator, a vector-based drawing program for the Apple Macintosh. Illustrator, which grew out of the firm&#x27;s in-house font-development software, helped popularize PostScript-enabled laser printers. By the mid-1990s, Adobe would either develop or acquire Photoshop from John and Thomas Knoll, FrameMaker from Frame Technology Corporation, and After Effects and PageMaker from Aldus, as well as develop Adobe Premiere, later known as Premiere Pro, in-house, initially releasing it in 1991. Around the same time as the development of Illustrator, Adobe entered the NASDAQ Composite index in August 1986.

=== PDFs and file formats (1993–1999) ===
In 1993, Adobe introduced the Portable Document Format, commonly shortened to the initialism PDF, and its Adobe Acrobat and Reader software. Warnock originally developed the PDF under a code name, &quot;The Camelot Project&quot;, using PostScript technology to create a widely available digital document format, able to display text, raster graphics, vector graphics, and fonts. Adobe kept the PDF as a proprietary file format from its introduction until 2008, when the PDF became an ISO international standard under ISO number ISO 32000-1:2008, though the PDF file format was free for viewers since its introduction.

With its acquisition of Aldus, in addition to gaining PageMaker and After Effects, Adobe gained control over the TIFF file format for images.

===Creative Suite and the Macromedia acquisition (2000–2009)===
The 2000s saw various developments for the company. Its first notable acquisition in the decade was in 2002, when Adobe acquired Canadian company Accelio, also known as JetForm. In May 2003, Adobe purchased audio editing and multitrack recording software Cool Edit Pro from Syntrillium Software for $16.5 million, as well as a large loop library called &quot;Loopology&quot;. Adobe then renamed Cool Edit Pro to Adobe Audition.

It was in 2003 that the company introduced the first version of Adobe Creative Suite, bundling its creative software into a single package. The first version of Creative Suite introduced InDesign (the successor to PageMaker), Illustrator, Photoshop, ImageReady and InCopy, with the 2005 second edition of Creative Suite including an updated version of Adobe Acrobat, Premiere Pro, GoLive, the file manager Adobe Bridge, and Adobe Dreamweaver, the latter of which was acquired from a $3.4 billion acquisition of Macromedia, most notably.

In addition to bringing in Dreamweaver, the $3.4 billion Macromedia acquisition, completed as a stock swap, added ColdFusion, Contribute, Captivate, Breeze (rebranded as Adobe Connect), Director, Fireworks, Flash, FlashPaper, Flex, FreeHand, HomeSite, JRun, Presenter, and Authorware to Adobe&#x27;s product line.

By April 2008, Adobe released Adobe Media Player. On April 27, Adobe discontinued the development and sales of its older HTML/web development software, GoLive, in favor of Dreamweaver. Adobe offered a discount on Dreamweaver for GoLive users and supports those who still use GoLive with online tutorials and migration assistance. On June 1, Adobe launched Acrobat.com, a series of web applications geared for collaborative work. Creative Suite 4, which includes Design, Web, Production Premium, and Master Collection came out in October 2008 in six configurations at prices from about US$1,700 to $2,500 or by individual application. The Windows version of Photoshop includes 64-bit processing. On December 3, 2008, Adobe laid off 600 of its employees (8% of the worldwide staff) citing the weak economic environment.

On September 15, 2009, Adobe Systems announced that it would acquire online marketing and web analytics company Omniture for $1.8 billion. The deal was completed on October 23, 2009. Former Omniture products were integrated into the Adobe Marketing Cloud.

On November 10, 2009, the company laid off a further 680 employees.

===End of Flash, security breach, and employee compensation class action (2010–2014)===

Adobe&#x27;s 2010 was marked by continuing arguments with Apple over the latter&#x27;s non-support for Adobe Flash on its iPhone, iPad and other products. Former Apple CEO Steve Jobs claimed that Flash was not reliable or secure enough, while Adobe executives have argued that Apple wishes to maintain control over the iOS platform. In April 2010, Steve Jobs published a post titled &quot;Thoughts on Flash&quot; where he outlined his thoughts on Flash and the rise of HTML5.
In July 2010, Adobe bought Day Software integrating their line of CQ Products: WCM, DAM, SOCO, and Mobile

In January 2011, Adobe acquired DemDex, Inc. with the intent of adding DemDex&#x27;s audience-optimization software to its online marketing suite. At Photoshop World 2011, Adobe unveiled a new mobile photo service. Carousel was a new application for iPhone, iPad, and Mac that used Photoshop Lightroom technology to allow users to adjust and fine-tune images on all platforms. Carousel also allowed users to automatically sync, share and browse photos. The service was later renamed &quot;Adobe Revel&quot;. Later that same year in October, Adobe acquired Nitobi Software, the maker of the mobile application development framework &quot;PhoneGap&quot;. As part of the acquisition, the source code of PhoneGap was submitted to the Apache Foundation, where it became Apache Cordova.

In November 2011, Adobe announced that they would cease development of Flash for mobile devices following version 11.1. Instead, it would focus on HTML5 for mobile devices. In December 2011, Adobe announced that it had entered into a definitive agreement to acquire privately held Efficient Frontier.

In December 2012, Adobe opened a new corporate campus in Lehi, Utah.

In 2013, Adobe endured a major security breach. Vast portions of the source code for the company&#x27;s software were stolen and posted online and over 150 million records of Adobe&#x27;s customers were made readily available for download. In 2012, about 40 million sets of payment card information were compromised by a hack at Adobe.

A class-action lawsuit alleging that the company suppressed employee compensation was filed against Adobe, and three other Silicon Valley–based companies in a California federal district court in 2013. In May 2014, it was revealed the four companies, Adobe, Apple, Google, and Intel had reached an agreement with the plaintiffs, 64,000 employees of the four companies, to pay a sum of $324.5 million to settle the suit.

=== Adobe Creative Cloud (Since 2011) ===
2011 saw the company first introduce Adobe Creative Cloud, a $600/year subscription plan to its creative software as opposed to a one-time perpetual license payment which could often top $2000 for creative professionals. The initial launch of Creative Cloud alongside Creative Suite 5 users came at the same time that Adobe ran into controversy from users of Adobe&#x27;s creative software, with users of Adobe software stating that the original perpetual and subscription pricing plans for CS5 would be unaffordable for not only individuals but also businesses, as well as refusing to extend a Creative Suite 6 discount to non-CS5 users. The original announcement of Adobe Creative Cloud was met with a positive reception from CNET journalists as a much more enticing plan, and Creative Cloud was first released in 2012, though a later CNET survey evidenced that more users had a negative perception about subscription creative software than a positive view. The original pricing plan for Creative Cloud was $75 per month for the entire suite of software, though Adobe discounted the monthly cost to $50 for users willing to commit to at least one year of continuous subscription for Creative Cloud, and down to $30 per month for former CS users with the one year commitment.

By 2013, Adobe decided that CS6 would be the last version of Creative Suite software that would be sold through perpetual licensing option, and in May announced that a Creative Cloud subscription would be the only way to get the newest versions of Photoshop, Illustrator, and other Adobe creative software. Reception to the mandatory subscriptions for future Adobe software was mostly negative, despite some positive testimonies on the move from customers and Adobe&#x27;s attraction of 500,000 Creative Cloud subscribers by the service&#x27;s first year. The switch to subscription only also did not deter software piracy of Creative Cloud services; within the first day of the first version of Photoshop exclusively made for Creative Cloud being released, cracked versions of Adobe Photoshop CC 2013 were found on The Pirate Bay, an online website used for distributing pirated software.

=== Further acquisitions and failed buyout of Figma (2018–2023) ===
In March 2018, at Adobe Summit, the company and Nvidia announced their association to upgrade their AI and profound learning innovations. They planned to streamline Adobe Sensei AI and machine learning structure for Nvidia GPUs. Adobe and Nvidia had cooperated for 10 years on GPU quickening. This incorporates Sensei-powered features, e.g. auto lip-sync in Adobe Character Animator CC and face-aware editing in Photoshop CC, and also cloud-based AI/ML items and features, for example, picture investigation for Adobe Stock and Lightroom CC and auto-labeling in Adobe Experience Supervisor.

Adobe further spent its time from 2018 to 2023 acquiring more companies to boost both Creative Cloud and the Adobe Experience Cloud, a software suite which increased business. These included e-commerce services provider Magento Commerce from private equity firm Permira for $1.68 billion in June 2018, Marketo for $4.75 billion in 2018, Allegorithmic in 2019 for just under $160 million, and Workfront in December 2020 for $1.5 billion. 2021 additionally saw Adobe add payment services to its e-commerce platforms in an attempt to compete with Shopify, accepting both credit cards and PayPal.

In July 2020, as the United States presidential elections approached, the software giant imposed a ban on the political ads features on its digital advertising sales platform.

On November 9, 2020, Adobe announced it would spend US$1.5 billion to acquire Workfront, a provider of marketing collaboration software. The acquisition was completed in early December 2020.

On August 19, 2021, Adobe announced it had entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Frame.io, a leading cloud-based video collaboration platform. The transaction is valued at $1.275 billion and closed during the fourth quarter of Adobe&#x27;s 2021 fiscal year.

Adobe announced a $20 billion acquisition of Figma, an Adobe XD competitor, in September 2022, its largest to date. Regulatory scrutiny from the US and European Union began shortly after due to concerns that Adobe, already a major player in the design software market with XD, would have too much control if it also owned Figma. At the time of the announcement to acquire Figma, Adobe&#x27;s share over the creative software market and design-software market was almost a monopoly. In December 2023, the two companies called off their merger, citing the regulatory challenges as a sign to both that the deal was not likely to be approved. Adobe paid Figma a $1 billion termination fee per their merger agreement.

===FTC lawsuit and terms of service update (2024–present)===
On June 17, 2024, the US Federal Trade Commission together with the US Department of Justice filed a lawsuit against Adobe for its subscription business model practice, citing hidden termination fees and the company pushing customers towards more expensive plans.

In June 2024, after facing backlash for its changes to the terms of service, Adobe updated them to explicitly pledge it will not use customer data to train its AI models.

==Products==
Adobe&#x27;s currently supported roster of software, online services and file formats comprises the following ():




=== Formats ===
Portable Document Format (PDF), PDF&#x27;s predecessor PostScript, ActionScript, Shockwave Flash (SWF), Flash Video (FLV), and &quot;Filmstrip&quot; (.flm)

=== Web-hosted services ===
Adobe Color, Photoshop Express, Acrobat.com, Behance and Adobe Express.

=== Adobe Renderer ===
Adobe Media Encoder

=== Adobe Stock ===
A microstock agency that presently provides over 57 million high-resolution, royalty-free images and videos available to license (via subscription or credit purchase methods). In 2015, Adobe acquired Fotolia, a stock content marketplace founded in 2005 by Thibaud Elziere, Oleg Tscheltzoff, and Patrick Chassany which operated in 23 countries. It was run as a stand-alone website until 2019, but has since been integrated into Adobe Stock.

=== Adobe Experience Platform ===
A family of content, development, and customer relationship management products, with what Adobe calls the &quot;next generation&quot; of its Sensei artificial intelligence and machine learning framework, introduced in March 2019.

== Criticisms ==
===Pricing===
Adobe has been criticized for its pricing practices, with retail prices being up to twice as much in non-US countries.

After Adobe revealed the pricing for the Creative Suite 3 Master Collection, which was £1,000 higher for European customers, a petition to protest over &quot;unfair pricing&quot; was published and signed by 10,000 users. In June 2009, Adobe further increased its prices in the UK by 10% in spite of weakening of the pound against the dollar, and UK users were not allowed to buy from the US store.

Adobe&#x27;s Reader and Flash programs were listed on &quot;The 10 most hated programs of all time&quot; article by &quot;TechRadar&quot;.

=== Security ===
Hackers have exploited vulnerabilities in Adobe programs, such as Adobe Reader, to gain unauthorized access to computers. Adobe&#x27;s Flash Player has also been criticized for, among other things, suffering from performance, memory usage and security problems. A report by security researchers from Kaspersky Lab criticized Adobe for producing the products having top 10 security vulnerabilities.

Observers noted that Adobe was spying on its customers by including spyware in the Creative Suite 3 software and quietly sending user data to a firm named Omniture. When users became aware, Adobe explained what the suspicious software did and admitted that they: &quot;could and should do a better job taking security concerns into account&quot;. When a security flaw was later discovered in Photoshop CS5, Adobe sparked outrage by saying it would leave the flaw unpatched, so anyone who wanted to use the software securely would have to pay for an upgrade. Following a fierce backlash Adobe decided to provide the software patch.

Adobe has been criticized for pushing unwanted software including third-party browser toolbars and free virus scanners, usually as part of the Flash update process, and for pushing a third-party scareware program designed to scare users into paying for unneeded system repairs.

===Customer data breach===
On October 3, 2013, the company initially revealed that 2.9 million customers&#x27; sensitive and personal data was stolen in a security breach which included encrypted credit card information. Adobe later admitted that 38 million active users have been affected and the attackers obtained access to their IDs and encrypted passwords, as well as to many inactive Adobe accounts. The company did not make it clear if all the personal information was encrypted, such as email addresses and physical addresses, though data privacy laws in 44 states require this information to be encrypted.

In late 2013 a 3.8 GB file stolen from Adobe and containing 152 million usernames, reversibly encrypted passwords and unencrypted password hints was posted on AnonNews.org. LastPass, a password security firm, said that Adobe failed to use best practices for securing the passwords and has not salted them. Another security firm, Sophos, showed that Adobe used a weak encryption method permitting the recovery of a lot of information with very little effort. According to IT expert Simon Bain, Adobe has failed its customers and &#x27;should hang their heads in shame&#x27;.

Many of the credit cards were tied to the Creative Cloud software-by-subscription service. Adobe offered its affected US customers a free membership in a credit monitoring service, but no similar arrangements have been made for non-US customers. When a data breach occurs in the US, penalties depend on the state where the victim resides, not where the company is based.

After stealing the customers&#x27; data, cyber-thieves also accessed Adobe&#x27;s source code repository, likely in mid-August 2013. Because hackers acquired copies of the source code of Adobe proprietary products, they could find and exploit any potential weaknesses in its security, computer experts warned. Security researcher Alex Holden, chief information security officer of Hold Security, characterized this Adobe breach, which affected Acrobat, ColdFusion and numerous other applications, as &quot;one of the worst in US history&quot;. Adobe also announced that hackers stole parts of the source code of Photoshop, which according to commentators could allow programmers to copy its engineering techniques and would make it easier to pirate Adobe&#x27;s expensive products.

Published on a server of a Russian-speaking hacker group, the &quot;disclosure of encryption algorithms, other security schemes, and software vulnerabilities can be used to bypass protections for individual and corporate data&quot; and may have opened the gateway to new generation zero-day attacks. Hackers already used ColdFusion exploits to make off with usernames and encrypted passwords of PR Newswire&#x27;s customers, which has been tied to the Adobe security breach. They also used a ColdFusion exploit to breach Washington state court and expose up to 200,000 Social Security numbers.

===Anti-competitive practices===
In 1994, Adobe acquired Aldus Corp., a software vendor that sold FreeHand, a competing product. FreeHand was direct competition to Adobe Illustrator, Adobe&#x27;s flagship vector-graphics editor. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) intervened and forced Adobe to sell FreeHand back to Altsys, and also banned Adobe from buying back FreeHand or any similar program for the next 10 years (1994–2004). Altsys was then bought by Macromedia, which released versions 5 to 11. When Adobe acquired Macromedia in December 2005, it stalled development of FreeHand in 2007, effectively rendering it obsolete. With FreeHand and Illustrator, Adobe controlled the only two products that compete in the professional illustration program market for Macintosh operating systems.

In 2011, a group of 5,000 FreeHand graphic designers convened under the banner &quot;Free FreeHand&quot;, and filed a civil antitrust complaint in the US District Court for the Northern District of California against Adobe. The suit alleged that:

&quot;Adobe has violated federal and state antitrust laws by abusing its dominant position in the professional vector graphic illustration software market [...] Adobe has engaged in a series of exclusionary and anti-competitive acts and strategies designed to kill FreeHand, the dominant competitor to Adobe&#x27;s Illustrator software product, instead of competing on the basis of product merit according to the principals of free market capitalism.&quot;

Adobe had no response to the claims and the lawsuit was eventually settled. The FreeHand community believes Adobe should release the product to an open-source community if it cannot update it internally.

, on its FreeHand product page, Adobe stated, &quot;While we recognize FreeHand has a loyal customer base, we encourage users to migrate to the new Adobe Illustrator CS4 software which supports both PowerPC and Intel–based Macs and Microsoft Windows XP and Windows Vista.&quot; , the FreeHand page no longer exists; instead, it simply redirects to the Illustrator page. Adobe&#x27;s software FTP server still contains a directory for FreeHand, but it is empty.

=== Cancellation fees ===
In April 2021, Adobe received criticism from Twitter users for the company&#x27;s cancellation fees after a customer shared a tweet showing they had been charged a $291.45 cancellation fee for their Adobe Creative Cloud subscription. Many also showed their cancellation fees for Adobe Creative Cloud, with this leading to many encouraging piracy of Adobe products and/or purchase of alternatives with lower prices or using free and open-source software instead. Furthermore, there have been reports that with changing subscriptions it is possible to avoid paying this fee.

The U.S. Department of Justice and the FTC filed a lawsuit against Adobe and two of its executives in June 2024, alleging that the company&#x27;s deceptive subscription practices and cancellation policies violated the Restore Online Shoppers&#x27; Confidence Act. According to the lawsuit, the company purportedly used small text disclosures, optional input fields, and complex web of links to obscure a concealed early termination fee. This fee reportedly amounted to fifty percent of the remaining value of annual contracts for users who chose to cancel early in the first year, resulting in significant penalties. Customers who tried to cancel services by contacting customer service faced obstacles, including dropped calls and multiple transfers between representatives; others continued to be billed by Adobe, under the mistaken belief that they had successfully ended their subscriptions.

=== 2024 terms of service update ===
On June 5, 2024, Adobe updated their terms of service (TOS) for Photoshop stating &quot;we may access your content through both manual and automated methods, such as for content review.&quot; This sparked outrage with Adobe users, as the new terms implied that the users&#x27; work would be used to train Adobe&#x27;s generative AI, even if the work was under a non-disclosure agreement (NDA).

Adobe responded the following day clarifying that they will not use user data to train generative AI or take users work as their own; however, they neglected to respond to the part in the TOS that gives Adobe the ability to view or use work that is contracted under an NDA.

==See also==
* Adobe MAX
* Digital rights management (DRM)
* List of acquisitions by Adobe
* &quot;United States v. Elcom Ltd.&quot;

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="0" end="10" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="25" end="51" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe Systems Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="68" end="85" title="software" label="computer software"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="103" end="123" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="555" end="570" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Adobe Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="595" end="612" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Adobe Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q207902" start="655" end="669" title="Acrobat Reader" label="Acrobat Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="678" end="702" title="Portable Document Format" label="Portable Document Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q360118" start="854" end="874" title="Adobe Creative Suite" label="Adobe Creative Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254596" start="910" end="931" title="software as a service" label="software as a service"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="954" end="974" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Adobe Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344392" start="1171" end="1183" title="John Warnock" label="John Warnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959209" start="1188" end="1203" title="Charles Geschke" label="Charles Geschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="1247" end="1257" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="1282" end="1292" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197154" start="1293" end="1318" title="page description language" label="page description language"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="1329" end="1343" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499906" start="1379" end="1390" title="LaserWriter" label="LaserWriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="1424" end="1442" title="desktop publishing" label="desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q234946" start="1529" end="1539" title="Macromedia" label="Macromedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="1564" end="1580" title="Adobe Flash" label="Macromedia Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q360424" start="1626" end="1640" title="Adobe Premiere" label="Adobe Premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q360424" start="1657" end="1675" title="Adobe Premiere Pro" label="Adobe Premiere Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589910" start="1677" end="1685" title="Low-code development platform" label="low-code"/>
<link wikidata="Q360299" start="1707" end="1717" title="Adobe Muse" label="Adobe Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49196" start="1895" end="1901" title="Newton, Massachusetts" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1903" end="1916" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q519815" start="1918" end="1929" title="Arden Hills, Minnesota" label="Arden Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010595" start="1931" end="1935" title="Lehi, Utah" label="Lehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="1937" end="1944" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="1946" end="1952" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1957" end="1970" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q278204" start="2016" end="2021" title="Noida" label="Noida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="2026" end="2035" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="2407" end="2434" title="US Federal Trade Commission" label="US Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="2443" end="2469" title="U.S. Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683974" start="2619" end="2630" title="Adobe Creek (Santa Clara County)" label="Adobe Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q864124" start="2634" end="2643" title="Los Altos, California" label="Los Altos"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="2736" end="2752" title="Adobe" label="the type of clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="2960" end="2970" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="4381" end="4391" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="4397" end="4409" title="digital font" label="digital font"/>
<link wikidata="Q785247" start="4462" end="4468" title="Type 1 font" label="Type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q42426634" start="4483" end="4494" title="Bill Paxton (computer scientist)" label="Bill Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="4570" end="4578" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="4639" end="4644" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="4709" end="4718" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="4860" end="4877" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Adobe Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="4881" end="4887" title="vector graphics" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="4918" end="4933" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="5127" end="5136" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313" start="5142" end="5146" title="John Knoll" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q617053" start="5151" end="5163" title="Thomas Knoll" label="Thomas Knoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440655" start="5165" end="5175" title="Adobe FrameMaker" label="FrameMaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q83380" start="5215" end="5228" title="Adobe After Effects" label="After Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q360355" start="5233" end="5242" title="Adobe PageMaker" label="PageMaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339044" start="5248" end="5253" title="Aldus Corporation" label="Aldus"/>
<link wikidata="Q360424" start="5274" end="5288" title="Adobe Premiere Pro" label="Adobe Premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q575782" start="5435" end="5457" title="NASDAQ Composite" label="NASDAQ Composite index"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="5547" end="5571" title="PDF" label="Portable Document Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q207902" start="5623" end="5647" title="Adobe Acrobat" label="Adobe Acrobat and Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="6001" end="6004" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="6045" end="6061" title="PDF" label="ISO 32000-1:2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q215106" start="6249" end="6253" title="TIFF" label="TIFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188748" start="6512" end="6519" title="JetForm" label="JetForm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="6676" end="6680" title="loop (music)" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q360044" start="6755" end="6769" title="Adobe Audition" label="Adobe Audition"/>
<link wikidata="Q360118" start="6836" end="6856" title="Adobe Creative Suite" label="Adobe Creative Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068393" start="7178" end="7190" title="Adobe Bridge" label="Adobe Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q192324" start="7196" end="7213" title="Adobe Dreamweaver" label="Adobe Dreamweaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q234946" start="7283" end="7293" title="Macromedia" label="Macromedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091455" start="7406" end="7416" title="stock swap" label="stock swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q468446" start="7424" end="7434" title="Adobe ColdFusion" label="ColdFusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191002" start="7436" end="7446" title="Adobe Contribute" label="Contribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q360071" start="7448" end="7457" title="Adobe Captivate" label="Captivate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551337" start="7480" end="7493" title="Adobe Connect" label="Adobe Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q360109" start="7496" end="7504" title="Adobe Director" label="Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q360187" start="7506" end="7515" title="Adobe Fireworks" label="Fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="7517" end="7522" title="Adobe Flash" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325617" start="7524" end="7534" title="FlashPaper" label="FlashPaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q616759" start="7536" end="7540" title="Adobe Flex" label="Flex"/>
<link wikidata="Q851356" start="7542" end="7550" title="Adobe FreeHand" label="FreeHand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883043" start="7552" end="7560" title="Adobe HomeSite" label="HomeSite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927805" start="7568" end="7577" title="Adobe Presenter" label="Presenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108362" start="7583" end="7593" title="Adobe Authorware" label="Authorware"/>
<link wikidata="Q360295" start="7655" end="7673" title="Adobe Media Player" label="Adobe Media Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="7746" end="7750" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q360232" start="7777" end="7783" title="Adobe GoLive" label="GoLive"/>
<link wikidata="Q192324" start="7797" end="7808" title="Adobe Dreamweaver" label="Dreamweaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823478" start="7981" end="7992" title="Acrobat.com" label="Acrobat.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="8006" end="8021" title="web application" label="web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="8416" end="8441" title="Great Recession" label="weak economic environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090416" start="8556" end="8564" title="Omniture" label="Omniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927817" start="8677" end="8698" title="Adobe Marketing Cloud" label="Adobe Marketing Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="8981" end="8987" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="8989" end="8993" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="9306" end="9311" title="Adobe Flash" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="9328" end="9333" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="9710" end="9713" title="Mac (computer)" label="Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="10032" end="10050" title="mobile application" label="mobile application"/>
<link wikidata="Q489709" start="10172" end="10189" title="Apache Foundation" label="Apache Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16626338" start="10207" end="10221" title="Apache Cordova" label="Apache Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010595" start="10583" end="10593" title="Lehi, Utah" label="Lehi, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="10935" end="10955" title="class-action lawsuit" label="class-action lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989177" start="11019" end="11038" title="High-Tech Employee Antitrust Litigation" label="filed against Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="11056" end="11070" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="11191" end="11196" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="11210" end="11215" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="11433" end="11453" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Adobe Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546711" start="13281" end="13296" title="Online piracy" label="software piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22663" start="13490" end="13504" title="The Pirate Bay" label="The Pirate Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="13681" end="13687" title="Nvidia" label="Nvidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="13856" end="13860" title="Graphics processing unit" label="GPUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927817" start="14334" end="14356" title="Adobe Experience Cloud" label="Adobe Experience Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884012" start="14445" end="14461" title="Magento" label="Magento Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q662030" start="14487" end="14494" title="Permira" label="Permira"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770934" start="14527" end="14534" title="Marketo" label="Marketo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812278" start="14617" end="14626" title="Workfront" label="Workfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501150" start="14769" end="14776" title="Shopify" label="Shopify"/>
<link wikidata="Q483959" start="14810" end="14816" title="PayPal" label="PayPal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812278" start="15074" end="15083" title="Workfront" label="Workfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q96186334" start="15501" end="15506" title="Figma" label="Figma"/>
<link wikidata="Q24060074" start="15511" end="15519" title="Adobe XD" label="Adobe XD"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="16253" end="16280" title="US Federal Trade Commission" label="US Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="16299" end="16323" title="US Department of Justice" label="US Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214489" start="16555" end="16571" title="terms of service" label="terms of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278300" start="16629" end="16642" title="customer data" label="customer data"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="16656" end="16658" title="AI" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="16815" end="16839" title="Portable Document Format" label="Portable Document Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="16870" end="16880" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q234657" start="16882" end="16894" title="ActionScript" label="ActionScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q594447" start="16913" end="16916" title="SWF" label="SWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135858" start="16919" end="16930" title="Flash Video" label="Flash Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="17013" end="17030" title="Photoshop Express" label="Photoshop Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823478" start="17032" end="17043" title="Acrobat.com" label="Acrobat.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880667" start="17045" end="17052" title="Behance" label="Behance"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446850" start="17057" end="17071" title="Adobe Spark" label="Adobe Express."/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="17096" end="17115" title="Adobe Media Encoder" label="Adobe Media Encoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931699" start="17139" end="17149" title="microstock" label="microstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q207902" start="18407" end="18413" title="Adobe Reader" label="Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="18418" end="18423" title="Adobe Flash" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q611515" start="18516" end="18525" title="TechRadar" label="TechRadar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18673" end="18723" title="Flash player#Criticism" label="Adobe&amp;#x27;s Flash Player has also been criticized"/>
<link wikidata="Q489943" start="18851" end="18864" title="Kaspersky Lab" label="Kaspersky Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="19018" end="19025" title="spyware" label="spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090416" start="19105" end="19113" title="Omniture" label="Omniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="19725" end="19730" title="Adobe Flash" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522059" start="19777" end="19786" title="scareware" label="scareware"/>
<link wikidata="Q456632" start="20403" end="20407" title="data privacy" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247836" start="20408" end="20419" title="privacy law" label="privacy law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418462" start="20650" end="20658" title="LastPass" label="LastPass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500258" start="20770" end="20776" title="Salt (cryptography)" label="salted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934568" start="20806" end="20812" title="Sophos" label="Sophos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241181" start="20839" end="20854" title="weak encryption" label="weak encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="20948" end="20950" title="Information technology" label="IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="21094" end="21108" title="Creative Cloud" label="Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172486" start="21305" end="21316" title="data breach" label="data breach"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="21506" end="21517" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="21565" end="21572" title="Hacker (computer security)" label="hackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="21617" end="21628" title="proprietary software" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963181" start="21754" end="21765" title="Alex Holden" label="Alex Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q207902" start="21868" end="21875" title="Adobe Acrobat" label="Acrobat"/>
<link wikidata="Q468446" start="21877" end="21887" title="ColdFusion" label="ColdFusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="22036" end="22045" title="Photoshop" label="Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801262" start="22251" end="22263" title="hacker group" label="hacker group"/>
<link wikidata="Q846726" start="22489" end="22504" title="zero-day attack" label="zero-day attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q376399" start="22602" end="22613" title="PR Newswire" label="PR Newswire"/>
<link wikidata="Q851356" start="22931" end="22939" title="Adobe FreeHand" label="FreeHand"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="22966" end="22983" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Adobe Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="23035" end="23059" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q234946" start="23259" end="23269" title="Macromedia" label="Macromedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q851356" start="23379" end="23387" title="Adobe FreeHand" label="FreeHand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546711" start="25335" end="25341" title="Online piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="25419" end="25439" title="free and open-source" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="25574" end="25600" title="U.S. Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q126708814" start="25788" end="25832" title="Restore Online Shoppers&amp;#x27; Confidence Act" label="Restore Online Shoppers&amp;#x27; Confidence Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214489" start="26541" end="26557" title="terms of service" label="terms of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053818" start="26866" end="26890" title="non-disclosure agreement" label="non-disclosure agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683991" start="27189" end="27198" title="Adobe MAX" label="Adobe MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="27201" end="27226" title="Digital rights management" label="Digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834405" start="27235" end="27264" title="List of acquisitions by Adobe" label="List of acquisitions by Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893277" start="27273" end="27300" title="United States v. Elcom Ltd." label="United States v. Elcom Ltd."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1957" wikidata="Q621647" url="?curid=1957" title="Alexander Technique">
<text>The Alexander Technique, named after its developer Frederick Matthias Alexander (1869–1955), is an alternative therapy based on the idea that poor posture causes a range of health problems. The American National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health classifies it as a &quot;psychological and physical&quot; complementary approach to health when used &quot;together with&quot; mainstream conventional medicine.

Alexander began developing his technique&#x27;s principles in the 1890s to address his own voice loss during public speaking. He credited his method with allowing him to pursue his passion for performing Shakespearean recitations.

Proponents and teachers of the Alexander Technique believe the technique can address a variety of health conditions, but there is a lack of research to support the claims. , the UK National Health Service and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) cite evidence that the Alexander Technique may be helpful for long-term back pain and for long-term neck pain, and that it could help people cope with Parkinson&#x27;s disease. Both the American health-insurance company Aetna and the Australian Department of Health have conducted reviews and concluded that there is insufficient evidence for the technique&#x27;s health claims to warrant insurance coverage.

== Method ==

The Alexander Technique is most commonly taught in a series of private lessons which may last from 30 minutes to an hour. The number of lessons varies widely, depending on the student&#x27;s needs and level of interest. Students are often performers, such as actors, dancers, musicians, athletes and public speakers, people who work on computers, or those who are in frequent pain for other reasons. Instructors observe their students, and provide both verbal and gentle manual guidance to help students learn how to move with better poise and less strain. Sessions include chair work – often in front of a mirror – during which the instructor will guide the student while the student stands, sits and walks, learning to move efficiently while maintaining a comfortable relationship between the head, neck, and spine, and table work or physical manipulation.

In the United Kingdom, there is no regulation for who can offer Alexander Technique services. Professional organisations do exist, however, typically offering three-year courses to people becoming instructors.

==History==

The Alexander Technique is based on the personal observations of Frederick Matthias Alexander (1869–1955). Alexander&#x27;s career as an actor was hampered by recurrent bouts of laryngitis, but he found he could overcome it by focusing on his discomfort and tension, and relaxing. Alexander also thought posture could be improved if a person became more conscious of their bodily movements.

While on a recital tour in New Zealand (1895), Alexander came to believe in the wider significance of improved carriage for overall physical functioning, although evidence from his own publications appears to indicate it happened less systematically and over a long period of time.

Alexander did not originally conceive of his technique as therapy, but it has become a form of alternative medicine.

When considering how to classify the Alexander Technique in relation to mainstream medicine, some sources describe it as alternative and/or complementary, depending on whether it is used alone or with mainstream methods. The American National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health classifies it as a &quot;psychological and physical&quot; complementary approach to health when used with mainstream methods. When used &quot;in place of&quot; conventional medicine, it is considered &quot;alternative&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;NCCIH3/10/2023&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

===Influence===

The American philosopher and educator John Dewey became impressed with the Alexander Technique after his headaches, neck pains, blurred vision, and stress symptoms largely improved during the time he used Alexander&#x27;s advice to change his posture. In 1923, Dewey wrote the introduction to Alexander&#x27;s &quot;Constructive Conscious Control of the Individual&quot;.

Fritz Perls, who originated Gestalt therapy, credited Alexander as an inspiration for his psychological work.

==Uses==

The Alexander Technique is used as a therapy for stress-related chronic conditions. It does not attempt to cure the underlying cause, but to teach people how to avoid bad habits which might exacerbate their condition.

The Technique is used as an alternative treatment to improve both voice and posture for people in the performing arts. it was on the curriculum of prominent Western performing arts institutions.

According to Alexander Technique instructor Michael J. Gelb, people tend to study the Alexander Technique for reasons of personal development.

==Health effects==

The UK National Health Service says that advocates of the Alexander Technique made claims for it that were not supported by evidence, but that there was evidence suggesting that it might help with chronic back or neck pain. According to the NHS, Alexander technique may be of benefit for people with Parkinson disease. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines state that people with Parkinson disease who are experiencing balance or motor function problems should consider the Alexander Technique along with disease-specific physiotherapy. There is limited evidence for chronic pain, stammering, and balance skills in older people. There was no good evidence of benefit for other conditions including asthma, headaches, osteoarthritis, difficulty sleeping, and stress.

A 2012 Cochrane systematic review found that there is no good evidence that the Alexander Technique is effective for treating asthma, and randomized clinical trials are needed in order to assess the effectiveness of this type of treatment approach.

A review published in &quot;BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine&quot; in 2014 focused on &quot;the evidence for the effectiveness of AT sessions on musicians&#x27; performance, anxiety, respiratory function and posture&quot; concluded that &quot;evidence from RCTs and CTs suggests that AT sessions may improve performance anxiety in musicians. Effects on music performance, respiratory function and posture yet remain inconclusive.&quot;

A 2015 review, conducted for the Australian Department of Health in order to determine what services the Australian government should pay for, examined clinical trials published to date and found that &quot;overall, the evidence was limited by the small number of participants in the intervention arms, wide confidence intervals or a lack of replication of results.&quot; It concluded that &quot;the Alexander Technique may improve short-term pain and disability in people with low back pain, but the longer-term effects remain uncertain. For all other clinical conditions, the effectiveness of the Alexander Technique was deemed to be uncertain, due to insufficient evidence.&quot; It also noted that &quot;evidence for the safety of Alexander Technique was lacking, with most trials not reporting on this outcome.&quot; Subsequently, in 2017, the Australian government named the Alexander Technique as a practice that would not qualify for insurance subsidy, saying this step would &quot;ensure taxpayer funds are expended appropriately and not directed to therapies lacking evidence&quot;.

A review by Aetna last updated in 2021 stated: &quot;Aetna considers the following alternative medicine interventions experimental and investigational because there is inadequate evidence in the peer-reviewed published medical literature of their effectiveness.&quot; The Alexander Technique is included in that list.

==See also==

* Nikolai Bernstein
* George E. Coghill
* Motor skill consolidation
* Neutral spine
* Psychomotor learning

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q621647" start="4" end="23" title="Alexander Technique" label="Alexander Technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356117" start="51" end="79" title="Frederick Matthias Alexander" label="Frederick Matthias Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="99" end="118" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115812481" start="142" end="154" title="poor posture" label="poor posture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278030" start="203" end="259" title="National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health" label="National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="318" end="331" title="complementary medicine" label="complementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q836379" start="513" end="523" title="voice loss" label="voice loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="626" end="639" title="Shakespearean" label="Shakespearean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680700" start="640" end="650" title="recitation" label="recitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="835" end="858" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="867" end="916" title="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence" label="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5781808" start="996" end="1005" title="back pain" label="back pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567802" start="1024" end="1033" title="neck pain" label="neck pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="1075" end="1099" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q26049" start="1144" end="1149" title="Aetna" label="Aetna"/>
<link wikidata="Q113588161" start="1158" end="1189" title="Department of Health (Australia)" label="Australian Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269526" start="2184" end="2205" title="physical manipulation" label="physical manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194557" start="2610" end="2620" title="laryngitis" label="laryngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="3202" end="3222" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="3365" end="3378" title="complementary medicine" label="complementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278030" start="3459" end="3515" title="National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health" label="National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="3852" end="3862" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930803" start="3942" end="3956" title="blurred vision" label="blurred vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750" start="4187" end="4198" title="Fritz Perls" label="Fritz Perls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4215" end="4230" title="Gestalt therapy" label="Gestalt therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="4629" end="4644" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831417" start="4767" end="4782" title="Michael J. Gelb" label="Michael J. Gelb"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998095" start="4844" end="4864" title="personal development" label="personal development"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="4894" end="4917" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="5187" end="5204" title="Parkinson disease" label="Parkinson disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="5210" end="5259" title="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence" label="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="5301" end="5318" title="Parkinson disease" label="Parkinson disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="5619" end="5625" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="5627" end="5635" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q62736" start="5638" end="5652" title="osteoarthritis" label="osteoarthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="5654" end="5673" title="insomnia" label="difficulty sleeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="5695" end="5703" title="Cochrane (organisation)" label="Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="5704" end="5721" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5966" end="6008" title="BioMed Central#Journals" label="BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26049" start="7491" end="7496" title="Aetna" label="Aetna"/>
<link wikidata="Q705001" start="7814" end="7831" title="Nikolai Bernstein" label="Nikolai Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538722" start="7834" end="7851" title="George E. Coghill" label="George E. Coghill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918155" start="7854" end="7879" title="Motor skill consolidation" label="Motor skill consolidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115812481" start="7882" end="7895" title="Neutral spine" label="Neutral spine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256440" start="7898" end="7918" title="Psychomotor learning" label="Psychomotor learning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1960" wikidata="Q464471" url="?curid=1960" title="Andrea Alciato">
<text>Andrea Alciato (8 May 149212 January 1550), commonly known as Alciati (Andreas Alciatus), was an Italian jurist and writer. He is regarded as the founder of the French school of legal humanists.

==Biography==

Alciati was born in Alzate Brianza, near Milan, and settled in France in the early 16th century. He displayed great literary skill in his exposition of the laws, and was one of the first to interpret the civil law by the history, languages and literature of antiquity, and to substitute original research for the servile interpretations of the glossators. He published many legal works, and some annotations on Tacitus and accumulated a sylloge of Roman inscriptions from Milan and its territories, as part of his preparation for his history of Milan, written in 1504–05.

Among his several appointments, Alciati taught law at the University of Bourges between 1529 and 1535. It was Guillaume Budé who encouraged the call to Bourges at the time. Pierre Bayle, in his General Dictionary (article &quot;Alciat&quot;), relates that he greatly increased his salary there, by the &quot;stratagem&quot; of arranging to get a job offer from the University of Bologna and using it as a negotiation point .

Alciati is most famous for his &quot;Emblemata,&quot; published in dozens of editions from 1531 onward. This collection of short Latin verse texts and accompanying woodcuts created an entire European genre, the emblem book, which attained enormous popularity in continental Europe and Great Britain.

Alciati died at Pavia in 1550. His heir, Francesco Alciati, commissioned a huge mausoleum in the Church of S. Epifanio.

==Works==
* &quot;Annotationes in tres libros Codicis&quot; (1515)
* &quot;Emblematum libellus&quot; (1531)
* &quot;Opera omnia&quot; (Basel 1546–49)
* &quot;Rerum Patriae, seu Historiae Mediolanensis, Libri IV&quot; (Milan, 1625) a history of Milan, written in 1504–05.
* &quot;De formula Romani Imperii&quot; (Basilae: Ioannem Oporinum, 1559, &quot;editio princeps&quot;)

==Bibliography==
* Andrea Alciato, &quot;Il libro degli emblemi secondo le edizioni del 1531 e del 1534&quot;, with Introduction, Italian translation and commentary by Mino Gabriele (Milan: Adelphi, 2009; second revised edition 2015) ISBN 978-88-459-2967-0
* William S. Heckscher, &quot;The Princeton Alciati Companion. A Glossary of Neo-Latin words and phrases used by Andrea Alciati and the emblem book writers of his time, including a bibliography of secondary sources relevant to the study of Alciati&#x27;s emblems&quot; (New York: Garland, 1989) ISBN 0-8240-3715-4

==Quotation==
==References==
==External links==
*Alciato at Glasgow – Reproductions of 22 editions of Alciato&#x27;s emblems from 1531 to 1621
*Description, Reproduction and translation Memorial University of Newfoundland
*Emblemata Latin text, Antwerp 1577, full digital facsimile, CAMENA Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q464471" start="0" end="14" title="Andrea Alciato" label="Andrea Alciato"/>
<link wikidata="Q464471" start="62" end="69" title="Andrea Alciato" label="Alciati"/>
<link wikidata="Q464471" start="71" end="87" title="Andrea Alciato" label="Andreas Alciatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="105" end="111" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948805" start="178" end="193" title="legal humanists" label="legal humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q244038" start="231" end="245" title="Alzate Brianza" label="Alzate Brianza"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="252" end="257" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="415" end="424" title="civil law (common law)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906114" start="469" end="478" title="antiquities" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="622" end="629" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495994" start="842" end="863" title="University of Bourges" label="University of Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q353668" start="894" end="908" title="Guillaume Budé" label="Guillaume Budé"/>
<link wikidata="Q214816" start="957" end="969" title="Pierre Bayle" label="Pierre Bayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531829" start="978" end="996" title="General Dictionary, Historical and Critical" label="General Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="1149" end="1170" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342127" start="1247" end="1256" title="Emblemata" label="Emblemata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496542" start="1339" end="1350" title="Latin verse" label="Latin verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128336" start="1421" end="1432" title="emblem book" label="emblem book"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1484" end="1490" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="1495" end="1508" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="1527" end="1532" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440898" start="1552" end="1569" title="Francesco Alciati" label="Francesco Alciati"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="1591" end="1600" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342127" start="1707" end="1726" title="Emblemata" label="Emblematum libellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249682" start="1983" end="1998" title="editio princeps" label="editio princeps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1962" wikidata="Q124313" url="?curid=1962" title="Apparent magnitude">
<text>Apparent magnitude () is a measure of the brightness of a star, astronomical object or other celestial objects like artificial satellites. Its value depends on its intrinsic luminosity, its distance, and any extinction of the object&#x27;s light caused by interstellar dust along the line of sight to the observer.

Unless stated otherwise, the word &quot;magnitude&quot; in astronomy usually refers to a celestial object&#x27;s apparent magnitude. The magnitude scale likely dates to before the ancient Roman astronomer Claudius Ptolemy, whose star catalog popularized the system by listing stars from 1st magnitude (brightest) to 6th magnitude (dimmest). The modern scale was mathematically defined to closely match this historical system by Norman Pogson in 1856.

The scale is reverse logarithmic: the brighter an object is, the lower its magnitude number. A difference of 1.0 in magnitude corresponds to the brightness ratio of formula_1, or about 2.512. For example, a magnitude 2.0 star is 2.512 times as bright as a magnitude 3.0 star, 6.31 times as magnitude 4.0, and 100 times magnitude 7.0.

The brightest astronomical objects have negative apparent magnitudes: for example, Venus at −4.2 or Sirius at −1.46. The faintest stars visible with the naked eye on the darkest night have apparent magnitudes of about +6.5, though this varies depending on a person&#x27;s eyesight and with altitude and atmospheric conditions. The apparent magnitudes of known objects range from the Sun at −26.832 to objects in deep Hubble Space Telescope images of magnitude +31.5.

The measurement of apparent magnitude is called photometry. Photometric measurements are made in the ultraviolet, visible, or infrared wavelength bands using standard passband filters belonging to photometric systems such as the UBV system or the Strömgren &quot;uvbyβ&quot; system. Measurement in the V-band may be referred to as the apparent visual magnitude.

Absolute magnitude is a related quantity which measures the luminosity that a celestial object emits, rather than its apparent brightness when observed, and is expressed on the same reverse logarithmic scale. Absolute magnitude is defined as the apparent magnitude that a star or object would have if it were observed from a distance of . Therefore, it is of greater use in stellar astrophysics since it refers to a property of a star regardless of how close it is to Earth. But in observational astronomy and popular stargazing, references to &quot;magnitude&quot; are understood to mean apparent magnitude.

Amateur astronomers commonly express the darkness of the sky in terms of limiting magnitude, i.e. the apparent magnitude of the faintest star they can see with the naked eye. This can be useful as a way of monitoring the spread of light pollution.

Apparent magnitude is technically a measure of illuminance, which can also be measured in photometric units such as lux.

== History ==

The scale used to indicate magnitude originates in the Hellenistic practice of dividing stars visible to the naked eye into six &quot;magnitudes&quot;. The brightest stars in the night sky were said to be of first magnitude ( = 1), whereas the faintest were of sixth magnitude ( = 6), which is the limit of human visual perception (without the aid of a telescope). Each grade of magnitude was considered twice the brightness of the following grade (a logarithmic scale), although that ratio was subjective as no photodetectors existed. This rather crude scale for the brightness of stars was popularized by Ptolemy in his &quot;Almagest&quot; and is generally believed to have originated with Hipparchus. This cannot be proved or disproved because Hipparchus&#x27;s original star catalogue is lost. The only preserved text by Hipparchus himself (a commentary to Aratus) clearly documents that he did not have a system to describe brightness with numbers: He always uses terms like &quot;big&quot; or &quot;small&quot;, &quot;bright&quot; or &quot;faint&quot; or even descriptions such as &quot;visible at full moon&quot;.

In 1856, Norman Robert Pogson formalized the system by defining a first magnitude star as a star that is 100 times as bright as a sixth-magnitude star, thereby establishing the logarithmic scale still in use today. This implies that a star of magnitude is about 2.512 times as bright as a star of magnitude . This figure, the fifth root of 100, became known as Pogson&#x27;s Ratio. The &quot;1884 Harvard Photometry&quot; and 1886 &quot;Potsdamer Duchmusterung&quot; star catalogs popularized Pogson&#x27;s ratio, and eventually it became a de facto standard in modern astronomy to describe differences in brightness.

Defining and calibrating what magnitude 0.0 means is difficult, and different types of measurements which detect different kinds of light (possibly by using filters) have different zero points. Pogson&#x27;s original 1856 paper defined magnitude 6.0 to be the faintest star the unaided eye can see, but the true limit for faintest possible visible star varies depending on the atmosphere and how high a star is in the sky. The &quot;Harvard Photometry&quot; used an average of 100 stars close to Polaris to define magnitude 5.0. Later, the Johnson UVB photometric system defined multiple types of photometric measurements with different filters, where magnitude 0.0 for each filter is defined to be the average of six stars with the same spectral type as Vega. This was done so the color index of these stars would be 0. Although this system is often called &quot;Vega normalized&quot;, Vega is slightly dimmer than the six-star average used to define magnitude 0.0, meaning Vega&#x27;s magnitude is normalized to 0.03 by definition.
With the modern magnitude systems, brightness is described using Pogson&#x27;s ratio. In practice, magnitude numbers rarely go above 30 before stars become too faint to detect. While Vega is close to magnitude 0, there are four brighter stars in the night sky at visible wavelengths (and more at infrared wavelengths) as well as the bright planets Venus, Mars, and Jupiter, and since brighter means smaller magnitude, these must be described by &quot;negative&quot; magnitudes. For example, Sirius, the brightest star of the celestial sphere, has a magnitude of −1.4 in the visible. Negative magnitudes for other very bright astronomical objects can be found in the table below.

Astronomers have developed other photometric zero point systems as alternatives to Vega normalized systems. The most widely used is the AB magnitude system, in which photometric zero points are based on a hypothetical reference spectrum having constant flux per unit frequency interval, rather than using a stellar spectrum or blackbody curve as the reference. The AB magnitude zero point is defined such that an object&#x27;s AB and Vega-based magnitudes will be approximately equal in the V filter band. However, the AB magnitude system is defined assuming an idealized detector measuring only one wavelength of light, while real detectors accept energy from a range of wavelengths.

== Measurement ==

Precision measurement of magnitude (photometry) requires calibration of the photographic or (usually) electronic detection apparatus. This generally involves contemporaneous observation, under identical conditions, of standard stars whose magnitude using that spectral filter is accurately known. Moreover, as the amount of light actually received by a telescope is reduced due to transmission through the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, the airmasses of the target and calibration stars must be taken into account. Typically one would observe a few different stars of known magnitude which are sufficiently similar. Calibrator stars close in the sky to the target are favoured (to avoid large differences in the atmospheric paths). If those stars have somewhat different zenith angles (altitudes) then a correction factor as a function of airmass can be derived and applied to the airmass at the target&#x27;s position. Such calibration obtains the brightness as would be observed from above the atmosphere, where apparent magnitude is defined.

The apparent magnitude scale in astronomy reflects the received power of stars and not their amplitude. Newcomers should consider using the relative brightness measure in astrophotography to adjust exposure times between stars. Apparent magnitude also integrates over the entire object, regardless of its focus, and this needs to be taken into account when scaling exposure times for objects with significant apparent size, like the Sun, Moon and planets. For example, directly scaling the exposure time from the Moon to the Sun works because they are approximately the same size in the sky. However, scaling the exposure from the Moon to Saturn would result in an overexposure if the image of Saturn takes up a smaller area on your sensor than the Moon did (at the same magnification, or more generally, f/#).

== Calculations ==

The dimmer an object appears, the higher the numerical value given to its magnitude, with a difference of 5 magnitudes corresponding to a brightness factor of exactly 100. Therefore, the magnitude , in the spectral band , would be given by
formula_2
which is more commonly expressed in terms of common (base-10) logarithms as
formula_3
where is the observed irradiance using spectral filter , and is the reference flux (zero-point) for that photometric filter. Since an increase of 5 magnitudes corresponds to a decrease in brightness by a factor of exactly 100, each magnitude increase implies a decrease in brightness by the factor formula_4 (Pogson&#x27;s ratio). Inverting the above formula, a magnitude difference implies a brightness factor of
formula_5

=== Example: Sun and Moon ===
&quot;What is the ratio in brightness between the Sun and the full Moon?&quot;

The apparent magnitude of the Sun is −26.832 (brighter), and the mean magnitude of the full moon is −12.74 (dimmer).

Difference in magnitude:
formula_6

Brightness factor:
formula_7

The Sun appears to be approximately times as bright as the full Moon.

===Magnitude addition===
Sometimes one might wish to add brightness. For example, photometry on closely separated double stars may only be able to produce a measurement of their combined light output. To find the combined magnitude of that double star knowing only the magnitudes of the individual components, this can be done by adding the brightness (in linear units) corresponding to each magnitude.
formula_8

Solving for formula_9 yields
formula_10
where is the resulting magnitude after adding the brightnesses referred to by and .

===Apparent bolometric magnitude===
While magnitude generally refers to a measurement in a particular filter band corresponding to some range of wavelengths, the apparent or absolute bolometric magnitude (mbol) is a measure of an object&#x27;s apparent or absolute brightness integrated over all wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum (also known as the object&#x27;s irradiance or power, respectively). The zero point of the apparent bolometric magnitude scale is based on the definition that an apparent bolometric magnitude of 0 mag is equivalent to a received irradiance of 2.518×10−8 watts per square metre (W·m−2).

===Absolute magnitude===

While apparent magnitude is a measure of the brightness of an object as seen by a particular observer, absolute magnitude is a measure of the &quot;intrinsic&quot; brightness of an object. Flux decreases with distance according to an inverse-square law, so the apparent magnitude of a star depends on both its absolute brightness and its distance (and any extinction). For example, a star at one distance will have the same apparent magnitude as a star four times as bright at twice that distance. In contrast, the intrinsic brightness of an astronomical object, does not depend on the distance of the observer or any extinction.

The absolute magnitude , of a star or astronomical object is defined as the apparent magnitude it would have as seen from a distance of . The absolute magnitude of the Sun is 4.83 in the V band (visual), 4.68 in the Gaia satellite&#x27;s G band (green) and 5.48 in the B band (blue).

In the case of a planet or asteroid, the absolute magnitude rather means the apparent magnitude it would have if it were from both the observer and the Sun, and fully illuminated at maximum opposition (a configuration that is only theoretically achievable, with the observer situated on the surface of the Sun).

== Standard reference values ==
The magnitude scale is a reverse logarithmic scale. A common misconception is that the logarithmic nature of the scale is because the human eye itself has a logarithmic response. In Pogson&#x27;s time this was thought to be true (see Weber–Fechner law), but it is now believed that the response is a power law .

Magnitude is complicated by the fact that light is not monochromatic. The sensitivity of a light detector varies according to the wavelength of the light, and the way it varies depends on the type of light detector. For this reason, it is necessary to specify how the magnitude is measured for the value to be meaningful. For this purpose the UBV system is widely used, in which the magnitude is measured in three different wavelength bands: U (centred at about 350 nm, in the near ultraviolet), B (about 435 nm, in the blue region) and V (about 555 nm, in the middle of the human visual range in daylight). The V band was chosen for spectral purposes and gives magnitudes closely corresponding to those seen by the human eye. When an apparent magnitude is discussed without further qualification, the V magnitude is generally understood.

Because cooler stars, such as red giants and red dwarfs, emit little energy in the blue and UV regions of the spectrum, their power is often under-represented by the UBV scale. Indeed, some L and T class stars have an estimated magnitude of well over 100, because they emit extremely little visible light, but are strongest in infrared.

Measures of magnitude need cautious treatment and it is extremely important to measure like with like. On early 20th century and older orthochromatic (blue-sensitive) photographic film, the relative brightnesses of the blue supergiant Rigel and the red supergiant Betelgeuse irregular variable star (at maximum) are reversed compared to what human eyes perceive, because this archaic film is more sensitive to blue light than it is to red light. Magnitudes obtained from this method are known as photographic magnitudes, and are now considered obsolete.

For objects within the Milky Way with a given absolute magnitude, 5 is added to the apparent magnitude for every tenfold increase in the distance to the object. For objects at very great distances (far beyond the Milky Way), this relationship must be adjusted for redshifts and for non-Euclidean distance measures due to general relativity.

For planets and other Solar System bodies, the apparent magnitude is derived from its phase curve and the distances to the Sun and observer.

==List of apparent magnitudes==

Some of the listed magnitudes are approximate. Telescope sensitivity depends on observing time, optical bandpass, and interfering light from scattering and airglow.

==See also==
* Angular diameter
* Distance modulus
* List of nearest bright stars
* List of nearest stars
* Luminosity
* Surface brightness

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="0" end="18" title="Apparent magnitude" label="Apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="20" end="20" title="Apparent magnitude" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="42" end="52" title="Irradiance" label="brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="58" end="62" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="64" end="83" title="astronomical object" label="astronomical object"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="116" end="136" title="artificial satellite" label="artificial satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="174" end="184" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="208" end="218" title="extinction (astronomy)" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="256" end="273" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q112252070" start="284" end="297" title="sightline" label="line of sight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="504" end="520" title="Ancient Greek astronomy#Astronomy in the Greco-Roman and Late Antique eras" label="Roman astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="521" end="537" title="Ptolemy" label="Claudius Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q850950" start="545" end="557" title="Star catalogue" label="star catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q13105140" start="603" end="616" title="First-magnitude star" label="1st magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q337194" start="744" end="757" title="Norman Robert Pogson" label="Norman Pogson"/>
<link wikidata="Q937378" start="789" end="800" title="logarithmic scale" label="logarithmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="843" end="852" title="magnitude (astronomy)" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="1186" end="1191" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="1203" end="1209" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q506254" start="1256" end="1265" title="naked eye" label="naked eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q555066" start="1375" end="1383" title="Visual acuity" label="eyesight"/>
<link wikidata="Q625696" start="1393" end="1401" title="Horizontal coordinate system" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="1520" end="1542" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073340" start="1619" end="1629" title="Photometry (astronomy)" label="photometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1672" end="1683" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="1685" end="1692" title="Visible spectrum" label="visible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="1697" end="1705" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1706" end="1722" title="Electromagnetic spectrum#Regions" label="wavelength bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q254758" start="1738" end="1746" title="passband" label="passband"/>
<link wikidata="Q948944" start="1768" end="1786" title="photometric system" label="photometric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q129833" start="1800" end="1810" title="UBV photometric system" label="UBV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251941" start="1818" end="1852" title="Strömgren photometric system" label="Strömgren &amp;quot;uvbyβ&amp;quot; system"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="1906" end="1931" title="Apparent magnitude" label="apparent visual magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="1934" end="1952" title="Absolute magnitude" label="Absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="1994" end="2004" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="2308" end="2328" title="stellar astrophysics" label="stellar astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="2416" end="2439" title="observational astronomy" label="observational astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="2452" end="2462" title="stargazing" label="stargazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="2544" end="2563" title="Amateur astronomy" label="Amateur astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545770" start="2617" end="2635" title="limiting magnitude" label="limiting magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="2775" end="2790" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q194411" start="2840" end="2851" title="illuminance" label="illuminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179836" start="2909" end="2912" title="lux" label="lux"/>
<link wikidata="Q15155713" start="2985" end="2996" title="Hellenistic Greece" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184221" start="3086" end="3101" title="List of brightest stars" label="brightest stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q13105140" start="3138" end="3153" title="first magnitude star" label="first magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="3237" end="3242" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="3243" end="3260" title="visual perception" label="visual perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="3283" end="3292" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q937378" start="3381" end="3398" title="logarithmic scale" label="logarithmic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q210765" start="3442" end="3455" title="photodetector" label="photodetector"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="3537" end="3544" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="3558" end="3566" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="3623" end="3633" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q337194" start="4062" end="4082" title="Norman Robert Pogson" label="Norman Robert Pogson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4379" end="4396" title="Generalized continued fraction#Example 2" label="fifth root of 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q271860" start="5454" end="5465" title="color index" label="color index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="6197" end="6203" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="6231" end="6247" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6372" end="6377" title="#List of apparent magnitudes" label="table"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650456" start="6522" end="6534" title="AB magnitude" label="AB magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575193" start="6639" end="6671" title="Spectral flux density" label="flux per unit frequency interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="7497" end="7520" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q352923" start="7526" end="7533" title="airmass" label="airmass"/>
<link wikidata="Q127604164" start="7554" end="7571" title="calibration stars" label="calibration stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="7856" end="7868" title="zenith angle" label="zenith angle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7871" end="7880" title="Horizontal coordinate system#Definition" label="altitudes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7951" end="7958" title="Photometry (astronomy)#Calibrations" label="applied"/>
<link wikidata="Q948944" start="9169" end="9182" title="Photometric system" label="spectral band"/>
<link wikidata="Q966582" start="9258" end="9285" title="Common logarithm" label="common (base-10) logarithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="9321" end="9331" title="irradiance" label="irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9404" end="9422" title="Photometric system#Filters used" label="photometric filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="9804" end="9807" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="9821" end="9825" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="9921" end="9930" title="full moon" label="full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073340" start="10171" end="10181" title="Photometry (astronomy)" label="photometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13890" start="10203" end="10214" title="double star" label="double star"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="11001" end="11011" title="irradiance" label="irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="11222" end="11226" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="11515" end="11533" title="inverse-square law" label="inverse-square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="11899" end="11909" title="Extinction (astronomy)" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q767805" start="12128" end="12149" title="Gaia (spacecraft)" label="Gaia satellite&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="12676" end="12685" title="human eye" label="human eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q835216" start="12776" end="12793" title="Weber–Fechner law" label="Weber–Fechner law"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="12842" end="12851" title="power law" label="power law"/>
<link wikidata="Q10770146" start="12910" end="12923" title="monochromatic" label="monochromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q129833" start="13198" end="13208" title="UBV system" label="UBV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="13337" end="13348" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="13725" end="13734" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="13740" end="13749" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="13885" end="13898" title="stellar classification" label="L and T class"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="14022" end="14030" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="14200" end="14217" title="photographic film" label="photographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q193599" start="14257" end="14267" title="supergiant" label="supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126" start="14268" end="14273" title="Rigel" label="Rigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="14297" end="14307" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322559" start="14529" end="14551" title="photographic magnitude" label="photographic magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="14611" end="14620" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694453" start="14839" end="14861" title="K correction" label="adjusted for redshifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q233858" start="14870" end="14883" title="Non-Euclidean geometry" label="non-Euclidean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="14909" end="14927" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180945" start="15016" end="15027" title="Phase curve (astronomy)" label="phase curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="15246" end="15256" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q408723" start="15261" end="15268" title="airglow" label="airglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q718647" start="15286" end="15302" title="Angular diameter" label="Angular diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193682" start="15305" end="15321" title="Distance modulus" label="Distance modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q931731" start="15324" end="15352" title="List of nearest bright stars" label="List of nearest bright stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q207247" start="15355" end="15376" title="List of nearest stars" label="List of nearest stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="15379" end="15389" title="Luminosity" label="Luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048103" start="15392" end="15410" title="Surface brightness" label="Surface brightness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1963" wikidata="Q159653" url="?curid=1963" title="Absolute magnitude">
<text>In astronomy, absolute magnitude () is a measure of the luminosity of a celestial object on an inverse logarithmic astronomical magnitude scale; the more luminous (intrinsically bright) an object, the lower its magnitude number. An object&#x27;s absolute magnitude is defined to be equal to the apparent magnitude that the object would have if it were viewed from a distance of exactly , without extinction (or dimming) of its light due to absorption by interstellar matter and cosmic dust. By hypothetically placing all objects at a standard reference distance from the observer, their luminosities can be directly compared among each other on a magnitude scale. For Solar System bodies that shine in reflected light, a different definition of absolute magnitude (H) is used, based on a standard reference distance of one astronomical unit.

Absolute magnitudes of stars generally range from approximately −10 to +20. The absolute magnitudes of galaxies can be much lower (brighter).

The more luminous an object, the smaller the numerical value of its absolute magnitude. A difference of 5 magnitudes between the absolute magnitudes of two objects corresponds to a ratio of 100 in their luminosities, and a difference of n magnitudes in absolute magnitude corresponds to a luminosity ratio of 100n/5. For example, a star of absolute magnitude MV = 3.0 would be 100 times as luminous as a star of absolute magnitude MV = 8.0 as measured in the V filter band. The Sun has absolute magnitude MV = +4.83. Highly luminous objects can have negative absolute magnitudes: for example, the Milky Way galaxy has an absolute B magnitude of about −20.8.

As with all astronomical magnitudes, the absolute magnitude can be specified for different wavelength ranges corresponding to specified filter bands or passbands; for stars a commonly quoted absolute magnitude is the absolute visual magnitude, which uses the visual (V) band of the spectrum (in the UBV photometric system). Absolute magnitudes are denoted by a capital M, with a subscript representing the filter band used for measurement, such as MV for absolute magnitude in the V band.

An object&#x27;s absolute &quot;bolometric&quot; magnitude (Mbol) represents its total luminosity over all wavelengths, rather than in a single filter band, as expressed on a logarithmic magnitude scale. To convert from an absolute magnitude in a specific filter band to absolute bolometric magnitude, a bolometric correction (BC) is applied.

==Stars and galaxies==
In stellar and galactic astronomy, the standard distance is 10 parsecs (about 32.616 light-years, 308.57 petameters or 308.57 trillion kilometres). A star at 10 parsecs has a parallax of 0.1″ (100 milliarcseconds). Galaxies (and other extended objects) are much larger than 10 parsecs; their light is radiated over an extended patch of sky, and their overall brightness cannot be directly observed from relatively short distances, but the same convention is used. A galaxy&#x27;s magnitude is defined by measuring all the light radiated over the entire object, treating that integrated brightness as the brightness of a single point-like or star-like source, and computing the magnitude of that point-like source as it would appear if observed at the standard 10 parsecs distance. Consequently, the absolute magnitude of any object &quot;equals&quot; the apparent magnitude it &quot;would have&quot; if it were 10 parsecs away.

Some stars visible to the naked eye have such a low absolute magnitude that they would appear bright enough to outshine the planets and cast shadows if they were at 10 parsecs from the Earth. Examples include Rigel (−7.8), Deneb (−8.4), Naos (−6.2), and Betelgeuse (−5.8). For comparison, Sirius has an absolute magnitude of only 1.4, which is still brighter than the Sun, whose absolute visual magnitude is 4.83. The Sun&#x27;s absolute bolometric magnitude is set arbitrarily, usually at 4.75.
Absolute magnitudes of stars generally range from approximately −10 to +20. The absolute magnitudes of galaxies can be much lower (brighter). For example, the giant elliptical galaxy M87 has an absolute magnitude of −22 (i.e. as bright as about 60,000 stars of magnitude −10). Some active galactic nuclei (quasars like CTA-102) can reach absolute magnitudes in excess of −32, making them the most luminous persistent objects in the observable universe, although these objects can vary in brightness over astronomically short timescales. At the extreme end, the optical afterglow of the gamma ray burst GRB 080319B reached, according to one paper, an absolute r magnitude brighter than −38 for a few tens of seconds.

=== Apparent magnitude ===
The Greek astronomer Hipparchus established a numerical scale to describe the brightness of each star appearing in the sky. The brightest stars in the sky were assigned an apparent magnitude , and the dimmest stars visible to the naked eye are assigned . The difference between them corresponds to a factor of 100 in brightness. For objects within the immediate neighborhood of the Sun, the absolute magnitude and apparent magnitude from any distance (in parsecs, with 1 pc = 3.2616 light-years) are related by
formula_1
where is the radiant flux measured at distance (in parsecs), the radiant flux measured at distance . Using the common logarithm, the equation can be written as
formula_2
where it is assumed that extinction from gas and dust is negligible. Typical extinction rates within the Milky Way galaxy are 1 to 2 magnitudes per kiloparsec, when dark clouds are taken into account.

For objects at very large distances (outside the Milky Way) the luminosity distance (distance defined using luminosity measurements) must be used instead of , because the Euclidean approximation is invalid for distant objects. Instead, general relativity must be taken into account. Moreover, the cosmological redshift complicates the relationship between absolute and apparent magnitude, because the radiation observed was shifted into the red range of the spectrum. To compare the magnitudes of very distant objects with those of local objects, a K correction might have to be applied to the magnitudes of the distant objects.

The absolute magnitude can also be written in terms of the apparent magnitude and stellar parallax :
formula_3
or using apparent magnitude and distance modulus :
formula_4

==== Examples ====
Rigel has a visual magnitude of 0.12 and distance of about 860 light-years:
formula_5

Vega has a parallax of 0.129″, and an apparent magnitude of 0.03:
formula_6

The Black Eye Galaxy has a visual magnitude of 9.36 and a distance modulus of 31.06:
formula_7

=== Bolometric magnitude ===
The absolute bolometric magnitude () takes into account electromagnetic radiation at all wavelengths. It includes those unobserved due to instrumental passband, the Earth&#x27;s atmospheric absorption, and extinction by interstellar dust. It is defined based on the luminosity of the stars. In the case of stars with few observations, it must be computed assuming an effective temperature.

Classically, the difference in bolometric magnitude is related to the luminosity ratio according to:
formula_8
which makes by inversion:
formula_9
where
* is the Sun&#x27;s luminosity (bolometric luminosity)
* is the star&#x27;s luminosity (bolometric luminosity)
* is the bolometric magnitude of the Sun
* is the bolometric magnitude of the star.

In August 2015, the International Astronomical Union passed Resolution B2 defining the zero points of the absolute and apparent bolometric magnitude scales in SI units for power (watts) and irradiance (W/m2), respectively. Although bolometric magnitudes had been used by astronomers for many decades, there had been systematic differences in the absolute magnitude-luminosity scales presented in various astronomical references, and no international standardization. This led to systematic differences in bolometric corrections scales. Combined with incorrect assumed absolute bolometric magnitudes for the Sun, this could lead to systematic errors in estimated stellar luminosities (and other stellar properties, such as radii or ages, which rely on stellar luminosity to be calculated).

Resolution B2 defines an absolute bolometric magnitude scale where corresponds to luminosity , with the zero point luminosity set such that the Sun (with nominal luminosity ) corresponds to absolute bolometric magnitude . Placing a radiation source (e.g. star) at the standard distance of 10 parsecs, it follows that the zero point of the apparent bolometric magnitude scale corresponds to irradiance . Using the IAU 2015 scale, the nominal total solar irradiance (&quot;solar constant&quot;) measured at 1 astronomical unit () corresponds to an apparent bolometric magnitude of the Sun of .

Following Resolution B2, the relation between a star&#x27;s absolute bolometric magnitude and its luminosity is no longer directly tied to the Sun&#x27;s (variable) luminosity:
formula_10
where
* is the star&#x27;s luminosity (bolometric luminosity) in watts
* is the zero point luminosity 
* is the bolometric magnitude of the star

The new IAU absolute magnitude scale permanently disconnects the scale from the variable Sun. However, on this SI power scale, the nominal solar luminosity corresponds closely to , a value that was commonly adopted by astronomers before the 2015 IAU resolution.

The luminosity of the star in watts can be calculated as a function of its absolute bolometric magnitude as:
formula_11
using the variables as defined previously.

== Solar System bodies () ==

For planets and asteroids, a definition of absolute magnitude that is more meaningful for non-stellar objects is used. The absolute magnitude, commonly called formula_12, is defined as the apparent magnitude that the object would have if it were one astronomical unit (AU) from both the Sun and the observer, and in conditions of ideal solar opposition (an arrangement that is impossible in practice). Because Solar System bodies are illuminated by the Sun, their brightness varies as a function of illumination conditions, described by the phase angle. This relationship is referred to as the phase curve. The absolute magnitude is the brightness at phase angle zero, an arrangement known as opposition, from a distance of one AU.

=== Apparent magnitude ===

The absolute magnitude formula_12 can be used to calculate the apparent magnitude formula_14 of a body. For an object reflecting sunlight, formula_12 and formula_14 are connected by the relation
formula_17
where formula_18 is the phase angle, the angle between the body-Sun and body–observer lines. formula_19 is the phase integral (the integration of reflected light; a number in the 0 to 1 range).

By the law of cosines, we have:
formula_20

Distances:
* is the distance between the body and the observer
* is the distance between the body and the Sun
* is the distance between the observer and the Sun
* , a unit conversion factor, is the constant 1 AU, the average distance between the Earth and the Sun

=== Approximations for phase integral ===
The value of formula_19 depends on the properties of the reflecting surface, in particular on its roughness. In practice, different approximations are used based on the known or assumed properties of the surface. The surfaces of terrestrial planets are generally more difficult to model than those of gaseous planets, the latter of which have smoother visible surfaces.

==== Planets as diffuse spheres ====
Planetary bodies can be approximated reasonably well as ideal diffuse reflecting spheres. Let formula_18 be the phase angle in degrees, then
formula_23
A full-phase diffuse sphere reflects two-thirds as much light as a diffuse flat disk of the same diameter. A quarter phase (formula_24) has formula_25 as much light as full phase (formula_26).

By contrast, a &quot;diffuse disk reflector model&quot; is simply formula_27, which isn&#x27;t realistic, but it does represent the opposition surge for rough surfaces that reflect more uniform light back at low phase angles.

The definition of the geometric albedo formula_28, a measure for the reflectivity of planetary surfaces, is based on the diffuse disk reflector model. The absolute magnitude formula_12, diameter formula_30 (in kilometers) and geometric albedo formula_28 of a body are related by
formula_32 or equivalently,
formula_33

Example: The Moon&#x27;s absolute magnitude formula_12 can be calculated from its diameter formula_35 and geometric albedo formula_36:
formula_37
We have formula_38, formula_39
At quarter phase, formula_40 (according to the diffuse reflector model), this yields an apparent magnitude of formula_41 The actual value is somewhat lower than that, formula_42 This is not a good approximation, because the phase curve of the Moon is too complicated for the diffuse reflector model. A more accurate formula is given in the following section.

==== More advanced models ====

Because Solar System bodies are never perfect diffuse reflectors, astronomers use different models to predict apparent magnitudes based on known or assumed properties of the body. For planets, approximations for the correction term formula_43 in the formula for have been derived empirically, to match observations at different phase angles. The approximations recommended by the Astronomical Almanac are (with formula_18 in degrees):

Here formula_45 is the effective inclination of Saturn&#x27;s rings (their tilt relative to the observer), which as seen from Earth varies between 0° and 27° over the course of one Saturn orbit, and formula_46 is a small correction term depending on Uranus&#x27; sub-Earth and sub-solar latitudes. formula_47 is the Common Era year. Neptune&#x27;s absolute magnitude is changing slowly due to seasonal effects as the planet moves along its 165-year orbit around the Sun, and the approximation above is only valid after the year 2000. For some circumstances, like formula_48 for Venus, no observations are available, and the phase curve is unknown in those cases. The formula for the Moon is only applicable to the near side of the Moon, the portion that is visible from the Earth.

Example 1: On 1 January 2019, Venus was formula_49 from the Sun, and formula_50 from Earth, at a phase angle of formula_51 (near quarter phase). Under full-phase conditions, Venus would have been visible at formula_52 Accounting for the high phase angle, the correction term above yields an actual apparent magnitude of formula_53 This is close to the value of formula_54 predicted by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

Example 2: At first quarter phase, the approximation for the Moon gives formula_55 With that, the apparent magnitude of the Moon is formula_56 close to the expected value of about formula_57. At last quarter, the Moon is about 0.06 mag fainter than at first quarter, because that part of its surface has a lower albedo.

Earth&#x27;s albedo varies by a factor of 6, from 0.12 in the cloud-free case to 0.76 in the case of altostratus cloud. The absolute magnitude in the table corresponds to an albedo of 0.434. Due to the variability of the weather, Earth&#x27;s apparent magnitude cannot be predicted as accurately as that of most other planets.

==== Asteroids ====

If an object has an atmosphere, it reflects light more or less isotropically in all directions, and its brightness can be modelled as a diffuse reflector. Bodies with no atmosphere, like asteroids or moons, tend to reflect light more strongly to the direction of the incident light, and their brightness increases rapidly as the phase angle approaches formula_58. This rapid brightening near opposition is called the opposition effect. Its strength depends on the physical properties of the body&#x27;s surface, and hence it differs from asteroid to asteroid.

In 1985, the IAU adopted the semi-empirical formula_59-system, based on two parameters formula_12 and formula_61 called &quot;absolute magnitude&quot; and &quot;slope&quot;, to model the opposition effect for the ephemerides published by the Minor Planet Center.
formula_62

where
*the phase integral is formula_63 and
*formula_64 for formula_65 or formula_66, formula_67, formula_68, formula_69 and formula_70.

This relation is valid for phase angles formula_71, and works best when formula_72.

The slope parameter formula_61 relates to the surge in brightness, typically , when the object is near opposition. It is known accurately only for a small number of asteroids, hence for most asteroids a value of formula_74 is assumed. In rare cases, formula_61 can be negative. An example is 101955 Bennu, with formula_76.

In 2012, the formula_59-system was officially replaced by an improved system with three parameters formula_12, formula_79 and formula_80, which produces more satisfactory results if the opposition effect is very small or restricted to very small phase angles. However, as of 2022, this formula_81-system has not been adopted by either the Minor Planet Center nor Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

The apparent magnitude of asteroids varies as they rotate, on time scales of seconds to weeks depending on their rotation period, by up to formula_82 or more. In addition, their absolute magnitude can vary with the viewing direction, depending on their axial tilt. In many cases, neither the rotation period nor the axial tilt are known, limiting the predictability. The models presented here do not capture those effects.

=== Cometary magnitudes ===
The brightness of comets is given separately as &quot;total magnitude&quot; (formula_83, the brightness integrated over the entire visible extend of the coma) and &quot;nuclear magnitude&quot; (formula_84, the brightness of the core region alone). Both are different scales than the magnitude scale used for planets and asteroids, and can not be used for a size comparison with an asteroid&#x27;s absolute magnitude .

The activity of comets varies with their distance from the Sun. Their brightness can be approximated as
formula_85
formula_86
where formula_87 are the total and nuclear apparent magnitudes of the comet, respectively, formula_88 are its &quot;absolute&quot; total and nuclear magnitudes, formula_89 and formula_90 are the body-sun and body-observer distances, formula_91 is the Astronomical Unit, and formula_92 are the slope parameters characterising the comet&#x27;s activity. For formula_93, this reduces to the formula for a purely reflecting body (showing no cometary activity).

For example, the lightcurve of comet C/2011 L4 (PANSTARRS) can be approximated by formula_94 On the day of its perihelion passage, 10 March 2013, comet PANSTARRS was formula_95 from the Sun and formula_96 from Earth. The total apparent magnitude formula_83 is predicted to have been formula_98 at that time. The Minor Planet Center gives a value close to that, formula_99.

The absolute magnitude of any given comet can vary dramatically. It can change as the comet becomes more or less active over time or if it undergoes an outburst. This makes it difficult to use the absolute magnitude for a size estimate. When comet 289P/Blanpain was discovered in 1819, its absolute magnitude was estimated as formula_100. It was subsequently lost and was only rediscovered in 2003. At that time, its absolute magnitude had decreased to formula_101, and it was realised that the 1819 apparition coincided with an outburst. 289P/Blanpain reached naked eye brightness (5–8 mag) in 1819, even though it is the comet with the smallest nucleus that has ever been physically characterised, and usually doesn&#x27;t become brighter than 18 mag.

For some comets that have been observed at heliocentric distances large enough to distinguish between light reflected from the coma, and light from the nucleus itself, an absolute magnitude analogous to that used for asteroids has been calculated, allowing to estimate the sizes of their nuclei.

== Meteors ==
For a meteor, the standard distance for measurement of magnitudes is at an altitude of at the observer&#x27;s zenith.

== See also ==
* Araucaria Project
* Hertzsprung–Russell diagram – relates absolute magnitude or luminosity versus spectral color or surface temperature.
* Jansky - the preferred unit for radio astronomy – linear in power/unit area
* List of most luminous stars
* Photographic magnitude
* Surface brightness – the &quot;magnitude&quot; for extended objects
* Zero point (photometry) – the typical calibration point for star flux

== References ==

/5}&lt;/math&gt;, where formula_102, the absolute magnitude of the Sun, and formula_103&lt;/ref&gt;















}}

== External links ==
* Reference zero-magnitude fluxes 
* International Astronomical Union
* Absolute Magnitude of a Star calculator
* The Magnitude system
* About stellar magnitudes 
* Obtain the magnitude of any star – SIMBAD
* Converting magnitude of minor planets to diameter
* Another table for converting asteroid magnitude to estimated diameter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3" end="12" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="14" end="32" title="Absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="34" end="34" title="Absolute magnitude" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="56" end="66" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="72" end="88" title="celestial object" label="celestial object"/>
<link wikidata="Q937378" start="103" end="114" title="Logarithmic scale" label="logarithmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="115" end="137" title="Magnitude (astronomy)" label="astronomical magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="295" end="313" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="396" end="406" title="Extinction (astronomy)" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="454" end="473" title="Interstellar medium" label="interstellar matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="478" end="489" title="cosmic dust" label="cosmic dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="668" end="680" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="745" end="767" title="Absolute magnitude#Solar System bodies (H)" label="absolute magnitude (H)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="823" end="840" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1464" end="1467" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="1583" end="1592" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q129833" start="1616" end="1627" title="UBV photometric system" label="B magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="1670" end="1680" title="magnitude (astronomy)" label="magnitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="1736" end="1746" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134091" start="1781" end="1787" title="Filter (optics)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q254758" start="1797" end="1805" title="passband" label="passband"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="1862" end="1887" title="Absolute magnitude" label="absolute visual magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q129833" start="1944" end="1966" title="UBV photometric system" label="UBV photometric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="2222" end="2232" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="2242" end="2253" title="wavelengths" label="wavelengths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147290" start="2439" end="2460" title="bolometric correction" label="bolometric correction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2628" end="2636" title="Orders of magnitude (numbers)#1012" label="trillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="2677" end="2685" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="2699" end="2714" title="minute of arc" label="milliarcseconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="2737" end="2753" title="nebula" label="extended objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="3555" end="3561" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126" start="3640" end="3645" title="Rigel" label="Rigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12179" start="3654" end="3659" title="Deneb" label="Deneb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13200" start="3668" end="3672" title="Zeta Puppis" label="Naos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="3685" end="3695" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="3720" end="3726" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="3799" end="3802" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q14041" start="4092" end="4113" title="elliptical galaxy M87" label="elliptical galaxy M87"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="4209" end="4231" title="active galactic nuclei" label="active galactic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="4233" end="4240" title="quasars" label="quasars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277659" start="4246" end="4253" title="CTA-102" label="CTA-102"/>
<link wikidata="Q528365" start="4529" end="4540" title="GRB 080319B" label="GRB 080319B"/>
<link wikidata="Q948944" start="4586" end="4597" title="Photometric system" label="r magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="4692" end="4702" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="5126" end="5132" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="5154" end="5164" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q966582" start="5303" end="5319" title="common logarithm" label="common logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="5387" end="5415" title="Extinction (astronomy)" label="extinction from gas and dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="5467" end="5476" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q204194" start="5527" end="5538" title="Dark nebula" label="dark clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="5735" end="5744" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="5800" end="5818" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="5861" end="5882" title="cosmological redshift" label="cosmological redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694453" start="6113" end="6125" title="K correction" label="K correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q906561" start="6276" end="6292" title="stellar parallax" label="stellar parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193682" start="6337" end="6353" title="distance modulus" label="distance modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126" start="6386" end="6391" title="Rigel" label="Rigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427" start="6473" end="6477" title="Vega" label="Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q13983" start="6554" end="6570" title="Black Eye Galaxy" label="Black Eye Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q852212" start="6688" end="6698" title="Bolometer" label="bolometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="6731" end="6756" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="6764" end="6775" title="wavelengths" label="wavelengths"/>
<link wikidata="Q254758" start="6826" end="6834" title="passband" label="passband"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="6881" end="6912" title="Extinction (astronomy)" label="extinction by interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="6941" end="6951" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="7042" end="7063" title="effective temperature" label="effective temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="7435" end="7467" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q62057320" start="7502" end="7513" title="Zero Point (photometry)" label="zero points"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="7543" end="7563" title="bolometric magnitude" label="bolometric magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="7594" end="7598" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="8320" end="8330" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="8404" end="8424" title="bolometric magnitude" label="bolometric magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="8437" end="8446" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="8497" end="8504" title="parsecs" label="parsecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="8595" end="8605" title="irradiance" label="irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="8652" end="8668" title="solar irradiance" label="solar irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q335272" start="8676" end="8690" title="solar constant" label="solar constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="8712" end="8729" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="8788" end="8791" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="9051" end="9055" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="9593" end="9599" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="9605" end="9613" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="9778" end="9796" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="9839" end="9856" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="9876" end="9879" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059855" start="10130" end="10141" title="phase angle (astronomy)" label="phase angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180945" start="10183" end="10194" title="Phase curve (astronomy)" label="phase curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562" start="10282" end="10292" title="opposition (astronomy)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q165939" start="10468" end="10478" title="reflection (physics)" label="reflecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059855" start="10580" end="10591" title="phase angle (astronomy)" label="phase angle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10667" end="10681" title="Bond albedo#Phase integral" label="phase integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="10687" end="10698" title="integral" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q164321" start="10758" end="10772" title="law of cosines" label="law of cosines"/>
<link wikidata="Q618655" start="10962" end="10977" title="unit conversion" label="unit conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="11004" end="11006" title="Astronomical Unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q114817" start="11200" end="11209" title="Surface roughness" label="roughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190146" start="11566" end="11590" title="Lambertian diffuse lighting model" label="ideal diffuse reflecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="11591" end="11597" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="11637" end="11644" title="Degree (angle)" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027206" start="11988" end="12004" title="opposition surge" label="opposition surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832068" start="12105" end="12121" title="geometric albedo" label="geometric albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q828224" start="12293" end="12302" title="kilometer" label="kilometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="12415" end="12426" title="Moon" label="Moon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832068" start="12508" end="12524" title="geometric albedo" label="geometric albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="12582" end="12595" title="lunar phases" label="quarter phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180945" start="13273" end="13311" title="phase curve (astronomy)" label="observations at different phase angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815913" start="13351" end="13371" title="Astronomical Almanac" label="Astronomical Almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q194" start="13455" end="13474" title="Saturn&amp;#x27;s rings" label="Saturn&amp;#x27;s rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="13723" end="13733" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q782867" start="14121" end="14142" title="near side of the Moon" label="near side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="14219" end="14224" title="Venus (planet)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="14620" end="14639" title="first quarter" label="first quarter phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="14801" end="14813" title="last quarter" label="last quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="14940" end="14946" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202145" start="15028" end="15045" title="altostratus clouds" label="altostratus cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q11663" start="15148" end="15155" title="weather" label="weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027206" start="15693" end="15710" title="opposition effect" label="opposition effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="15850" end="15853" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="15866" end="15880" title="semi-empirical" label="semi-empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q120200" start="16050" end="16061" title="ephemeris" label="ephemerides"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="16079" end="16098" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11558" start="16627" end="16639" title="101955 Bennu" label="101955 Bennu"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="17022" end="17047" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q675076" start="17086" end="17107" title="Light curve" label="varies as they rotate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185981" start="17163" end="17178" title="rotation period" label="rotation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="17303" end="17313" title="axial tilt" label="axial tilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="17520" end="17525" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q259854" start="17655" end="17659" title="Coma (cometary)" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="18298" end="18315" title="Astronomical Unit" label="Astronomical Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022612" start="18542" end="18563" title="C/2011 L4" label="C/2011 L4 (PANSTARRS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392009" start="19127" end="19140" title="289P/Blanpain" label="289P/Blanpain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="19951" end="19957" title="meteor" label="meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="20055" end="20061" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166244" start="20081" end="20098" title="Araucaria Project" label="Araucaria Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="20101" end="20128" title="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram" label="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="20161" end="20171" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="20205" end="20216" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434381" start="20220" end="20226" title="Jansky" label="Jansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141760" start="20298" end="20325" title="List of most luminous stars" label="List of most luminous stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322559" start="20328" end="20350" title="Photographic magnitude" label="Photographic magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048103" start="20353" end="20371" title="Surface brightness" label="Surface brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q62057320" start="20423" end="20446" title="Zero point (photometry)" label="Zero point (photometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q654724" start="20852" end="20858" title="SIMBAD" label="SIMBAD"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1965" wikidata="Q194082" url="?curid=1965" title="Apollo 1">
<text>Apollo 1, initially designated AS-204, was planned to be the first crewed mission of the Apollo program, the American undertaking to land the first man on the Moon. It was planned to launch on February 21, 1967, as the first low Earth orbital test of the Apollo command and service module. The mission never flew; a cabin fire during a launch rehearsal test at Cape Kennedy Air Force Station Launch Complex 34 on January 27 killed all three crew members—Command Pilot Gus Grissom, Senior Pilot Ed White, and Pilot Roger B. Chaffee—and destroyed the command module (CM). The name Apollo 1, chosen by the crew, was made official by NASA in their honor after the fire.

Immediately after the fire, NASA convened an Accident Review Board to determine the cause of the fire, and both chambers of the United States Congress conducted their own committee inquiries to oversee NASA&#x27;s investigation. The ignition source of the fire was determined to be electrical, and the fire spread rapidly due to combustible nylon material and the high-pressure pure oxygen cabin atmosphere. Rescue was prevented by the plug door hatch, which could not be opened against the internal pressure of the cabin. Because the rocket was unfueled, the test had not been considered hazardous, and emergency preparedness for it was poor.

During the Congressional investigation, Senator Walter Mondale publicly revealed a NASA internal document citing problems with prime Apollo contractor North American Aviation, which became known as the Phillips Report. This disclosure embarrassed NASA Administrator James E. Webb, who was unaware of the document&#x27;s existence, and attracted controversy to the Apollo program. Despite congressional displeasure at NASA&#x27;s lack of openness, both congressional committees ruled that the issues raised in the report had no bearing on the accident.

Crewed Apollo flights were suspended for twenty months while the command module&#x27;s hazards were addressed. However, the development and uncrewed testing of the lunar module (LM) and Saturn V rocket continued. The Saturn IB launch vehicle for Apollo1, AS-204, was used for the first LM test flight, Apollo 5. The first successful crewed Apollo mission was flown by Apollo1&#x27;s backup crew on Apollo 7 in October 1968.

== Crew ==
=== First backup crew (April–December 1966) ===
=== Second backup crew (December 1966 – January 1967) ===
== Apollo crewed test flight plans ==
AS-204 was to be the first crewed test flight of the Apollo command and service module (CSM) to Earth orbit, launched on a Saturn IB rocket. AS-204 was to test launch operations, ground tracking and control facilities and the performance of the Apollo-Saturn launch assembly and would have lasted up to two weeks, depending on how the spacecraft performed.

The CSM for this flight, number 012 built by North American Aviation (NAA), was a Block I version designed before the lunar orbit rendezvous landing strategy was chosen; therefore it lacked the capability of docking with the lunar module. This was incorporated into the Block II CSM design, along with lessons learned in Block I. Block II would be test-flown with the LM when the latter was ready.

Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton selected the first Apollo crew in January 1966, with Grissom as Command Pilot, White as Senior Pilot, and rookie Donn F. Eisele as Pilot. But Eisele dislocated his shoulder twice aboard the KC-135 weightlessness training aircraft, and had to undergo surgery on January 27. Slayton replaced him with Chaffee, and NASA announced the crew selection on March 21, 1966. James McDivitt, David Scott and Russell Schweickart were named as the backup crew.

On September 29, Walter Schirra, Eisele, and Walter Cunningham were named as the prime crew for a second Block I CSM flight, AS-205. NASA planned to follow this with an uncrewed test flight of the LM (AS-206), then the third crewed mission would be a dual flight designated AS-278 (or AS-207/208), in which AS-207 would launch the first crewed Block II CSM, which would then rendezvous and dock with the LM launched uncrewed on AS-208.

In March, NASA was studying the possibility of flying the first Apollo mission as a joint space rendezvous with the final Project Gemini mission, Gemini 12 in November 1966. But by May, delays in making Apollo ready for flight just by itself, and the extra time needed to incorporate compatibility with the Gemini, made that impractical. This became moot when slippage in readiness of the AS-204 spacecraft caused the last-quarter 1966 target date to be missed, and the mission was rescheduled for February 21, 1967.

== Mission background ==

In October 1966, NASA announced the flight would carry a small television camera to broadcast live from the command module. The camera would also be used to allow flight controllers to monitor the spacecraft&#x27;s instrument panel in flight. Television cameras were carried aboard all crewed Apollo missions.

=== Insignia ===
Grissom&#x27;s crew received approval in June 1966 to design a mission patch with the name &quot;Apollo1&quot; (though the approval was subsequently withdrawn pending a final decision on the mission designation, which was not resolved until after the fire). The design&#x27;s center depicts a command and service module flying over the southeastern United States with Florida (the launch point) prominent. The Moon is seen in the distance, symbolic of the eventual program goal. A yellow border carries the mission and astronaut names with another border set with stars and stripes, trimmed in gold. The insignia was designed by the crew, with the artwork done by North American Aviation employee Allen Stevens.
=== Spacecraft and crew preparation ===
The Apollo command and service module was much bigger and far more complex than any previous crewed spacecraft. In October 1963, Joseph F. Shea was named Apollo Spacecraft Program Office (ASPO) manager, responsible for managing the design and construction of both the CSM and the LM.
In a spacecraft review meeting held with Shea on August 19, 1966 (a week before delivery), the crew expressed concern about the amount of flammable material (mainly nylon netting and Velcro) in the cabin, which both astronauts and technicians found convenient for holding tools and equipment in place. Although Shea gave the spacecraft a passing grade, after the meeting they gave him a crew portrait they had posed with heads bowed and hands clasped in prayer, with the inscription:

Shea gave his staff orders to tell North American to remove the flammables from the cabin, but did not supervise the issue personally.

North American shipped spacecraft CM-012 to Kennedy Space Center on August 26, 1966, under a conditional Certificate of Flight Worthiness: 113 significant incomplete planned engineering changes had to be completed at KSC. That was not all; an additional 623 engineering change orders were made and completed after delivery. Grissom became so frustrated with the inability of the training simulator engineers to keep up with the spacecraft changes that he took a lemon from a tree by his house and hung it on the simulator.
The command and service modules were mated in the KSC altitude chamber in September, and combined system testing was performed. Altitude testing was performed first uncrewed, then with both the prime and backup crews, from October 10 through December 30. During this testing, the environmental control unit in the command module was found to have a design flaw, and was sent back to the manufacturer for design changes and rework. The returned ECU then leaked water/glycol coolant, and had to be returned a second time. Also during this time, a propellant tank in another service module had ruptured during testing at NAA, prompting the removal from the KSC test chamber of the service module so it could be tested for signs of the tank problem. These tests were negative.

In December the second Block I flight AS-205 was canceled as unnecessary; Schirra, Eisele and Cunningham were reassigned as the backup crew for Apollo1. McDivitt&#x27;s crew was now promoted to prime crew of the Block II/LM mission, re-designated AS-258 because the AS-205 launch vehicle would be used in place of AS-207. A third crewed mission was planned to launch the CSM and LM together on a SaturnV (AS-503) to an elliptical medium Earth orbit (MEO), to be crewed by Frank Borman, Michael Collins and William Anders. McDivitt, Scott and Schweickart had started their training for AS-258 in CM-101 at the NAA plant in Downey, California, when the Apollo1 accident occurred.
Once all outstanding CSM-012 hardware problems had been fixed, the reassembled spacecraft completed a successful altitude chamber test with Schirra&#x27;s backup crew on December 30. According to the final report of the accident investigation board, &quot;At the post-test debriefing the backup flight crew expressed their satisfaction with the condition and performance of the spacecraft.&quot; This would appear to contradict the account given in the 1994 book &quot;Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo13&quot; by Jeffrey Kluger and astronaut James Lovell, that &quot;When the trio climbed out of the ship... Schirra made it clear that he was not pleased with what he had seen,&quot; and that he later warned Grissom and Shea that &quot;there&#x27;s nothing wrong with this ship that I can point to, but it just makes me uncomfortable. Something about it just doesn&#x27;t ring right,&quot; and that Grissom should get out at the first sign of trouble.

After the successful altitude tests, the spacecraft was removed from the altitude chamber on January 3, 1967, and mated to its Saturn IB launch vehicle on pad 34 on January 6.

Grissom said in a February 1963 interview that NASA could not eliminate risk despite precautions:

&quot;I suppose that someday we are going to have a failure. In every other business there are failures, and they are bound to happen sooner or later&quot;, he added. Grissom was asked about the fear of potential catastrophe in a December 1966 interview:

== Accident ==

=== Plugs-out test ===
The launch simulation on January 27, 1967, on pad 34, was a &quot;plugs-out&quot; test to determine whether the spacecraft would operate nominally on (simulated) internal power while detached from all cables and umbilicals. Passing this test was essential to making the February 21 launch date. The test was considered non-hazardous because neither the launch vehicle nor the spacecraft was loaded with fuel or cryogenics and all pyrotechnic systems (explosive bolts) were disabled.

At 1:00 pm EST (18:00 GMT) on January 27, first Grissom, then Chaffee, and White entered the command module fully pressure-suited, and were strapped into their seats and hooked up to the spacecraft&#x27;s oxygen and communication systems. Grissom immediately noticed a strange odor in the air circulating through his suit which he compared to &quot;sour buttermilk&quot;, and the simulated countdown was put on hold at 1:20 pm, while air samples were taken. No cause of the odor could be found, and the countdown was resumed at 2:42 pm. The accident investigation found this odor not to be related to the fire.

Three minutes after the count was resumed the hatch installation was started. The hatch consisted of three parts: a removable inner hatch which stayed inside the cabin; a hinged outer hatch which was part of the spacecraft&#x27;s heat shield; and an outer hatch cover which was part of the boost protective cover enveloping the entire command module to protect it from aerodynamic heating during launch and from launch escape rocket exhaust in the event of a launch abort. The boost hatch cover was partially, but not fully, latched in place because the flexible boost protective cover was slightly distorted by some cabling run under it to provide the simulated internal power (the spacecraft&#x27;s fuel cell reactants were not loaded for this test). After the hatches were sealed, the air in the cabin was replaced with pure oxygen at , higher than atmospheric pressure.

Movement by the astronauts was detected by the spacecraft&#x27;s inertial measurement unit and the astronauts&#x27; biomedical sensors, and also indicated by increases in oxygen spacesuit flow, and sounds from Grissom&#x27;s stuck-open microphone. The stuck microphone was part of a problem with the communications loop connecting the crew, the Operations and Checkout Building, and the Complex 34 blockhouse control room. The poor communications led Grissom to remark: &quot;How are we going to get to the Moon if we can&#x27;t talk between two or three buildings?&quot;

The simulated countdown was put on hold again at 5:40 pm while attempts were made to troubleshoot the communications problem. All countdown functions up to the simulated internal power transfer had been successfully completed by 6:20 pm, and at 6:30 the count remained on hold at T minus 10 minutes.

=== The fire ===

The crew members were using the time to run through their checklist again, when a momentary increase in AC Bus2 voltage occurred. Nine seconds later (at 6:31:04.7), one of the astronauts (some listeners and laboratory analysis indicate Grissom) exclaimed &quot;Hey!&quot;, &quot;Fire!&quot;, or &quot;Flame!&quot;; this was followed by two seconds of scuffling sounds through Grissom&#x27;s open microphone. This was immediately followed at 6:31:06.2 (23:31:06.2 GMT) by someone (believed by most listeners, and supported by laboratory analysis, to be Chaffee) saying, &quot;[I&#x27;ve, or We&#x27;ve] got a fire in the cockpit.&quot; After 6.8 seconds of silence, a second, badly garbled transmission was heard by various listeners (who believed this transmission was made by Chaffee) as:
* &quot;They&#x27;re fighting a bad fire—Let&#x27;s get out... Open &#x27;er up&quot;,
* &quot;We&#x27;ve got a bad fire—Let&#x27;s get out... We&#x27;re burning up&quot;, or
* &quot;I&#x27;m reporting a bad fire... I&#x27;m getting out...&quot;
The transmission lasted 5.0 seconds and ended with a cry of pain.

Some blockhouse witnesses said that they saw White on the television monitors, reaching for the inner hatch release handle as flames in the cabin spread from left to right.

The heat of the fire fed by pure oxygen caused the pressure to rise to , which ruptured the command module&#x27;s inner wall at 6:31:19 (23:31:19 GMT, initial phase of the fire). Flames and gases then rushed outside the command module through open access panels to two levels of the pad service structure. The intense heat, dense smoke, and ineffective gas masks designed for toxic fumes rather than smoke, hampered the ground crew&#x27;s attempts to rescue the men. There were fears the command module had exploded, or soon would, and that the fire might ignite the solid fuel rocket in the launch escape tower above the command module, which would have likely killed nearby ground personnel, and possibly have destroyed the pad.

As the pressure was released by the cabin rupture, the rush of gases within the module caused flames to spread across the cabin, beginning the second phase. The third phase began when most of the oxygen was consumed and was replaced with atmospheric air, essentially quenching the fire, but causing high concentrations of carbon monoxide and heavy smoke to fill the cabin, and large amounts of soot to be deposited on surfaces as they cooled.
It took five minutes for the pad workers to open all three hatch layers, and they could not drop the inner hatch to the cabin floor as intended, so they pushed it out of the way to one side. Although the cabin lights remained on, they were unable to see the astronauts through the dense smoke. As the smoke cleared they found the bodies, but were not able to remove them. The fire had partly melted Grissom&#x27;s and White&#x27;s nylon space suits and the hoses connecting them to the life support system. Grissom had removed his restraints and was lying on the floor of the spacecraft. White&#x27;s restraints were burned through, and he was found lying sideways just below the hatch. It was determined that he had tried to open the hatch per the emergency procedure, but was not able to do so against the internal pressure. Chaffee was found strapped into his right-hand seat, as procedure called for him to maintain communication until White opened the hatch. Because of the large strands of melted nylon fusing the astronauts to the cabin interior, removing the bodies took nearly 90 minutes. The bodies were only able to be removed after 7.5 hours from the time the incident took place, due to the gasses and toxins present which prevented medical personnel from entering initially.

Deke Slayton was possibly the first NASA official to examine the spacecraft&#x27;s interior. His testimony contradicted the official report concerning the position of Grissom&#x27;s body. Slayton said of Grissom and White&#x27;s bodies, &quot;it is very difficult for me to determine the exact relationships of these two bodies. They were sort of jumbled together, and I couldn&#x27;t really tell which head even belonged to which body at that point. I guess the only thing that was real obvious is that both bodies were at the lower edge of the hatch. They were not in the seats. They were almost completely clear of the seat areas.&quot;

== Investigation ==
As a result of the in-flight failure of the Gemini 8 mission on March 17, 1966, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert Seamans wrote and implemented &quot;Management Instruction 8621.1&quot; on April 14, 1966, defining &quot;Mission Failure Investigation Policy And Procedures&quot;. This modified NASA&#x27;s existing accident procedures, based on military aircraft accident investigation, by giving the Deputy Administrator the option of performing independent investigations of major failures, beyond those for which the various Program Office officials were normally responsible. It declared, &quot;It is NASA policy to investigate and document the causes of all major mission failures which occur in the conduct of its space and aeronautical activities and to take appropriate corrective actions as a result of the findings and recommendations.&quot;

Immediately after thefire NASA Administrator James E. Webb asked President Lyndon B. Johnson to allow NASA to handle the investigation according to its established procedure, promising to be truthful in assessing blame, and to keep the appropriate leaders of Congress informed. Deputy Director Seamans then ordered the establishment of the &quot;Apollo 204 Review Board&quot; chaired by Langley Research Center director Floyd L. Thompson, which included astronaut Frank Borman, spacecraft designer Maxime Faget, and six others. On February 1, Cornell University professor Frank A. Long left the board, and was replaced by Robert W. Van Dolah of the U.S. Bureau of Mines. The next day North American&#x27;s chief engineer for Apollo, George Jeffs, resigned as well.

Seamans ordered all Apollo1 hardware and software impounded, to be released only under control of the board. After thorough stereo photographic documentation of the CM-012 interior, the board ordered its disassembly using procedures tested by disassembling the identical CM-014 and conducted a thorough investigation of every part. The board also reviewed the astronauts&#x27; autopsy results and interviewed witnesses. Seamans sent Webb weekly status reports of the investigation&#x27;s progress, and the board issued its final report on April 5, 1967.

===Cause of death===
According to the Board, Grissom suffered severe third-degree burns on more than one-third of his body and his spacesuit was almost completely destroyed. White suffered third-degree burns on almost half of his body and a quarter of his spacesuit had melted away. Chaffee suffered third-degree burns on almost a quarter of his body and a small portion of his spacesuit was damaged. The autopsy report determined that the primary cause of death for all three astronauts was cardiac arrest caused by high concentrations of carbon monoxide. Burns suffered by the crew were not believed to be major factors, and it was concluded that most of them had occurred postmortem. Asphyxiation occurred after the fire melted the astronauts&#x27; suits and oxygen tubes, exposing them to the lethal atmosphere of the cabin.

=== Major causes of accident ===
The review board identified several major factors which combined to cause the fire and the astronauts&#x27; deaths:
* An ignition source most probably related to &quot;vulnerable wiring carrying spacecraft power&quot; and &quot;vulnerable plumbing carrying a combustible and corrosive coolant&quot;
* A pure oxygen atmosphere at higher than atmospheric pressure
* A cabin sealed with a hatch cover which could not be quickly removed at high pressure
* An extensive distribution of combustible materials in the cabin
* Inadequate emergency preparedness (rescue or medical assistance, and crew escape)

==== Ignition source ====
The review board determined that the electrical power momentarily failed at 23:30:55 GMT, and found evidence of several electric arcs in the interior equipment. They were unable to conclusively identify a single ignition source. They determined that the fire most likely started near the floor in the lower left section of the cabin, close to the Environmental Control Unit. It spread from the left wall of the cabin to the right, with the floor being affected only briefly.

The board noted that a silver-plated copper wire, running through an environmental control unit near the center couch, had become stripped of its Teflon insulation and abraded by repeated opening and closing of a small access door.

This weak point in the wiring also ran near a junction in an ethylene glycol/water cooling line that had been prone to leaks. Electrolysis of ethylene glycol solution with the silver anode of the wire was discovered at the Manned Spacecraft Center on May 29, 1967, to be a hazard capable of causing a violent exothermic reaction, igniting the ethylene glycol mixture in the Command Module&#x27;s pure oxygen atmosphere. Experiments at the Illinois Institute of Technology confirmed the hazard existed for silver-plated wires, but not for copper-only or nickel-plated copper. In July, ASPO directed both North American and Grumman to ensure no silver or silver-coated electrical contacts existed in the vicinity of possible glycol spills in the Apollo spacecraft.

==== Pure oxygen atmosphere ====

The plugs-out test had been run to simulate the launch procedure, with the cabin pressurized with pure oxygen at the nominal launch level of , above standard sea level atmospheric pressure. This is more than five times the partial pressure of oxygen in the atmosphere, and provides an environment in which materials not normally considered flammable will be highly flammable and burst into flame.

The high-pressure oxygen atmosphere was similar to that which had been used successfully in the Mercury and Gemini programs. The pressure before launch was deliberately greater than ambient in order to drive out the nitrogen-containing air and replace it with pure oxygen, and also to seal the plug door hatch cover. During the launch, the pressure would have been gradually reduced to the in-flight level of , providing sufficient oxygen for the astronauts to breathe while reducing the fire risk. The Apollo1 crew had successfully tested this procedure with their spacecraft in the Operations and Checkout Building altitude (vacuum) chamber on October 18 and 19, 1966, and the backup crew of Schirra, Eisele and Cunningham had repeated it on December 30. The investigation board noted that, during these tests, the command module had been fully pressurized with pure oxygen four times, for a total of six hours and fifteen minutes, two and a half hours longer than it had been during the plugs-out test.

==== Flammable materials in the cabin ====
The review board cited &quot;many types and classes of combustible material&quot; close to ignition sources. The NASA crew systems department had installed of Velcro throughout the spacecraft, almost like carpeting. This Velcro was found to be flammable in a high-pressure 100% oxygen environment. Astronaut Buzz Aldrin states in his book &quot;Men From Earth&quot; that the flammable material had been removed per the crew&#x27;s August 19 complaints and Joseph Shea&#x27;s order, but was replaced before the August 26 delivery to Cape Kennedy.

==== Hatch design ====
The inner hatch cover used a plug door design, sealed by higher pressure inside the cabin than outside. The normal pressure level used for launch ( above ambient) created sufficient force to prevent removing the cover until the excess pressure was vented. Emergency procedure called for Grissom to open the cabin vent valve first, allowing White to remove the cover, but Grissom was prevented from doing this because the valve was located to the left, behind the initial wall of flames. Also, while the system could easily vent the normal pressure, its flow capacity was utterly incapable of handling the rapid increase to caused by the intense heat of the fire.

North American had originally suggested the hatch open outward and use explosive bolts to blow the hatch in case of emergency, as had been done in Project Mercury. NASA did not agree, arguing the hatch could accidentally open, as it had on Grissom&#x27;s &quot;Liberty Bell 7&quot; flight, so the Manned Spacecraft Center designers rejected the explosive design in favor of a mechanically operated one for the Gemini and Apollo programs. Before the fire, the Apollo astronauts had recommended changing the design to an outward-opening hatch, and this was already slated for inclusion in the Block II command module design. According to Donald K. Slayton&#x27;s testimony before the House investigation of the accident, this was based on ease of exit for spacewalks and at the end of flight, rather than for emergency exit.

==== Emergency preparedness ====
The board noted that the test planners had failed to identify the test as hazardous; emergency equipment (such as gas masks) were inadequate to handle this type of fire; that fire, rescue, and medical teams were not in attendance; and that the spacecraft work and access areas contained many hindrances to emergency response such as steps, sliding doors, and sharp turns.

== Choice of pure oxygen atmosphere ==
When designing the Mercury spacecraft, NASA had considered using a nitrogen/oxygen mixture to reduce the fire risk near launch, but rejected it based on a number of considerations. First, a pure oxygen atmosphere is comfortably breathable by humans at , greatly reducing the pressure load on the spacecraft in the vacuum of space. Second, nitrogen used with the in-flight pressure reduction carried the risk of decompression sickness (known as &quot;the bends&quot;). But the decision to eliminate the use of any gas but oxygen was criticized when a serious accident occurred on April 21, 1960, in which McDonnell Aircraft test pilot G. B. North passed out and was seriously injured when testing a Mercury cabin / spacesuit atmosphere system in a vacuum chamber. The problem was found to be nitrogen-rich (oxygen-poor) air leaking from the cabin into his spacesuit feed. North American Aviation had suggested using an oxygen/nitrogen mixture for Apollo, but NASA overruled this. The pure oxygen design was judged to be safer, less complicated, and lighter in weight. In his monograph &quot;Project Apollo: The Tough Decisions&quot;, Deputy Administrator Seamans wrote that NASA&#x27;s worst mistake in engineering judgment was not running a fire test on the command module before the plugs-out test. In the first episode of the 2009 BBC documentary series &quot;NASA: Triumph and Tragedy&quot;, Jim McDivitt said that NASA had no idea how a 100% oxygen atmosphere would influence burning. Similar remarks by other astronauts were expressed in the 2007 documentary film &quot;In the Shadow of the Moon&quot;.

=== Other oxygen incidents ===
Several fires in high-oxygen test environments had occurred before the Apollo fire. In 1962, USAF Colonel B. Dean Smith was conducting a test of the Gemini space suit with a colleague in a pure oxygen chamber at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas, when a fire broke out, destroying the chamber. Smith and his partner narrowly escaped. On November 17, 1962, a fire broke out in a chamber at the Navy&#x27;s Air Crew Equipment Laboratory during a pure oxygen test. The fire was started because a faulty ground wire arced onto nearby insulation. After attempts to extinguish the fire by smothering it, the crew escaped the chamber with minor burns across large parts of their bodies. On February 16, 1965, United States Navy Divers Fred Jackson and John Youmans were killed in a decompression chamber fire at the Experimental Diving Unit in Washington, D.C., shortly after additional oxygen was added to the chamber&#x27;s atmospheric mix.

In addition to fires with personnel present, the Apollo Environmental Control System experienced several accidents from 1964 to 1966 due to various hardware malfunctions. Notable is the April 28, 1966, fire, as the subsequent investigation found that several new measures should be taken to avoid fires, including improved selection of materials and that ESC and Command Module circuits have a potential for arcing or short circuits.

Other oxygen fire occurrences are documented in reports archived in the National Air and Space Museum, such as:
* Selection of Space Cabin Atmospheres. Part II: Fire and Blast Hazards in Space Cabins. (Emanuel M. Roth; Dept of Aeronautics Medicine and Bioastronautics, Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research. c. 1964–1966)
* &quot;Fire Prevention in Manned Spacecraft and Test Chamber Oxygen Atmospheres&quot;. (Manned Spacecraft Center. NASA General Working Paper 10 063. October 10, 1966)

Incidents had also occurred in the Soviet space program, but due to the Soviet government&#x27;s policy of secrecy, these were not disclosed until well after the Apollo1 fire. Cosmonaut Valentin Bondarenko died on March 23, 1961, from burns sustained in a fire while participating in a 15-day endurance experiment in a high-oxygen isolation chamber, less than three weeks before the first Vostok crewed space flight; this was disclosed on January 28, 1986.

During the Voskhod 2 mission in March 1965, cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Alexei Leonov could not completely seal the spacecraft hatch after Leonov&#x27;s historic first walk in space. The spacecraft&#x27;s environmental control system responded to the leaking air by adding more oxygen to the cabin, causing the concentration level to rise as high as 45%. The crew and ground controllers worried about the possibility of fire, remembering Bondarenko&#x27;s death four years earlier.

On January 31, 1967, four days after the Apollo1 fire, United States Air Force airmen William F. Bartley Jr. and Richard G. Harmon were killed in a flash fire while tending laboratory rabbits in the Two Man Space Environment Simulator, a pure oxygen chamber at the School of Aerospace Medicine at Brooks Air Force Base. Like the Apollo1 fire, the School fire was caused by an electrical spark in a pure oxygen environment. The widows of the Apollo1 crew sent condolence letters to Bartley and Harmon&#x27;s families.

== Political fallout ==
Committees in both houses of the United States Congress with oversight of the space program soon launched investigations, including the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, chaired by Senator Clinton P. Anderson. Seamans, Webb, Manned Space Flight Administrator Dr. George E. Mueller, and Apollo Program Director Maj Gen Samuel C. Phillips were called to testify before Anderson&#x27;s committee.

In the February 27 hearing, Senator Walter F. Mondale asked Webb if he knew of a report of extraordinary problems with the performance of North American Aviation on the Apollo contract. Webb replied he did not, and deferred to his subordinates on the witness panel. Mueller and Phillips responded they too were unaware of any such &quot;report&quot;.

However, in late 1965, just over a year before the accident, Phillips had headed a &quot;tiger team&quot; investigating the causes of inadequate quality, schedule delays, and cost overruns in both the Apollo CSM and the Saturn V second stage (for which North American was also prime contractor). He gave an oral presentation (with transparencies) of his team&#x27;s findings to Mueller and Seamans, and also presented them in a memo to North American president John L. Atwood, to which Mueller appended his own strongly worded memo to Atwood.

During Mondale&#x27;s 1967 questioning about what was to become known as the &quot;Phillips Report&quot;, Seamans was afraid Mondale might actually have seen a hard copy of Phillips&#x27; presentation, and responded that contractors have occasionally been subjected to on-site progress reviews; perhaps this was what Mondale&#x27;s information referred to. Mondale continued to refer to &quot;the Report&quot; despite Phillips&#x27; refusal to characterize it as such, and, angered by what he perceived as Webb&#x27;s deception and concealment of important program problems from Congress, he questioned NASA&#x27;s selection of North American as prime contractor. Seamans later wrote that Webb roundly chastised him in the cab ride leaving the hearing, for volunteering information which led to the disclosure of Phillips&#x27; memo.

On May 11, Webb issued a statement defending NASA&#x27;s November 1961 selection of North American as the prime contractor for Apollo. This was followed on June9 by Seamans filing a seven-page memorandum documenting the selection process. Webb eventually provided a controlled copy of Phillips&#x27; memo to Congress. The Senate committee noted in its final report NASA&#x27;s testimony that &quot;the findings of the [Phillips] task force had no effect on the accident, did not lead to the accident, and were not related to the accident&quot;, but stated in its recommendations:
Freshman Senators Edward W. Brooke III and Charles H. Percy jointly wrote an &quot;Additional Views&quot; section appended to the committee report, chastising NASA more strongly than Anderson for not having disclosed the Phillips review to Congress. Mondale wrote his own, even more strongly worded Additional View, accusing NASA of &quot;evasiveness... lack of candor... patronizing attitude toward Congress... refusal to respond fully and forthrightly to legitimate Congressional inquiries, and... solicitous concern for corporate sensitivities at a time of national tragedy&quot;.

The potential political threat to Apollo blew over, due in large part to the support of President Lyndon B. Johnson, who at the time still wielded a measure of influence with the Congress from his own Senatorial experience. He was a staunch supporter of NASA since its inception, had even recommended the Moon program to President John F. Kennedy in 1961, and was skilled at portraying it as part of Kennedy&#x27;s legacy.

Relations between NASA and North American deteriorated over the assignment of blame. North American argued unsuccessfully it was not responsible for the fatal error in spacecraft atmosphere design. Finally, Webb contacted Atwood, and demanded either he or Chief Engineer Harrison A. Storms resign. Atwood elected to fire Storms.

On the NASA side, Joseph Shea resorted to barbiturates and alcohol in order to help him cope. NASA administrator James Webb became increasingly worried about Shea&#x27;s mental state. Shea was asked to take an extended voluntary leave of absence, but Shea refused, threatening to resign rather than take leave. As a compromise, he agreed to meet with a psychiatrist and to abide by an independent assessment of his psychological fitness. This approach to remove Shea from his position was also unsuccessful. Finally, six months after the fire, Shea&#x27;s superiors reassigned him to NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C. Shea felt that his new post was a &quot;non-job,&quot; and left after only two months.

== Program recovery ==

Gene Kranz called a meeting of his staff in Mission Control three days after the accident, delivering a speech which has subsequently become one of NASA&#x27;s principles. Speaking of the errors and overall attitude surrounding the Apollo program before the accident, he said: &quot;We were too &#x27;gung-ho&#x27; about the schedule and we blocked out all of the problems we saw each day in our work. Every element of the program was in trouble and so were we.&quot; He reminded the team of the perils and mercilessness of their endeavor, and stated the new requirement that every member of every team in mission control be &quot;tough and competent&quot;, requiring nothing less than perfection throughout NASA&#x27;s programs. In 2003, following the Space Shuttle &quot;Columbia&quot; disaster, NASA administrator Sean O&#x27;Keefe quoted Kranz&#x27;s speech, applying it to the &quot;Columbia&quot; crew.

=== Command module redesign ===
After the fire, the Apollo program was grounded for review and redesign. The command module was found to be extremely hazardous and, in some instances, carelessly assembled (for example, a misplaced wrench socket was found in the cabin).

It was decided that the remaining Block I spacecraft would be used only for uncrewed Saturn V test flights. All crewed missions would use the Block II spacecraft, to which many command module design changes were made:
* The cabin atmosphere at launch was adjusted to 60% oxygen and 40% nitrogen at sea-level pressure: . During ascent the cabin rapidly vented down to , releasing approximately 2/3 of the gas originally present at launch. The vent then closed and the environmental control system maintained a nominal cabin pressure of as the spacecraft continued into vacuum. The cabin was then very slowly purged (vented to space and simultaneously replaced with 100% oxygen), so the nitrogen concentration gradually fell off to zero over the next day. Although the new cabin launch atmosphere was significantly safer than 100% oxygen, it still contained almost three times the amount of oxygen present in ordinary sea-level air (20.9% oxygen). This was necessary to ensure a sufficient partial pressure of oxygen when the astronauts removed their helmets after reaching orbit. (60% of five psi is three psi, compared to 60% of which is at launch, and 20.9% of which is in sea-level air.)
* The environment within the astronauts&#x27; pressure suits was not changed. Because of the rapid drop in cabin (and suit) pressures during ascent, decompression sickness was likely unless the nitrogen had been purged from the astronauts&#x27; tissues before launch. They would still breathe pure oxygen, starting several hours before launch, until they removed their helmets on orbit. Avoiding the &quot;bends&quot; was considered worth the residual risk of an oxygen-accelerated fire within a suit.
* Nylon used in the Block I suits was replaced in the Block II suits with Beta cloth, a non-flammable, highly melt-resistant fabric woven from fiberglass and coated with Teflon.
* Block II had already been planned to use a completely redesigned hatch which opened outward, and could be opened in less than five seconds. Concerns of accidental opening were addressed by using a cartridge of pressurized nitrogen to drive the release mechanism in an emergency, instead of the explosive bolts used on Project Mercury.
* Flammable materials in the cabin were replaced with self-extinguishing versions.
* Plumbing and wiring were covered with protective insulation. Aluminum tubing was replaced with stainless steel tubing that used brazed joints when possible.

Thorough protocols were implemented for documenting spacecraft construction and maintenance.

=== New mission naming scheme ===
The astronauts&#x27; widows asked that &quot;Apollo 1&quot; be reserved for the flight their husbands never made, and on April 24, 1967, Mueller, as Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, announced this change officially: AS-204 would be recorded as Apollo1, &quot;first manned Apollo Saturn flight – failed on ground test&quot;. Even though three uncrewed Apollo missions (AS-201, AS-202, and AS-203) had previously occurred, only AS-201 and AS-202 carried spacecraft. Therefore, the next mission, the first uncrewed Saturn V test flight (AS-501) would be designated Apollo4, with all subsequent flights numbered sequentially in the order flown. The first three flights would not be renumbered, and the names &quot;Apollo2&quot; and &quot;Apollo3&quot; would officially go unused. Mueller considered AS-201 and AS-202, the first and second flights of the Apollo Block I CSM, as Apollo2 and3 respectively.

The crewed flight hiatus allowed work to catch up on the Saturn V and lunar module, which were encountering their own delays. Apollo4 flew in November 1967. Apollo1&#x27;s (AS-204) Saturn IB rocket was taken down from Launch Complex 34, later reassembled at Launch complex 37B and used to launch Apollo5, an uncrewed Earth orbital test flight of the first lunar module, LM-1, in January 1968. A second uncrewed Saturn V AS-502 flew as Apollo6 in April 1968, and Grissom&#x27;s backup crew of Wally Schirra, Don Eisele, and Walter Cunningham, finally flew the orbital test mission as Apollo7 (AS-205), in a Block II CSM in October 1968.

== Memorials ==
Gus Grissom and Roger Chaffee were buried at Arlington National Cemetery. Ed White was buried at West Point Cemetery on the grounds of the United States Military Academy in West Point, New York. NASA officials attempted to pressure Pat White, Ed White&#x27;s widow, into allowing her husband also to be buried at Arlington, against what she knew to be his wishes; their efforts were foiled by astronaut Frank Borman. The names of the Apollo 1 crew are among those of multiple astronauts who have died in the line of duty, listed on the Space Mirror Memorial at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex in Merritt Island, Florida. President Jimmy Carter awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor posthumously to Grissom on October 1, 1978. President Bill Clinton awarded it to White and Chaffee on December 17, 1997.
An Apollo 1 mission patch was left on the Moon&#x27;s surface after the first crewed lunar landing by Apollo11 crew members Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin. The Apollo15 mission left on the surface of the Moon a tiny memorial statue, &quot;Fallen Astronaut&quot;, along with a plaque containing the names of the Apollo1 astronauts, among others including Soviet cosmonauts, who perished in the pursuit of human space flight.

=== Launch Complex 34 ===
After the Apollo 1 fire, Launch Complex 34 was subsequently used only for the launch of Apollo7 and later dismantled down to the concrete launch pedestal, which remains at the site () along with a few other concrete and steel-reinforced structures. The pedestal bears two plaques commemorating the crew. 
The &quot;Ad Astra per aspera&quot; plaque for &quot;the crew of Apollo 1&quot; is seen in the 1998 film &quot;Armageddon&quot;. 
The &quot;Dedicated to the living memory of the crew of the Apollo 1&quot; plaque is quoted at the end of Wayne Hale&#x27;s Requiem for the NASA Space Shuttle program. Each year the families of the Apollo1 crew are invited to the site for a memorial, and the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex includes the site during the tour of the historic Cape Canaveral launch sites.

In January 2005, three granite benches, built by a college classmate of one of the astronauts, were installed at the site on the southern edge of the launch pad. Each bears the name of one of the astronauts and his military service insignia.
=== Stars, landmarks on the Moon and Mars ===
* Apollo astronauts frequently aligned their spacecraft inertial navigation platforms and determined their positions relative to the Earth and Moon by sighting sets of stars with optical instruments. As a practical joke, the Apollo1 crew named three of the stars in the Apollo catalog after themselves and introduced them into NASA documentation. Gamma Cassiopeiae became &quot;Navi&quot; – Ivan (Gus Grissom&#x27;s middle name) spelled backwards. Iota Ursae Majoris became &quot;Dnoces&quot; – &quot;Second&quot; spelled backwards, for Edward H. White II. And Gamma Velorum became &quot;Regor&quot; – Roger (Chaffee) spelled backwards. These names quickly stuck after the Apollo1 accident and were regularly used by later Apollo crews.
* Craters on the Moon and hills on Mars are named after the three Apollo1 astronauts.

=== Civic and other memorials ===
* Three public schools in Huntsville, Alabama (home of George C. Marshall Space Flight Center and the U.S. Space &amp; Rocket Center): Virgil I. Grissom High School, Ed White Middle School, and the Chaffee Elementary School.
* Ed White II Elementary e-STEM (Elementary-Science, Technology, Engineering and Math) Magnet school in El Lago, Texas, near the Johnson Space Center. White lived in El Lago (next door to Neil Armstrong).
* There are Grissom or Virgil I. Grissom middle schools in Mishawaka, Indiana, Sterling Heights, Michigan, and Tinley Park, Illinois.
* Virgil Grissom Elementary School in Princeton, Iowa, and the Edward White Elementary School in Eldridge, Iowa, are both part of the North Scott Community School District also naming the other three elementary schools after astronauts Neil Armstrong, John Glenn, and Alan Shepard.
* School #7 in Rochester, New York, is also known as the Virgil I. Grissom School.
* In the early 1970s, three streets in Amherst, New York, were named for Chaffee, White and Grissom. By 1991, when no homes had been built on Grissom Drive, the area was repurposed as commercial property; the Grissom street sign was removed and the street renamed Classics V Drive for the banquet hall that occupied the land.
* The THUMS Islands, four man-made oil drilling islands in the harbor off Long Beach, California, are named Grissom, White, Chaffee and Theodore Freeman.
* The Roger B. Chaffee Planetarium is located at the Grand Rapids Public Museum.
* Roger B. Chaffee Memorial Boulevard in Wyoming, Michigan, the largest suburb of Grand Rapids, Michigan, which is today an industrial park, but exists on the site of the former Grand Rapids Airport. A large portion of the north-south runway is used today as the roadway of the Roger B. Chaffee Memorial Boulevard.
* Roger B. Chaffee Scholarship Fund in Grand Rapids, Michigan, each year in memory of Chaffee honors one student who intends to pursue a career in engineering or the sciences
* Three adjacent parks in Fullerton, California, are each named for Grissom, Chaffee and White. The parks are located near a former Hughes Aircraft research and development facility. A Hughes subsidiary, Hughes Space and Communications Company, built components for the Apollo program.
* Two buildings on the campus of Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana, are named for Grissom and Chaffee (both Purdue alumni). Grissom Hall houses the School of Industrial Engineering (and was home to the School of Aeronautics and Astronautics before it moved into the new Neil Armstrong Hall of Engineering). Chaffee Hall, constructed in 1965, is the administration complex of Maurice J. Zucrow Laboratories where combustion, propulsion, gas dynamics, and related fields are studied. The Chaffee Hall contains a 72-seat auditorium, offices, and administrative staff.
* A tree for each astronaut was planted in NASA&#x27;s Astronaut Memorial Grove at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, not far from the Saturn V building, along with trees for each astronaut from the &quot;Challenger&quot; and &quot;Columbia&quot; disasters. Tours of the space center pause briefly near the grove for a moment of silence, and the trees can be seen from nearby NASA Road 1.
* In 1968, Bunker Hill Air Force Base near Peru, Indiana was renamed Grissom Air Force Base. The three-letter code for the VOR air navigation beacon at the base is GUS.
* All three Apollo 1 astronauts are memorialized in Jacksonville, Florida: Edward H. White High School, Chaffee Road, and Grissom Drive.

== Remains of CM-012 ==
The Apollo 1 command module has never been on public display. After the accident, the spacecraft was removed and taken to Kennedy Space Center to facilitate the review board&#x27;s disassembly in order to investigate the cause of the fire. When the investigation was complete, it was moved to the NASA Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, and placed in a secured storage warehouse.
On February 17, 2007, the parts of CM-012 were moved approximately to a newer, environmentally controlled warehouse. Only a few weeks earlier, Gus Grissom&#x27;s brother Lowell publicly suggested CM-012 be permanently entombed in the concrete remains of Launch Complex 34.

On January 27, 2017, the 50th anniversary of the fire, NASA put the hatch from Apollo1 on display at the Saturn V Rocket Center at Kennedy Space Center Visitors Complex. KSC&#x27;s Visitor Complex also houses memorials that include parts of &quot;Challenger&quot; and &quot;Columbia,&quot; located in the Space Shuttle &quot;Atlantis&quot; exhibit. &quot;This is way, way, way long overdue. But we&#x27;re excited about it,&quot; said Scott Grissom, Gus Grissom&#x27;s older son.

== In popular culture ==
* The accident and its aftermath are the subject of episode2, &quot;Apollo One&quot;, of the 1998 HBO miniseries &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot;.
* The mission and accident are covered in the 2015 ABC television series &quot;The Astronaut Wives Club&quot;, episodes8 &quot;Rendezvous&quot; and9 &quot;Abort&quot; from the point of view of Grissom&#x27;s widow Betty.
* The incident is the subject of the Public Service Broadcasting track &quot;Fire in the Cockpit&quot; from their 2015 album &quot;The Race for Space&quot;.
* The incident is featured in the 2018 movie &quot;First Man&quot;.
* A short dramatization of the accident is featured at the beginning of the 1995 film &quot;Apollo 13&quot;.
* The accident and a subsequent emphasis on safety within NASA are the subject of investigation in the first two episodes of the Apple TV+ series &quot;For All Mankind&quot;.
* The accident is covered in the 2024 movie &quot;Fly Me to the Moon&quot;.

== See also ==
* List of spaceflight-related accidents and incidents
* STS-1 – First Space Shuttle flight, three technicians asphyxiated on the launch pad after a countdown test
* STS-51-L – Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot;, America&#x27;s first in-flight fatality
* STS-107 – Space Shuttle &quot;Columbia&quot;, America&#x27;s first return-flight fatality
* Valentin Bondarenko – a Soviet cosmonaut-in-training, died in a high-oxygen fire in an experimental chamber
* Soyuz 1 – First Soviet spaceflight death
* Soyuz 11 – Loss of an entire Soviet spacecraft crew

== References ==
Notes

Citations

== Further reading ==
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Baron testimony at investigation before Olin Teague, 21. April 1967
* &quot;Apollo 204 Review Board Final Report&quot; , NASA&#x27;s final report on its investigation, April 5, 1967
* Final report of the U.S. Senate investigation, January 30, 1968
* Apollo Operations Handbook, Command and Service Module, Spacecraft 012 (The flight manual for CSM 012)
*CBS News Special Report on Apollo 1 Disaster, January 27, 1967, C-SPAN</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194082" start="0" end="8" title="Apollo 1" label="Apollo 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q194082" start="31" end="37" title="Apollo 1" label="AS-204"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="89" end="103" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="225" end="240" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="255" end="288" title="Apollo command and service module" label="Apollo command and service module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034347" start="361" end="409" title="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station Launch Complex 34" label="Cape Kennedy Air Force Station Launch Complex 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="468" end="479" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q216726" start="494" end="502" title="Ed White (astronaut)" label="Ed White"/>
<link wikidata="Q345678" start="514" end="530" title="Roger B. Chaffee" label="Roger B. Chaffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="630" end="634" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="795" end="817" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002816" start="838" end="857" title="United States congressional hearing" label="committee inquiries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205264" start="1103" end="1112" title="plug door" label="plug door"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="1360" end="1374" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q519560" start="1463" end="1486" title="North American Aviation" label="North American Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074794" start="1514" end="1529" title="Phillips Report" label="Phillips Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q537520" start="1578" end="1591" title="James E. Webb" label="James E. Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q65241362" start="2029" end="2041" title="lunar module" label="lunar module"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="2051" end="2059" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q719315" start="2082" end="2091" title="Saturn IB" label="Saturn IB"/>
<link wikidata="Q242528" start="2167" end="2175" title="Apollo 5" label="Apollo 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q188486" start="2263" end="2271" title="Apollo 7" label="Apollo 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="2498" end="2531" title="Apollo command and service module" label="Apollo command and service module"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="2780" end="2790" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q519560" start="2848" end="2871" title="North American Aviation" label="North American Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2885" end="2892" title="Apollo command and service module#Development history" label="Block I"/>
<link wikidata="Q938183" start="2921" end="2943" title="lunar orbit rendezvous" label="lunar orbit rendezvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="3237" end="3249" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q449706" start="3363" end="3377" title="Donn F. Eisele" label="Donn F. Eisele"/>
<link wikidata="Q829092" start="3440" end="3446" title="Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker" label="KC-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898068" start="3447" end="3479" title="Reduced-gravity aircraft" label="weightlessness training aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q364476" start="3615" end="3629" title="James McDivitt" label="James McDivitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q278656" start="3631" end="3642" title="David Scott" label="David Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q363506" start="3647" end="3666" title="Rusty Schweickart" label="Russell Schweickart"/>
<link wikidata="Q110450" start="3716" end="3730" title="Wally Schirra" label="Walter Schirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q372215" start="3744" end="3761" title="Walter Cunningham" label="Walter Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093759" start="4226" end="4242" title="space rendezvous" label="space rendezvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="4258" end="4272" title="Project Gemini" label="Project Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q259770" start="4282" end="4291" title="Gemini 12" label="Gemini 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="5418" end="5422" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988651" start="5889" end="5903" title="Joseph Francis Shea" label="Joseph F. Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15411420" start="6227" end="6233" title="hook and loop fastener" label="Velcro"/>
<link wikidata="Q218414" start="8392" end="8410" title="medium Earth orbit" label="medium Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18762" start="8434" end="8446" title="Frank Borman" label="Frank Borman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859" start="8448" end="8463" title="Michael Collins (astronaut)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q19242" start="8468" end="8482" title="William Anders" label="William Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684149" start="9109" end="9151" title="Lost Moon" label="Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686458" start="9161" end="9175" title="Jeffrey Kluger" label="Jeffrey Kluger"/>
<link wikidata="Q111240" start="9190" end="9202" title="Jim Lovell" label="James Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034347" start="9756" end="9762" title="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station Launch Complex 34" label="pad 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="10583" end="10593" title="cryogenics" label="cryogenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810561" start="10602" end="10613" title="pyrotechnic fastener" label="pyrotechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="10667" end="10670" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EST"/>
<link wikidata="Q30192" start="10678" end="10681" title="Greenwich Mean Time" label="GMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q941680" start="12208" end="12233" title="inertial measurement unit" label="inertial measurement unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097807" start="12488" end="12520" title="Operations and Checkout Building" label="Operations and Checkout Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q617651" start="17482" end="17490" title="Gemini 8" label="Gemini 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158806" start="17544" end="17558" title="Robert Seamans" label="Robert Seamans"/>
<link wikidata="Q537520" start="18334" end="18347" title="James E. Webb" label="James E. Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="18354" end="18363" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="18364" end="18381" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q618731" start="18676" end="18699" title="Langley Research Center" label="Langley Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18709" end="18726" title="Floyd L. Thompson" label="Floyd L. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18762" start="18753" end="18765" title="Frank Borman" label="Frank Borman"/>
<link wikidata="Q923972" start="18787" end="18799" title="Maxime Faget" label="Maxime Faget"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889588" start="18938" end="18958" title="United States Bureau of Mines" label="U.S. Bureau of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="19179" end="19198" title="stereoscopy" label="stereo photographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170518" start="19679" end="19697" title="burn" label="third-degree burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="20102" end="20116" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="20150" end="20165" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="20297" end="20309" title="Asphyxiation" label="Asphyxiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="21220" end="21232" title="electric arc" label="electric arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="21722" end="21728" title="Polytetrafluoroethylene" label="Teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194207" start="21870" end="21885" title="ethylene glycol" label="ethylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="21935" end="21947" title="Electrolysis" label="Electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181232" start="21992" end="21997" title="anode" label="anode"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="22032" end="22056" title="Manned Spacecraft Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q205949" start="22118" end="22137" title="exothermic reaction" label="exothermic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q659706" start="22248" end="22280" title="Illinois Institute of Technology" label="Illinois Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="23101" end="23108" title="Project Mercury" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205264" start="23299" end="23308" title="plug door" label="plug door"/>
<link wikidata="Q15411420" start="24214" end="24220" title="Hook-and-loop fastener" label="Velcro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252" start="24363" end="24374" title="Buzz Aldrin" label="Buzz Aldrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205264" start="24654" end="24663" title="plug door" label="plug door"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810561" start="25360" end="25374" title="explosive bolt" label="explosive bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="25436" end="25451" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25550" end="25564" title="Mercury-Redstone 4#Liberty Bell 7" label="Liberty Bell 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="25586" end="25610" title="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="25925" end="25942" title="Deke Slayton" label="Donald K. Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="26969" end="26991" title="decompression sickness" label="decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q750141" start="27162" end="27180" title="McDonnell Aircraft" label="McDonnell Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="27891" end="27894" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q364476" start="27953" end="27965" title="James McDivitt" label="Jim McDivitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704813" start="28127" end="28164" title="In the Shadow of the Moon (2007 film)" label="&amp;quot;In the Shadow of the Moon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="28291" end="28295" title="United States Air Force" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501091" start="28347" end="28364" title="Gemini space suit" label="Gemini space suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974968" start="28410" end="28431" title="Brooks Air Force Base" label="Brooks Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="28435" end="28446" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890816" start="28910" end="28935" title="Navy diver (United States Navy)" label="United States Navy Divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q549046" start="28983" end="29004" title="decompression chamber" label="decompression chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890817" start="29017" end="29041" title="United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit" label="Experimental Diving Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="29045" end="29061" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="29652" end="29681" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="30008" end="30032" title="Manned Spacecraft Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="30123" end="30143" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="30264" end="30273" title="Cosmonaut" label="Cosmonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q538639" start="30274" end="30293" title="Valentin Bondarenko" label="Valentin Bondarenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q623873" start="30477" end="30483" title="Vostok programme" label="Vostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q722791" start="30557" end="30566" title="Voskhod 2" label="Voskhod 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q157931" start="30601" end="30615" title="Pavel Belyayev" label="Pavel Belyayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q154269" start="30620" end="30633" title="Alexei Leonov" label="Alexei Leonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="30716" end="30729" title="extravehicular activity" label="walk in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="31606" end="31628" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891256" start="31709" end="31760" title="United States Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences" label="Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q464733" start="31781" end="31800" title="Clinton Presba Anderson" label="Clinton P. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821445" start="31855" end="31872" title="George Mueller (NASA)" label="George E. Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="31902" end="31909" title="Major general (United States)" label="Maj Gen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484225" start="31910" end="31928" title="Samuel C. Phillips" label="Samuel C. Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="32015" end="32022" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="32023" end="32040" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter F. Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413754" start="32428" end="32438" title="tiger team" label="tiger team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244504" start="32800" end="32814" title="John Leland Atwood" label="John L. Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074794" start="32966" end="32981" title="Phillips Report" label="Phillips Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q831677" start="33984" end="33999" title="document control" label="controlled copy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276635" start="34316" end="34336" title="Edward Brooke" label="Edward W. Brooke III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064692" start="34341" end="34357" title="Charles H. Percy" label="Charles H. Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="35214" end="35229" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15458416" start="35578" end="35596" title="Harrison Storms" label="Harrison A. Storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q711493" start="36371" end="36381" title="Gene Kranz" label="Gene Kranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="36603" end="36617" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q871690" start="36672" end="36679" title="gung-ho" label="gung-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q580867" start="37124" end="37167" title="Space Shuttle Columbia disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q983423" start="37188" end="37205" title="Sean O&amp;#x27;Keefe" label="Sean O&amp;#x27;Keefe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37694" end="37713" title="Apollo command and service module#Major differences between Block I and Block II" label="Block II spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q27165" start="38540" end="38556" title="partial pressure" label="partial pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="38891" end="38913" title="decompression sickness" label="decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501091" start="39264" end="39277" title="Gemini space suit" label="Block I suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q286518" start="39298" end="39312" title="Apollo/Skylab A7L" label="Block II suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840911" start="39318" end="39328" title="Beta cloth" label="Beta cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5861" start="39387" end="39397" title="Glass (fiber)" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810561" start="39718" end="39732" title="explosive bolt" label="explosive bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="39893" end="39903" title="thermal insulation" label="insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q297059" start="40514" end="40520" title="AS-201" label="AS-201"/>
<link wikidata="Q297077" start="40522" end="40528" title="AS-202" label="AS-202"/>
<link wikidata="Q297082" start="40534" end="40540" title="AS-203" label="AS-203"/>
<link wikidata="Q236071" start="40708" end="40715" title="Apollo 4" label="Apollo4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175575" start="41305" end="41323" title="Cape Canaveral Space Launch Complex 37" label="Launch complex 37B"/>
<link wikidata="Q242528" start="41343" end="41350" title="Apollo 5" label="Apollo5"/>
<link wikidata="Q222871" start="41482" end="41489" title="Apollo 6" label="Apollo6"/>
<link wikidata="Q110450" start="41539" end="41552" title="Wally Schirra" label="Wally Schirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q449706" start="41554" end="41564" title="Donn F. Eisele" label="Don Eisele"/>
<link wikidata="Q372215" start="41570" end="41587" title="Walter Cunningham" label="Walter Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q188486" start="41630" end="41637" title="Apollo 7" label="Apollo7"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="41745" end="41772" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687434" start="41797" end="41816" title="West Point Cemetery" label="West Point Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="41839" end="41869" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="41873" end="41893" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18762" start="42103" end="42115" title="Frank Borman" label="Frank Borman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546040" start="42236" end="42257" title="Space Mirror Memorial" label="Space Mirror Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389687" start="42265" end="42301" title="Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex" label="Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q991010" start="42305" end="42328" title="Merritt Island, Florida" label="Merritt Island, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="42340" end="42352" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126046" start="42365" end="42399" title="Congressional Space Medal of Honor" label="Congressional Space Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="42454" end="42466" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="42623" end="42631" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="42645" end="42659" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="42681" end="42689" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161218" start="42760" end="42776" title="Fallen Astronaut" label="Fallen Astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034347" start="42997" end="43014" title="Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 34" label="Launch Complex 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714768" start="43287" end="43306" title="Ad astra" label="Ad Astra per aspera"/>
<link wikidata="Q208344" start="43388" end="43398" title="Armageddon (1998 film)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553065" start="43513" end="43523" title="Wayne Hale" label="Wayne Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314838" start="43531" end="43538" title="Requiem (short story)" label="Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775296" start="43552" end="43573" title="Space Shuttle program" label="Space Shuttle program"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="44127" end="44146" title="inertial navigation" label="inertial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13584" start="44418" end="44435" title="Gamma Cassiopeiae" label="Gamma Cassiopeiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501930" start="44519" end="44537" title="Iota Ursae Majoris" label="Iota Ursae Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q14235" start="44632" end="44645" title="Gamma Velorum" label="Gamma Velorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703807" start="44810" end="44817" title="Lunar craters named for space explorers" label="Craters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272492" start="44834" end="44839" title="Apollo 1 Hills" label="hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="44843" end="44847" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="44955" end="44974" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="44984" end="45022" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="George C. Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347952" start="45031" end="45061" title="U.S. Space &amp;amp; Rocket Center" label="U.S. Space &amp;amp; Rocket Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933773" start="45064" end="45093" title="Virgil I. Grissom High School" label="Virgil I. Grissom High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945856" start="45095" end="45117" title="Ed White Middle School (Alabama)" label="Ed White Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q981260" start="45258" end="45272" title="El Lago, Texas" label="El Lago, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="45283" end="45303" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="45342" end="45356" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q990691" start="45418" end="45436" title="Mishawaka, Indiana" label="Mishawaka, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q927243" start="45438" end="45464" title="Sterling Heights, Michigan" label="Sterling Heights, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761214" start="45470" end="45491" title="Tinley Park, Illinois" label="Tinley Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928154" start="45531" end="45546" title="Princeton, Iowa" label="Princeton, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913982" start="45590" end="45604" title="Eldridge, Iowa" label="Eldridge, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083928" start="45627" end="45664" title="North Scott Community School District" label="North Scott Community School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="45745" end="45755" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="45761" end="45773" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="45790" end="45809" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q470592" start="45897" end="45914" title="Amherst, New York" label="Amherst, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108333" start="46190" end="46203" title="THUMS Islands" label="THUMS Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="46258" end="46280" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q634141" start="46320" end="46336" title="Theodore Freeman" label="Theodore Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022953" start="46460" end="46477" title="Wyoming, Michigan" label="Wyoming, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184587" start="46501" end="46523" title="Grand Rapids, Michigan" label="Grand Rapids, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184587" start="46773" end="46795" title="Grand Rapids, Michigan" label="Grand Rapids, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q494723" start="46935" end="46956" title="Fullerton, California" label="Fullerton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="47041" end="47056" title="Hughes Aircraft Company" label="Hughes Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47113" end="47152" title="Hughes Aircraft Company#Hughes Space and Communications Group" label="Hughes Space and Communications Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="47228" end="47245" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q166481" start="47249" end="47272" title="West Lafayette, Indiana" label="West Lafayette, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q59130262" start="47581" end="47598" title="Maurice J. Zucrow" label="Maurice J. Zucrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="47858" end="47878" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="47882" end="47889" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504345" start="48156" end="48167" title="Texas State Highway NASA Road 1" label="NASA Road 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q386657" start="48212" end="48225" title="Peru, Indiana" label="Peru, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547093" start="48238" end="48260" title="Grissom Air Reserve Base" label="Grissom Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q820036" start="48292" end="48317" title="VHF omnidirectional range" label="VOR air navigation beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="48390" end="48411" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343257" start="48413" end="48440" title="Edward H. White High School" label="Edward H. White High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q618731" start="48802" end="48825" title="Langley Research Center" label="Langley Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034347" start="49145" end="49162" title="Launch Complex 34" label="Launch Complex 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389687" start="49296" end="49333" title="Kennedy Space Center Visitors Complex" label="Kennedy Space Center Visitors Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q54382" start="49406" end="49428" title="Space Shuttle Challenger" label="&amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q54383" start="49433" end="49454" title="Space Shuttle Columbia" label="&amp;quot;Columbia,&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="49615" end="49626" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="49769" end="49772" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="49790" end="49816" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="49875" end="49878" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15728899" start="49903" end="49927" title="The Astronaut Wives Club" label="The Astronaut Wives Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257602" start="50082" end="50109" title="Public Service Broadcasting (band)" label="Public Service Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627530" start="50176" end="50194" title="The Race for Space (album)" label="The Race for Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q42708010" start="50253" end="50262" title="First Man (film)" label="First Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q106428" start="50362" end="50371" title="Apollo 13 (film)" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="50508" end="50517" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958409" start="50525" end="50552" title="For All Mankind (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;For All Mankind&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q115057826" start="50598" end="50628" title="Fly Me to the Moon (2024 film)" label="&amp;quot;Fly Me to the Moon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q603630" start="50648" end="50699" title="List of spaceflight-related accidents and incidents" label="List of spaceflight-related accidents and incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q217543" start="50702" end="50707" title="STS-1" label="STS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q19050" start="50811" end="50819" title="STS-51-L" label="STS-51-L"/>
<link wikidata="Q178836" start="50902" end="50909" title="STS-107" label="STS-107"/>
<link wikidata="Q538639" start="50994" end="51013" title="Valentin Bondarenko" label="Valentin Bondarenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q211254" start="51104" end="51111" title="Soyuz 1" label="Soyuz 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q648581" start="51147" end="51155" title="Soyuz 11" label="Soyuz 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="51705" end="51711" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1966" wikidata="Q191746" url="?curid=1966" title="Apollo 10">
<text>Apollo 10 (May 18–26, 1969) was the fourth human spaceflight in the United States&#x27; Apollo program and the second to orbit the Moon. NASA, the mission&#x27;s operator, described it as a &quot;dress rehearsal&quot; for the first Moon landing (Apollo 11, two months later). It was designated an &quot;F&quot;mission, intended to test all spacecraft components and procedures short of actual descent and landing.

After the spacecraft reached lunar orbit, astronaut John Young remained in the Command and Service Module (CSM) while astronauts Thomas Stafford and Gene Cernan flew the Apollo Lunar Module (LM) to within of the lunar surface, the point at which powered descent for landing would begin on a landing mission. After four orbits they rejoined Young in the CSM and, after the CSM completed its 31st orbit of the Moon, they returned safely to Earth.

While NASA had considered attempting the first crewed lunar landing on Apollo 10, mission planners ultimately decided that it would be prudent to have a practice flight to hone the procedures and techniques. The crew encountered some problems during the flight: pogo oscillations during the launch phase and a brief, uncontrolled tumble of the LM ascent stage in lunar orbit during its solo flight. However, the mission accomplished its major objectives. Stafford and Cernan observed and photographed Apollo 11&#x27;s planned landing site in the Sea of Tranquility. Apollo 10 spent 61 hours and 37 minutes orbiting the Moon, for about eight hours of which Stafford and Cernan flew the LM apart from Young in the CSM, and about eight days total in space. Additionally, Apollo 10 set the record for the highest speed attained by a crewed vehicle: 39,897 km/h (11.08 km/s or 24,791 mph) on May 26, 1969, during the return from the Moon.

The mission&#x27;s call signs were the names of the &quot;Peanuts&quot; characters Charlie Brown for the CSM and Snoopy for the LM, who became Apollo 10&#x27;s semi-official mascots. &quot;Peanuts&quot; creator Charles Schulz also drew mission-related artwork for NASA.

==Framework==

=== Background ===
By 1967, NASA had devised a list of mission types, designated by letters, that needed to be flown before a landing attempt, which would be the &quot;G&quot; mission. The early uncrewed flights were considered &quot;A&quot; or &quot;B&quot; missions, while Apollo 7, the crewed-flight test of the Command and Service Module (CSM), was the &quot;C&quot; mission. The first crewed orbital test of the Lunar Module (LM) was accomplished on Apollo 9, the &quot;D&quot; mission. Apollo 8, flown to the Moon&#x27;s orbit without an LM, was considered a &quot;C-prime&quot; mission, but its success gave NASA the confidence to skip the &quot;E&quot; mission, which would have tested the full Apollo spacecraft in medium or high Earth orbit. Apollo 10, the dress rehearsal for the lunar landing, was to be the &quot;F&quot; mission.

NASA considered skipping the &quot;F&quot; mission as well and attempting the first lunar landing on Apollo 10. Some with the agency advocated this, feeling it senseless to bring astronauts so close to the lunar surface, only to turn away. Although the lunar module intended for Apollo 10 was too heavy to perform the lunar mission, the one intended for Apollo 11 could be substituted by delaying Apollo 10 a month from its May 1969 planned launch. NASA official George Mueller favored a landing attempt on ; he was known for his aggressive approach to moving the Apollo program forward. However, Director of Flight Operations Christopher C. Kraft and others opposed this, feeling that new procedures would have to be developed for a rendezvous in lunar orbit and that NASA had incomplete information regarding the Moon&#x27;s mass concentrations, which might throw off the spacecraft&#x27;s trajectory. Lieutenant General Sam Phillips, the Apollo Program Manager, listened to the arguments on both sides and decided that having a dress rehearsal was crucial.

=== Crew and key Mission Control personnel ===
On November 13, 1968, NASA announced the crew members of Apollo 10. Thomas P. Stafford, the commander, was 38 years old at the time of the mission. A 1952 graduate of the Naval Academy, he was commissioned in the Air Force. Selected for the second group of astronauts in 1962, he flew as pilot of Gemini 6A (1965) and command pilot of Gemini 9A (1966). John Young, the command module pilot, was 38 years old and a commander in the Navy at the time of Apollo 10. A 1952 graduate of Georgia Tech who entered the Navy after graduation and became a test pilot in 1959, he was selected as a Group 2 astronaut alongside Stafford. He flew in Gemini 3 with Gus Grissom in 1965, becoming the first American not of the Mercury Seven to fly in space. Young thereafter commanded Gemini 10 (1966), flying with Michael Collins. Eugene Cernan, the lunar module pilot, was a commander in the Navy at the time of Apollo 10. A 1952 graduate of Purdue University, he entered the Navy after graduation. Selected for the third group of astronauts in 1963, Cernan flew with Stafford on Gemini 9A before his assignment to Apollo 10. With five prior flights among them, the Apollo 10 crew was the most experienced to reach space until the Space Shuttle era, and the first American space mission whose crew were all spaceflight veterans.

The backup crew for Apollo 10 was L. Gordon Cooper Jr as commander, Donn F. Eisele as command module pilot, and Edgar D. Mitchell as lunar module pilot. By the normal crew rotation in place during Apollo, Cooper, Eisele, and Mitchell would have flown on Apollo 13, but Cooper and Eisele never flew again. Deke Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, felt that Cooper did not train as hard as he could have. Eisele was blackballed because of incidents during Apollo 7, which he had flown as CMP and which had seen conflict between the crew and ground controllers; he had also been involved in a messy divorce. Slayton only assigned the two as backups because he had few veteran astronauts available. Cooper and Eisele were replaced by Alan Shepard and Stuart Roosa respectively. Feeling they needed additional training time, George Mueller rejected the Apollo 13 crew. The crew was switched to Apollo 14, which saw Shepard and Mitchell walk on the Moon.

For projects Mercury and Gemini, a prime and a backup crew had been designated, but for Apollo, a third group of astronauts, known as the support crew, was also designated. Slayton created the support crews early in the Apollo program on the advice of McDivitt, who would lead Apollo 9. McDivitt believed that, with preparation going on in facilities across the U.S., meetings that needed a member of the flight crew would be missed. Support crew members were to assist as directed by the mission commander. Usually low in seniority, they assembled the mission&#x27;s rules, flight plan, and checklists, and kept them updated. For Apollo 10, they were Joe Engle, James Irwin, and Charles Duke.

Flight directors were Gerry Griffin, Glynn Lunney, Milt Windler, and Pete Frank. Flight directors during Apollo had a one-sentence job description: &quot;The flight director may take any actions necessary for crew safety and mission success.&quot; CAPCOMs were Duke, Engle, Jack Lousma, and Bruce McCandless II.

===Call signs and mission insignia===
The command module was given the call sign &quot;Charlie Brown&quot; and the lunar module the call sign &quot;Snoopy&quot;. These were taken from the characters in the comic strip, &quot;Peanuts&quot;, Charlie Brown and Snoopy. These names were chosen by the astronauts with the approval of Charles Schulz, the strip&#x27;s creator, who was uncertain it was a good idea, since Charlie Brown was always a failure. The choice of names was deemed undignified by some at NASA, as were the choices for Apollo 9&#x27;s CM and LM (&quot;Gumdrop&quot; and &quot;Spider&quot;). Public relations chief Julian Scheer urged a change for the lunar landing mission. But for Apollo 10, according to Cernan, &quot;The P.R.-types lost this one big-time, for everybody on the planet knew the klutzy kid and his adventuresome beagle, and the names were embraced in a public relations bonanza.&quot; Apollo 11&#x27;s call signs were &quot;Columbia&quot; for the command module and &quot;Eagle&quot; for the lunar module.

Snoopy, Charlie Brown&#x27;s dog, was chosen for the call sign of the lunar module since it was to &quot;snoop&quot; around the landing site, with Charlie Brown given to the command module as Snoopy&#x27;s companion. Snoopy had been associated for some time with the space program, with workers who performed in an outstanding manner awarded silver &quot;Snoopy pins&quot;, and Snoopy posters were seen at NASA facilities, with the cartoon dog having traded in his World War I aviator&#x27;s headgear for a space helmet. Stafford stated that, given the pins, &quot;the choice of Snoopy [as call sign] was a way of acknowledging the contributions of the hundreds of thousands of people who got us there&quot;. The use of the dog was also appropriate since, in the comic strip, Snoopy had journeyed to the Moon the year before, thus defeating, according to Schulz, &quot;the Americans, the Russians, and that stupid cat next door&quot;.
The shield-shaped mission insignia shows a large, three-dimensional Roman numeral X sitting on the Moon&#x27;s surface, in Stafford&#x27;s words, &quot;to show that we had left our mark&quot;. Although it did not land on the Moon, the prominence of the number represents the contributions the mission made to the Apollo program. A CSM circles the Moon as an LM ascent stage flies up from its low pass over the lunar surface with its engine firing. The Earth is visible in the background. On the mission patch, a wide, light blue border carries the word APOLLO at the top and the crew names around the bottom. The patch is trimmed in gold. The insignia was designed by Allen Stevens of Rockwell International.

===Training and preparation===

Apollo 10, the &quot;F&quot; mission or dress rehearsal for the lunar landing, had as its primary objectives to demonstrate crew, space vehicle and mission support facilities performance during a crewed mission to lunar orbit, and to evaluate the performance of the lunar module there. In addition, it was to attempt photography of Apollo Landing Site 2 (ALS-2) in the Sea of Tranquillity, the contemplated landing site for Apollo 11. According to Stafford, Our flight was to take the first lunar module to the moon. We would take the lunar module, go down to within about ten miles above the moon, nine miles above the mountains, radar map, photo map, pick out the first landing site, do the first rendezvous around the moon, pick out some future landing sites, and come home.

Apollo 10 was to adhere as closely as possible to the plans for Apollo 11, including its trajectory to and from lunar orbit, the timeline of mission events, and even the angle of the Sun at ALS-2. However, no landing was to be attempted. ALS-1, given that number because it was the furthest to the east of the candidate sites, and also located in the Sea of Tranquility, had been extensively photographed by Apollo 8 astronauts; at the suggestion of scientist-astronaut Harrison Schmitt, the launch of Apollo 10 had been postponed a day so ALS-2 could be photographed under proper conditions. ALS-2 was chosen as the lunar landing site since it was relatively smooth, of scientific interest, and ALS-1 was deemed too far to the east. Thus, when Apollo 10&#x27;s launch date was announced on January 10, 1969, it was shifted from its placeholder date of May 1 to May 17, rather than to May 16. On March 17, 1969, the launch was slipped one day to May 18, to allow for a better view of ALS-3, to the west of ALS-2. Another deviation from the plans for Apollo 11 was that Apollo 10 was to spend an additional day in lunar orbit once the CSM and LM rendezvoused; this was to allow time for additional testing of the LM&#x27;s systems, as well as for photography of possible future Apollo landing sites.

The Apollo 10 astronauts undertook five hours of formal training for each hour of the mission&#x27;s eight-day duration. This was in addition to the normal mission preparations such as technical briefings, pilot meetings and study. They took part in the testing of the CSM at the Downey, California, facility of its manufacturer, North American Rockwell, and of the LM at Grumman in Bethpage, New York. They visited Cambridge, Massachusetts, for briefings on the Apollo Guidance Computer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Instrumentation Laboratory. They each spent more than 300 hours in simulators of the CM or LM at the Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC) in Houston and at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. To train for the high-acceleration conditions they would experience in returning to Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, they endured MSC&#x27;s centrifuge.

====Lunar landing capability====
While Apollo 10 was meant to follow the procedures of a lunar landing mission to the point of powered descent, Apollo 10&#x27;s LM was not capable of landing and returning to lunar orbit. The ascent stage was loaded with the amount of fuel and oxidizer it would have had remaining if it had lifted off from the surface and reached the altitude at which the Apollo 10 ascent stage fired; this was only about half the total amount required for lift off and rendezvous with the CSM. The mission-loaded LM weighed , compared to for the Apollo 11 LM which made the first landing. Additionally, the software necessary to guide the LM to a landing was not available at the time of Apollo 10.

Craig Nelson wrote in his book &quot;Rocket Men&quot; that NASA took special precaution to ensure Stafford and Cernan would not attempt to make the first landing. Nelson quoted Cernan as saying &quot;A lot of people thought about the kind of people we were: &#x27;Don&#x27;t give those guys an opportunity to land, &#x27;cause they might!&#x27; So the ascent module, the part we lifted off the lunar surface with, was short-fueled. The fuel tanks weren&#x27;t full. So had we literally tried to land on the Moon, we couldn&#x27;t have gotten off.&quot; Mueller, NASA&#x27;s Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, stated, There had been some speculation about whether or not the crew might have landed, having gotten so close. They might have wanted to, but it was impossible for that lunar module to land. It was an early design that was too heavy for a lunar landing, or, to be more precise, too heavy to be able to complete the ascent back to the command module. It was a test module, for the dress rehearsal only, and that was the way it was used.

=== Equipment ===
The descent stage of the LM was delivered to KSC on October 11, 1968, and the ascent stage arrived five days later. They were mated on November 2. The Service Module (SM) and Command Module (CM) arrived on November 24 and were mated two days later. Portions of the Saturn V launch vehicle arrived during November and December 1968, and the complete launch vehicle was erected in the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) on December 30. After being tested in an altitude chamber, the CSM was placed atop the launch vehicle on February 6, 1969. The completed space vehicle was rolled out to Launch Complex 39B on March 11, 1969—the fact that it had been assembled in the VAB&#x27;s High Bay 2 (the first time it had been used) required the crawler to exit the rear of the VAB before looping around the building and joining the main crawlerway, proceeding to the launch pad. This rollout, using Mobile Launch Platform-3 (MLP-3), happened eight days after the launch of Apollo 9, while that mission was still in orbit.

The launch vehicle for Apollo 10 was a Saturn V, designated AS-505, the fifth flight-ready Saturn V to be launched and the third to take astronauts to orbit. The Saturn V differed from that used on Apollo 9 in having a lower dry weight (without propellant) in its first two stages, with a significant reduction to the interstage joining them. Although the S-IVB third stage was slightly heavier, all three stages could carry a greater weight of propellant, and the S-II second stage generated more thrust than that of Apollo 9.

The Apollo spacecraft for the Apollo 10 mission was composed of Command Module 106 (CM-106), Service Module 106 (SM-106, together with the CM known as CSM-106), Lunar Module 4 (LM-4), a spacecraft-lunar module adapter (SLA), numbered as SLA-13A, and a launch escape system. The SLA was a mating structure joining the Instrument Unit on the S-IVB stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle and the CSM, and acted as a housing for the LM, while the Launch Escape System (LES) contained rockets to propel the CM to safety if there was an aborted launch. At about 76.99 metric tons, Apollo 10 would be the heaviest spacecraft to reach orbit to that point.

==Mission highlights==
===Launch and outbound trip===
Apollo 10 launched from KSC on May 18, 1969, at 12:49:00 EDT (16:49:00 UT), at the start of a 4.5-hour launch window. The launch window was timed to secure optimal lighting conditions at Apollo Landing Site 2 at the time of the LM&#x27;s closest approach to the site days later. The launch followed a countdown that had begun at 21:00:00 EDT on May 16 (01:00:00 UT on May 17). Because preparations for Apollo 11 had already begun at Pad 39A, Apollo 10 launched from Pad 39B, becoming the only Apollo flight to launch from that pad and the only one to be controlled from its Firing Room 3.

Problems that arose during the countdown were dealt with during the built-in holds, and did not delay the mission. On the day before launch, Cernan had been stopped for speeding while returning from a final visit with his wife and child. Lacking identification and under orders to tell no one who he was, Cernan later attested in his autobiography that he had feared being arrested. Launch pad leader Gunther Wendt, who had pulled over nearby after recognizing Cernan, explained the situation to the police officer, who then released Cernan despite the officer&#x27;s skepticism that Cernan was an astronaut.
The crew experienced a somewhat rough ride on the way to orbit due to pogo oscillations. About 12 minutes after liftoff, the spacecraft entered a low Earth orbit with a high point of and a low point of . All appeared to be normal during the systems review period in Earth orbit, and the crew restarted the S-IVB third stage to achieve trans-lunar injection (TLI) and send them towards the Moon. The vehicle shook again while executing the TLI burn, causing Cernan to be concerned that they might have to abort. However, the TLI burn was completed without incident. Young then performed the transposition, docking, and extraction maneuver, separating the CSM from the S-IVB stage, turning around, and docking its nose to the top of the lunar module (LM), before separating from the S-IVB. Apollo 10 was the first mission to carry a color television camera inside the spacecraft, and mission controllers in Houston watched as Young performed the maneuver. Soon thereafter, the large television audience was treated to color views of the Earth. One problem that was encountered was that the mylar cover of the CM&#x27;s hatch had pulled loose, spilling quantities of fiberglass insulation into the tunnel, and then into both the CM and LM. The S-IVB was fired by ground command and sent into solar orbit with a period of 344.88 days.

The crew settled in for the voyage to the Moon. They had a light workload, and spent much of their time studying the flight plan or sleeping. They made five more television broadcasts back to Earth, and were informed that more than a billion people had watched some part of their activities. In June 1969, the crew would accept a special Emmy Award on behalf of the first four Apollo crews for their television broadcasts from space. One slight course correction was necessary; this occurred at 26:32:56.8 into the mission and lasted 7.1 seconds. This aligned Apollo 10 with the trajectory Apollo 11 was expected to take. One issue the crew encountered was bad-tasting food, as Stafford apparently used a double dose of chlorine in their drinking water, which had to be placed in their dehydrated food to reconstitute it.

===Lunar orbit===
====Arrival and initial operations====
At 75:55:54 into the mission, above the far side of the Moon, the CSM&#x27;s service propulsion system (SPS) engine was fired for 356.1 seconds to slow the spacecraft into a lunar orbit of . This was followed, after two orbits of the Moon, with a 13.9-second firing of the SPS to circularize the orbit to at 80:25:08.1. Within the first couple of hours after the initial lunar orbit insertion burn and following the circularization burn, the crew turned to tracking planned landmarks on the surface below to record observations and take photographs. In addition to ALS-1, ALS-2, and ALS-3, the crew of Apollo 10 observed and photographed features on the near and far sides of the Moon, including the craters Coriolis, King, and Papaleksi. Shortly after the circularization burn, the crew partook in a scheduled half-hour color-television broadcast with descriptions and video transmissions of views of the lunar surface below.

About an hour after the second burn, the LM crew of Stafford and Cernan entered the LM to check out its systems. They were met with a blizzard of fiberglass particles from the earlier problem, which they cleaned up with a vacuum cleaner as best they could. Stafford had to help Cernan remove smaller bits from his hair and eyebrows. Stafford later commented that Cernan looked like he just came out of a chicken coop, and that the particles made them itch and got into the air conditioning system, and they were scraping it off the filter screens for the rest of the mission. This was merely an annoyance, but the particles may have gotten into the docking ring joining the two craft and caused it to misalign slightly. Mission Control determined that this was still within safe limits.

====The flight of &quot;Snoopy&quot;====

After Stafford and Cernan checked out &quot;Snoopy&quot;, they returned to &quot;Charlie Brown&quot; for a rest. Then they re-entered &quot;Snoopy&quot; and undocked it from the CSM at 98:29:20. Young, who remained in the CSM, became the first person to fly solo in lunar orbit. After undocking, Stafford and Cernan deployed the LM&#x27;s landing gear and inspected the LM&#x27;s systems. The CSM performed an 8.3-second burn with its RCS thrusters to separate itself from the LM by about 30 feet, after which Young visually inspected the LM from the CSM. The CSM performed another separation burn, this time separating the two spacecraft by about . The LM crew then performed the descent orbit insertion maneuver by firing their descent engine for 27.4 seconds at 99:46:01.6, and tested their craft&#x27;s landing radar as they approached the altitude where the subsequent Apollo 11 mission would begin powered descent to land on the Moon. Previously, the LM&#x27;s landing radar had only been tested under terrestrial conditions. While the LM executed these maneuvers, Young monitored the location and status of the LM from the CSM, standing by to rescue the LM crew if necessary. Cernan and Stafford surveyed ALS-2, coming within of the surface at a point 15 degrees to its east, then performed a phasing burn at 100:58:25.93, thrusting for just under 40 seconds to allow a second pass at ALS-2, when the craft came within of the Moon, its closest approach. Reporting on his observations of the site from the LM&#x27;s low passes, Stafford indicated that ALS-2 seemed smoother than he had expected and described its appearance as similar to the desert surrounding Blythe, California; but he observed that Apollo 11 could face rougher terrain downrange if it approached off-target. Based upon Apollo 10&#x27;s observations from relatively low altitude, NASA mission planners became comfortable enough with ALS-2 to confirm it as the target site for Apollo 11.
The next action was to prepare to separate the LM ascent stage from the descent stage, to jettison the descent stage, and fire the Ascent Propulsion System to return the ascent stage towards the CSM. As Stafford and Cernan prepared to do so, the LM began to gyrate out of control. Alarmed, Cernan exclaimed, &quot;Son of a bitch!&quot; into a hot mic being broadcast live, which, combined with other language used by the crew during the mission, generated some complaints back on Earth. Stafford discarded the descent stage about five seconds after the tumbling began and fought to regain control manually, suspecting that there might have been an &quot;open thruster&quot;, or a thruster stuck firing. He did so in time to orient the spacecraft to rejoin &quot;Charlie Brown&quot;. The problem was traced to a switch controlling the mode of the abort guidance system; it was to be moved as part of the procedure, but both of the crew members switched it, thus returning it to the original position. Had they fired &quot;Snoopy&quot; in the wrong direction, they might have missed the rendezvous with &quot;Charlie Brown&quot; or crashed into the Moon. Once Stafford had regained control of the LM ascent stage, which took about eight seconds, the pair fired the ascent engine at the lowest point of the LM&#x27;s orbit, mimicking the orbital insertion maneuver after launch from the lunar surface in a later landing mission. &quot;Snoopy&quot; coasted on that trajectory for about an hour before firing the engine once more to further fine-tune its approach to &quot;Charlie Brown&quot;.
&quot;Snoopy&quot; rendezvoused with and re-docked with &quot;Charlie Brown&quot; at 106:22:02, just under eight hours after undocking. The docking was telecast live in color from the CSM. Once Cernan and Stafford had re-entered &quot;Charlie Brown&quot;, &quot;Snoopy&quot; was sealed off and separated from &quot;Charlie Brown.&quot; The rest of the LM&#x27;s ascent-stage engine fuel was burned to send it on a trajectory past the Moon and into a heliocentric orbit.

It was the only Apollo LM to meet this fate. The Apollo 11 ascent stage would be left in lunar orbit to crash randomly, while ascent stages of later Apollo mission (12, 14, 15 and 17) were steered into the Moon to obtain readings from seismometers placed nearby on the surface, with two exceptions: Apollo 13&#x27;s ascent stage, which the crew used as a &quot;life boat&quot; to get safely back to Earth before releasing it to burn up in Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, and Apollo 16&#x27;s, which NASA lost control of after jettison.

===Return to Earth===

After ejecting the LM ascent stage, the crew slept and performed photography and observation of the lunar surface from orbit. Though the crew located 18 landmarks on the surface and took photographs of various surface features, crew fatigue necessitated the cancellation of two scheduled television broadcasts. Thereafter, the main Service Propulsion System engine of the CSM re-ignited for about 2.5 minutes to set Apollo 10 on a trajectory towards Earth, achieving such a trajectory at 137:39:13.7. As it departed lunar orbit, Apollo 10 had orbited the Moon 31 times over the span of about 61 hours and 37 minutes.

During their journey back to Earth, the crew performed some observational activities which included star-Earth horizon sightings for navigation. The crew also performed a scheduled test to gauge the reflectivity of the CSM&#x27;s high-gain antenna and broadcast six television transmissions of varying durations to show views inside the spacecraft and of the Earth and Moon from the crew&#x27;s vantage point. Cernan reported later that he and his crewmates became the first to &quot;successfully shave in space&quot; during the return trip, using a safety razor and thick shaving gel, as such items had been deemed a safety hazard and prohibited on earlier flights. The crew fired the engine of the CSM for the only mid-course-correction burn required during the return trip at 188:49:58, a few hours before separation of the CM from the SM. The burn lasted about 6.7 seconds.

As the spacecraft rapidly approached Earth on the final day of the mission, the Apollo 10 crew traveled faster than any humans before or since, relative to Earth: 39,897 km/h (11.08 km/s or 24,791 mph). This is because the return trajectory was designed to take only 42 hours rather than the normal 56. The Apollo 10 crew also traveled farther than any humans before or since from their (Houston) homes: (though the Apollo 13 crew was 200 km farther away from Earth as a whole).

At 191:33:26, the CM (which contained the crew) separated from the SM in preparation for reentry, which occurred about 15 minutes later at 191:48:54.5. Splashdown of the CM occurred about 15 minutes after reentry in the Pacific Ocean about east of American Samoa on May 26, 1969, at 16:52:23 UTC and mission elapsed time 192:03:23. The astronauts were recovered by . They spent about four hours aboard, during which they took a congratulatory phone call from President Richard Nixon. As they had not made contact with the lunar surface, Apollo 10&#x27;s crew were not required to quarantine like the first landing crews would be. They were flown to Pago Pago International Airport in Tafuna for a greeting reception, before boarding a C-141 cargo plane to Ellington Air Force Base near Houston.

== Aftermath ==
Orbital operations and the solo maneuvering of the LM in partial descent to the lunar surface paved the way for the successful Apollo 11 lunar landing by demonstrating the capabilities of the mission hardware and systems. The crew demonstrated that the checkout procedures of the LM and initial descent and rendezvous could be accomplished within the allotted time, that the communication systems of the LM were sufficient, that the rendezvous and landing radars of the LM were operational in lunar orbit, and that the two spacecraft could be adequately monitored by personnel on Earth. Additionally, the precision of lunar orbital navigation improved with Apollo 10 and, combined with data from Apollo 8, NASA expected that it had achieved a level of precision sufficient to execute the first crewed lunar landing. After about two weeks of Apollo 10 data analysis, a NASA flight readiness team cleared Apollo 11 to proceed with its scheduled July 1969 flight. On July 16, 1969, the next Saturn V to launch carried the astronauts of Apollo 11: Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, and Michael Collins. On July 20, Armstrong and Aldrin landed on the Moon, and four days later the three astronauts returned to Earth, fulfilling John F. Kennedy&#x27;s challenge to Americans to land astronauts on the Moon and return them safely to Earth by the end of the 1960s.

In July 1969, Stafford replaced Alan Shepard as Chief Astronaut, and then became deputy director of Flight Crew Operations under Deke Slayton. In his memoirs, Stafford wrote that he could have put his name back in the flight rotation, but wanted managerial experience. In 1972, Stafford was promoted to brigadier general and assigned to command the American portion of the Apollo–Soyuz Test Project, which flew in July 1975. He commanded the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, and retired in November 1979 as a lieutenant general. Young commanded the Apollo 16 lunar landing mission flown in April 1972. From 1974 to 1987, Young served as Chief Astronaut, commanding the STS-1 (1981) and STS-9 (1983) Space Shuttle missions in April 1981 and November 1983, respectively, and retired from NASA&#x27;s Astronaut Corps in 2004. Gene Cernan commanded the final Apollo lunar mission, Apollo 17, flown in December 1972. Cernan retired from NASA and the Navy as a captain in 1976.

==Hardware disposition==

The Smithsonian has been accountable for the command module &quot;Charlie Brown&quot; since 1970. The spacecraft was on display in several countries until it was placed on loan to the London Science Museum in 1978. &quot;Charlie Brown&quot;&#x27;s SM was jettisoned just before re-entry and burned up in the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, its remnants scattering in the Pacific Ocean.

After translunar injection, the Saturn V&#x27;s S-IVB third stage was accelerated past Earth escape velocity to become space debris; , it remains in a heliocentric orbit.

The ascent stage of the Lunar Module &quot;Snoopy&quot; was jettisoned into a heliocentric orbit. &quot;Snoopy&quot;&#x27;s ascent stage orbit was not tracked after 1969, and its whereabouts were unknown. In 2011, a group of amateur astronomers in the UK started a project to search for it. In June 2019, the Royal Astronomical Society announced a possible rediscovery of &quot;Snoopy&quot;, determining that small Earth-crossing asteroid 2018 AV2 is likely to be the spacecraft with &quot;98%&quot; certainty. It is the only once-crewed spacecraft known to still be in outer space without a crew.

&quot;Snoopy&#x27;s&quot; descent stage was jettisoned in lunar orbit; its current location is unknown, though it may have eventually crashed into the Moon as a result of orbital decay. Phil Stooke, a planetary scientist who studied the lunar crash sites of the LM&#x27;s ascent stages, wrote that the descent stage &quot;crashed at an unknown location&quot;, and another source stated that the descent stage &quot;eventually impact(ed) within a few degrees of the equator on the near side&quot;. Richard Orloff and David M. Harland, in their sourcebook on Apollo, stated that &quot;the descent stage was left in the low orbit, but perturbations by &#x27;mascons&#x27; would have caused this to decay, sending the stage to crash onto the lunar surface&quot;.

==Images==
== See also ==
* List of artificial objects on the Moon
* List of missions to the Moon
* List of vehicle speed records

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* &quot;Apollo 10&quot; at Encyclopedia Astronautica
* NSSDC Master Catalog at NASA
* Apollo 10 Flight Journal
NASA reports
* &quot;The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology&quot; NASA, NASA SP-4009
* &quot;Apollo Program Summary Report&quot; (PDF), NASA, JSC-09423, April 1975
* &quot;Table 2-38. Apollo 10 Characteristics&quot; from NASA Historical Data Book: Volume III: Programs and Projects 1969–1978 by Linda Neuman Ezell, NASA History Series (1988)

Multimedia
* &quot;Apollo 10: &quot;To Sort Out the Unknowns&quot;&quot; Official NASA/JSC documentary film, JSC-519 (1969)
* Apollo 10 16mm onboard film part 1, part 2 raw footage taken from Apollo 10 at the Internet Archive
* Mission Transcripts: Apollo 10 at NASA&#x27;s Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center
* Images from Apollo 10 at NASA&#x27;s Kennedy Space Center
* Apollo launch and mission videos at ApolloTV.net</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191746" start="0" end="9" title="Apollo 10" label="Apollo 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="43" end="60" title="human spaceflight" label="human spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="88" end="102" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="131" end="135" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="137" end="141" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="232" end="244" title="Moon landing" label="Moon landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="246" end="255" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="297" end="317" title="List of Apollo missions#Alphabetical mission types" label="&amp;quot;F&amp;quot;mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="340" end="350" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q107667" start="467" end="477" title="John Young (astronaut)" label="John Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="494" end="520" title="Apollo Command and Service Module" label="Command and Service Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q316417" start="544" end="559" title="Thomas P. Stafford" label="Thomas Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q158486" start="564" end="575" title="Gene Cernan" label="Gene Cernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="585" end="604" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Apollo Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648514" start="627" end="640" title="lunar surface" label="lunar surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295906" start="1123" end="1140" title="pogo oscillations" label="pogo oscillations"/>
<link wikidata="Q320936" start="1407" end="1425" title="Sea of Tranquility" label="Sea of Tranquility"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="1815" end="1824" title="call sign" label="call sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="1854" end="1861" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="1879" end="1892" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q207369" start="1909" end="1915" title="Snoopy" label="Snoopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="2007" end="2021" title="Charles Schulz" label="Charles Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2129" end="2150" title="List of Apollo missions#Alphabetical mission types" label="list of mission types"/>
<link wikidata="Q188486" start="2357" end="2365" title="Apollo 7" label="Apollo 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="2397" end="2423" title="Apollo Command and Service Module" label="Command and Service Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="2499" end="2511" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q203651" start="2537" end="2545" title="Apollo 9" label="Apollo 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="2574" end="2582" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="3280" end="3289" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821445" start="3389" end="3403" title="George Mueller (engineer)" label="George Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="3490" end="3504" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q735104" start="3553" end="3573" title="Christopher C. Kraft" label="Christopher C. Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q220717" start="3753" end="3771" title="Mass concentration (astronomy)" label="mass concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484225" start="3849" end="3861" title="Samuel C. Phillips" label="Sam Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="4205" end="4218" title="United States Naval Academy" label="Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="4247" end="4256" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409842" start="4275" end="4301" title="NASA Astronaut Group 2" label="second group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q378306" start="4331" end="4340" title="Gemini 6A" label="Gemini 6A"/>
<link wikidata="Q519533" start="4369" end="4378" title="Gemini 9A" label="Gemini 9A"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4448" end="4457" title="Commander (United States)#Naval" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4465" end="4469" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="4515" end="4527" title="Georgia Tech" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q682628" start="4669" end="4677" title="Gemini 3" label="Gemini 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="4683" end="4694" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q597154" start="4743" end="4756" title="Mercury Seven" label="Mercury Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q752799" start="4801" end="4810" title="Gemini 10" label="Gemini 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859" start="4831" end="4846" title="Michael Collins (astronaut)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="4960" end="4977" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408073" start="5034" end="5059" title="NASA Astronaut Group 3" label="third group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="5249" end="5262" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q312833" start="5382" end="5401" title="Gordon Cooper" label="L. Gordon Cooper Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q449706" start="5416" end="5430" title="Donn F. Eisele" label="Donn F. Eisele"/>
<link wikidata="Q295873" start="5460" end="5477" title="Edgar Mitchell" label="Edgar D. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="5602" end="5611" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="5653" end="5665" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="6087" end="6099" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q375065" start="6104" end="6116" title="Stuart Roosa" label="Stuart Roosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821445" start="6177" end="6191" title="George Mueller (NASA)" label="George Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q178871" start="6246" end="6255" title="Apollo 14" label="Apollo 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="6320" end="6327" title="Project Mercury" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="6332" end="6338" title="Project Gemini" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q545034" start="6882" end="6893" title="flight plan" label="flight plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q374034" start="6959" end="6968" title="Joe Engle" label="Joe Engle"/>
<link wikidata="Q297801" start="6970" end="6981" title="James Irwin" label="James Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112284" start="6987" end="6999" title="Charles Duke" label="Charles Duke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7002" end="7018" title="Flight controller#Flight director" label="Flight directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549046" start="7024" end="7037" title="Gerry Griffin" label="Gerry Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032002" start="7039" end="7051" title="Glynn Lunney" label="Glynn Lunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41674223" start="7053" end="7065" title="Milt Windler" label="Milt Windler"/>
<link wikidata="Q94579995" start="7071" end="7081" title="Pete Frank" label="Pete Frank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7250" end="7257" title="Flight controller#CAPCOM" label="CAPCOMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q363976" start="7276" end="7287" title="Jack Lousma" label="Jack Lousma"/>
<link wikidata="Q433608" start="7293" end="7312" title="Bruce McCandless II" label="Bruce McCandless II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="7540" end="7547" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="7555" end="7568" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q207369" start="7573" end="7579" title="Snoopy" label="Snoopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="7644" end="7658" title="Charles M. Schulz" label="Charles Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q58895663" start="7945" end="7958" title="Julian Scheer" label="Julian Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295963" start="8710" end="8721" title="Silver Snoopy award" label="Snoopy pins"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8820" end="8831" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="9358" end="9371" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="9975" end="9997" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q320936" start="10401" end="10420" title="Sea of Tranquillity" label="Sea of Tranquillity"/>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="11281" end="11297" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Harrison Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q488946" start="12391" end="12397" title="Downey, California" label="Downey"/>
<link wikidata="Q519560" start="12441" end="12464" title="North American Rockwell" label="North American Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q463261" start="12483" end="12490" title="Grumman" label="Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144537" start="12494" end="12502" title="Bethpage, New York" label="Bethpage"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="12527" end="12536" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q138875" start="12574" end="12598" title="Apollo Guidance Computer" label="Apollo Guidance Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876029" start="12606" end="12670" title="MIT Instrumentation Lab" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology Instrumentation Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="12745" end="12769" title="Manned Spacecraft Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="12794" end="12814" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16831" start="13247" end="13251" title="aerozine 50" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q382984" start="13256" end="13264" title="nitrogen tetroxide" label="oxidizer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14929" end="14943" title="Apollo command and service module#Service module (SM)" label="Service Module"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14953" end="14967" title="Apollo command and service module#Command module (CM)" label="Command Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="15043" end="15051" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q901058" start="15161" end="15186" title="Vehicle Assembly Building" label="Vehicle Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q24256506" start="15362" end="15380" title="Launch Complex 39B" label="Launch Complex 39B"/>
<link wikidata="Q94712" start="15511" end="15518" title="Crawler-transporter" label="crawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182960" start="15603" end="15613" title="crawlerway" label="crawlerway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15665" end="15689" title="Mobile launcher platform#Mobile Launcher Platform-3" label="Mobile Launch Platform-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q697175" start="15793" end="15807" title="launch vehicle" label="launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093699" start="16254" end="16258" title="S-II" label="S-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q907773" start="16759" end="16779" title="Launch Escape System" label="Launch Escape System"/>
<link wikidata="Q855377" start="17122" end="17135" title="launch window" label="launch window"/>
<link wikidata="Q874572" start="17381" end="17383" title="Universal Time" label="UT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516332" start="17766" end="17786" title="Traffic stop" label="stopped for speeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q72416" start="18010" end="18023" title="Gunther Wendt" label="Gunther Wendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295906" start="18288" end="18304" title="pogo oscillation" label="pogo oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="18364" end="18379" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q257161" start="18524" end="18529" title="S-IVB" label="S-IVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q863248" start="18553" end="18574" title="trans-lunar injection" label="trans-lunar injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835327" start="18808" end="18846" title="transposition, docking, and extraction" label="transposition, docking, and extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q849194" start="19049" end="19065" title="color television" label="color television"/>
<link wikidata="Q441961" start="19306" end="19311" title="mylar" label="mylar"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="19888" end="19898" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="20507" end="20532" title="service propulsion system" label="service propulsion system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517766" start="21138" end="21146" title="Coriolis (crater)" label="Coriolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q630263" start="21148" end="21152" title="King (crater)" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132458" start="21158" end="21167" title="Papaleksi (crater)" label="Papaleksi"/>
<link wikidata="Q861182" start="21762" end="21774" title="chicken coop" label="chicken coop"/>
<link wikidata="Q886915" start="23855" end="23861" title="Blythe, California" label="Blythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803858" start="24281" end="24305" title="Ascent Propulsion System" label="Ascent Propulsion System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839886" start="24493" end="24500" title="hot mic" label="hot mic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813456" start="25485" end="25502" title="orbital insertion" label="orbital insertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q737809" start="26189" end="26207" title="heliocentric orbit" label="heliocentric orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="26445" end="26457" title="seismometers" label="seismometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188168" start="26678" end="26687" title="Apollo 16" label="Apollo 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q769152" start="27611" end="27628" title="Directional antenna" label="high-gain antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219606" start="27931" end="27943" title="safety razor" label="safety razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q413152" start="27954" end="27965" title="Shaving cream" label="shaving gel"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="28829" end="28836" title="Atmospheric reentry" label="reentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642255" start="28892" end="28902" title="Splashdown (spacecraft landing)" label="Splashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="28988" end="29002" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="29209" end="29222" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886953" start="29320" end="29330" title="Mobile quarantine facility" label="quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q939904" start="29389" end="29420" title="Pago Pago International Airport" label="Pago Pago International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019488" start="29424" end="29430" title="Tafuna, American Samoa" label="Tafuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q182113" start="29475" end="29480" title="Lockheed C-141 Starlifter" label="C-141"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365417" start="29496" end="29520" title="Ellington Air Force Base" label="Ellington Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="29526" end="29533" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="30596" end="30610" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252" start="30612" end="30623" title="Buzz Aldrin" label="Buzz Aldrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="30770" end="30785" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="30937" end="30949" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667787" start="30953" end="30968" title="Chief Astronaut" label="Chief Astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="31208" end="31225" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q208759" start="31278" end="31303" title="Apollo–Soyuz Test Project" label="Apollo–Soyuz Test Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697972" start="31347" end="31375" title="Air Force Flight Test Center" label="Air Force Flight Test Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="31379" end="31401" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Edwards Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="31451" end="31469" title="lieutenant general" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q188168" start="31491" end="31500" title="Apollo 16" label="Apollo 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q217543" start="31611" end="31616" title="STS-1" label="STS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q312052" start="31628" end="31633" title="STS-9" label="STS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="31897" end="31904" title="Captain (United States O-6)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="32125" end="32146" title="Science Museum (London)" label="London Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q863248" start="32327" end="32347" title="translunar injection" label="translunar injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q166530" start="32414" end="32429" title="escape velocity" label="escape velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q275450" start="32440" end="32452" title="space debris" label="space debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="32802" end="32828" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="33293" end="33312" title="planetary science" label="planetary scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236922" start="33608" end="33624" title="David M. Harland" label="David M. Harland"/>
<link wikidata="Q220717" start="33747" end="33754" title="Mass concentration (astronomy)" label="mascons"/>
<link wikidata="Q743127" start="33880" end="33918" title="List of artificial objects on the Moon" label="List of artificial objects on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530844" start="33921" end="33949" title="List of missions to the Moon" label="List of missions to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517725" start="33952" end="33981" title="List of vehicle speed records" label="List of vehicle speed records"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="34797" end="34827" title="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center" label="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="34867" end="34887" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1967" wikidata="Q188433" url="?curid=1967" title="Apollo 12">
<text>Apollo 12 (November 14–24, 1969) was the sixth crewed flight in the United States Apollo program and the second to land on the Moon. It was launched on November 14, 1969, by NASA from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Commander Charles &quot;Pete&quot; Conrad and Lunar Module Pilot Alan L. Bean completed just over one day and seven hours of lunar surface activity while Command Module Pilot Richard F. Gordon remained in lunar orbit.

Apollo 12 would have attempted the first lunar landing had Apollo 11 failed, but after the success of the earlier mission, Apollo 12 was postponed by two months, and other Apollo missions also put on a more relaxed schedule. More time was allotted for geologic training in preparation for Apollo 12 than for Apollo 11, Conrad and Bean making several geology field trips in preparation for their mission. Apollo 12&#x27;s spacecraft and launch vehicle were almost identical to Apollo 11&#x27;s. One addition was a set of hammocks, designed to provide Conrad and Bean with a more comfortable resting arrangement inside the Lunar Module during their stay on the Moon.

Shortly after being launched on a rainy day at Kennedy Space Center, Apollo 12 was twice struck by lightning, causing instrumentation problems but little damage. The crew found that switching to the auxiliary power supply resolved the data relay problem, which helped save the mission. The outward journey to the Moon otherwise saw few problems. On November 19, Conrad and Bean achieved a precise landing at their expected location within walking distance of the Surveyor 3 robotic probe, which had landed on April 20, 1967. In making a pinpoint landing, they showed that NASA could plan future missions in the expectation that astronauts could land close to sites of scientific interest. Conrad and Bean carried the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package, a group of nuclear-powered scientific instruments, as well as the first color television camera taken by an Apollo mission to the lunar surface, but transmission was lost after Bean accidentally pointed the camera at the Sun and its sensor was burned out. On the second of two moonwalks, they visited Surveyor 3 and removed parts for return to Earth.

Lunar Module &quot;Intrepid&quot; lifted off from the Moon on November 20 and docked with the command module, which subsequently traveled back to Earth. The Apollo 12 mission ended on November 24 with a splashdown.

== Crew and key Mission Control personnel ==
The commander of the all-Navy Apollo 12 crew was Charles &quot;Pete&quot; Conrad, who was 39 years old at the time of the mission. After receiving a bachelor&#x27;s degree in aeronautical engineering from Princeton University in 1953, he became a naval aviator, and completed United States Naval Test Pilot School at Patuxent River Naval Air Station. He was selected in the second group of astronauts in 1962, and flew on Gemini 5 in 1965, and as command pilot of Gemini 11 in 1966. Command Module Pilot Richard &quot;Dick&quot; Gordon, 40 years old at the time of Apollo 12, also became a naval aviator in 1953, following graduation from the University of Washington with a degree in chemistry, and completed test pilot school at Patuxent River. Selected as a Group 3 astronaut in 1963, he flew with Conrad on Gemini 11.

The original Lunar Module pilot assigned to work with Conrad was Clifton C. Williams Jr., who was killed in October 1967 when the T-38 he was flying crashed near Tallahassee. When forming his crew, Conrad had wanted Alan L. Bean, a former student of his at the test pilot school, but had been told by Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton that Bean was unavailable due to an assignment to the Apollo Applications Program. After Williams&#x27;s death, Conrad asked for Bean again, and this time Slayton yielded. Bean, 37 years old when the mission flew, had graduated from the University of Texas in 1955 with a degree in aeronautical engineering. Also a naval aviator, he was selected alongside Gordon in 1963, and first flew in space on Apollo 12. The three Apollo 12 crew members had backed up Apollo 9 earlier in 1969.

The Apollo 12 backup crew was David R. Scott as commander, Alfred M. Worden as Command Module pilot, and James B. Irwin as Lunar Module pilot. They became the crew of Apollo 15. For Apollo, a third crew of astronauts, known as the support crew, was designated in addition to the prime and backup crews used on projects Mercury and Gemini. Slayton created the support crews because James McDivitt, who would command Apollo 9, believed that, with preparation going on in facilities across the US, meetings that needed a member of the flight crew would be missed. Support crew members were to assist as directed by the mission commander. Usually low in seniority, they assembled the mission&#x27;s rules, flight plan, and checklists, and kept them updated; For Apollo 12, they were Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson and Paul J. Weitz. Flight directors were Gerry Griffin, first shift, Pete Frank, second shift, Clifford E. Charlesworth, third shift, and Milton Windler, fourth shift. Flight directors during Apollo had a one-sentence job description, &quot;The flight director may take any actions necessary for crew safety and mission success.&quot; Capsule communicators (CAPCOMs) were Scott, Worden, Irwin, Carr, Gibson, Weitz and Don Lind.

== Preparation ==
=== Site selection ===
The landing site selection process for Apollo 12 was greatly informed by the site selection for Apollo 11. There were rigid standards for the possible Apollo 11 landing sites, in which scientific interest was not a major factor: they had to be close to the lunar equator and not on the periphery of the portion of the lunar surface visible from Earth; they had to be relatively flat and without major obstructions along the path the Lunar Module (LM) would fly to reach them, their suitability confirmed by photographs from Lunar Orbiter probes. Also desirable was the presence of another suitable site further west in case the mission was delayed, and the Sun would have risen too high in the sky at the original site for desired lighting conditions. The need for three days to recycle if a launch had to be scrubbed meant that only three of the five suitable sites found were designated as potential landing sites for Apollo 11, of which the Apollo 11 landing site in the Sea of Tranquility was the easternmost. Since Apollo 12 was to attempt the first lunar landing if Apollo 11 failed, both sets of astronauts trained for the same sites.

With the success of Apollo 11, it was initially contemplated that Apollo 12 would land at the site next further west from the Sea of Tranquility, in Sinus Medii. However, NASA planning coordinator Jack Sevier and engineers at the Manned Spaceflight Center at Houston argued for a landing close enough to the crater in which the Surveyor 3 probe had landed in 1967 to allow the astronauts to cut parts from it for return to Earth. The site was otherwise suitable and had scientific interest. Given that Apollo 11 had landed several miles off-target, though, some NASA administrators feared Apollo 12 would land far enough away that the astronauts could not reach the probe, and the agency would be embarrassed. Nevertheless, the ability to perform pinpoint landings was essential if Apollo&#x27;s exploration program was to be carried out, and on July 25, 1969, Apollo Program Manager Samuel Phillips designated what became known as Surveyor crater as the landing site, despite the unanimous opposition of members of two site selection boards. 

To locate Surveyor 3, NASA invited Ewen Whitaker, who together with Gerard Kuiper worked on multiple Moon atlases. Whitaker had found the Surveyor 1 landing site with better precision than NASA. By studying images from Surveyor 3 and comparing them with photographs of thousands of similar craters under the microscope, he identified two rocks near Surveyor 3, that led to the identification of the probe&#x27;s location.

=== Training and preparation ===
The Apollo 12 astronauts spent five hours in mission-specific training for every hour they expected to spend in flight on the mission, a total exceeding 1,000 hours per crew member. Conrad and Bean received more mission-specific training than Apollo 11&#x27;s Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin had. This was in addition to the 1,500 hours of training they received as backup crew members for Apollo 9. The Apollo 12 training included over 400 hours per crew member in simulators of the Command Module (CM) and of the LM. Some of the simulations were linked in real time to flight controllers in Mission Control. To practice landing on the Moon, Conrad flew the Lunar Landing Training Vehicle (LLTV), training in which continued to be authorized even though Armstrong had been forced to bail out of a similar vehicle in 1968, just before it crashed.

Soon after being assigned as Apollo 12 crew commander, Conrad met with NASA geologists and told them that the training for lunar surface activities would be conducted much as Apollo 11&#x27;s, but there was to be no publicity or involvement by the media. Conrad felt he had been abused by the press during Gemini, and the sole Apollo 11 geology field trip had turned into a near-fiasco, with a large media contingent present, some getting in the way—the astronauts had trouble hearing each other due to a hovering press helicopter. After the return of Apollo 11 in July 1969, more time was allotted for geology, but the astronauts&#x27; focus was on getting time in the simulators without being preempted by the Apollo 11 crew. On the six Apollo 12 geology field trips, the astronauts would practice as if on the Moon, collecting samples and documenting them with photographs, while communicating with a CAPCOM and geologists who were out of sight in a nearby tent. Afterwards, the astronauts&#x27; performance in choosing samples and taking photographs would be critiqued. To the frustration of the astronauts, the scientists kept changing the photo documentation procedures; after the fourth or fifth such change, Conrad required that there be no more. After the return of Apollo 11, the Apollo 12 crew was able to view the lunar samples, and be briefed on them by scientists.

As Apollo 11 was targeted for an ellipse-shaped landing zone, rather than at a specific point, there was no planning for geology traverses, the designated tasks to be done at sites of the crew&#x27;s choosing. For Apollo 12, before the mission, some of NASA&#x27;s geology team met with the crew and Conrad suggested they lay out possible routes for him and Bean. The result was four traverses, based on four potential landing points for the LM. This was the start of geology traverse planning that on later missions became a considerable effort involving several organizations.

The stages of the lunar module, LM–6, were delivered to Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on March 24, 1969, and were mated to each other on April 28. Command module CM–108 and service module SM–108 were delivered to KSC on March 28, and were mated to each other on April 21. Following installation of gear and testing, the launch vehicle, with the spacecraft atop it, was rolled out to Launch Complex 39A on September 8, 1969. The training schedule was complete, as planned, by November 1, 1969; activities after that date were intended as refreshers. The crew members felt that the training, for the most part, was adequate preparation for the Moon mission.

== Hardware ==
=== Launch vehicle ===
There were no significant changes to the Saturn V launch vehicle used on Apollo 12, SA–507, from that used on Apollo 11. There were another 17 instrumentation measurements in the Apollo 12 launch vehicle, bringing the number to 1,365. The entire vehicle, including the spacecraft, weighed at launch, an increase from Apollo 11&#x27;s . Of this figure, the spacecraft weighed , up from on Apollo 11.

==== Third stage trajectory ====
After LM separation, the third stage of the Saturn V, the S-IVB, was intended to fly into solar orbit. The S-IVB auxiliary propulsion system was fired, with the intent that the Moon&#x27;s gravity would slingshot the stage into solar orbit. Due to an error, the S-IVB flew past the Moon at too high an altitude to achieve Earth escape velocity. It remained in a semi-stable Earth orbit until it finally escaped Earth orbit in 1971, but briefly returned to Earth orbit 31 years later. It was discovered by amateur astronomer Bill Yeung who gave it the temporary designation J002E3 before it was determined to be an artificial object. Again in solar orbit as of 2021, it may again be captured by Earth&#x27;s gravity, but not at least until the 2040s. The S-IVBs used on later lunar missions were deliberately crashed into the Moon to create seismic events that would register on the seismometers left on the Moon and provide data about the Moon&#x27;s structure.

=== Spacecraft ===
The Apollo 12 spacecraft consisted of Command Module 108 and Service Module 108 (together Command and Service Modules 108, or CSM–108), Lunar Module 6 (LM–6), a Launch Escape System (LES), and Spacecraft-Lunar Module Adapter 15 (SLA–15). The LES contained three rocket motors to propel the CM to safety in the event of an abort shortly after launch, while the SLA housed the LM and provided a structural connection between the Saturn V and the LM. The SLA was identical to Apollo 11&#x27;s, while the LES differed only in the installation of a more reliable motor igniter.

The CSM was given the call sign &quot;Yankee Clipper&quot;, while the LM had the call sign &quot;Intrepid&quot;. These sea-related names were selected by the all-Navy crew from several thousand proposed names submitted by employees of the prime contractors of the respective modules. George Glacken, a flight test engineer at North American Aviation, builder of the CSM, proposed &quot;Yankee Clipper&quot; as such ships had &quot;majestically sailed the high seas with pride and prestige for a new America&quot;. &quot;Intrepid&quot; was from a suggestion by Robert Lambert, a planner at Grumman, builder of the LM, as evocative of &quot;this nation&#x27;s resolute determination for continued exploration of space, stressing our astronauts&#x27; fortitude and endurance of hardship&quot;.

The differences between the CSM and LM of Apollo 11, and those of Apollo 12, were few and minor. A hydrogen separator was added to the CSM to stop the gas from entering the potable water tank—Apollo 11 had had one, though mounted on the water dispenser in the CM&#x27;s cabin. Gaseous hydrogen in the water had given the Apollo 11 crew severe flatulence. Other changes included the strengthening of the recovery loop attached following splashdown, meaning that the swimmers recovering the CM would not have to attach an auxiliary loop. LM changes included a structural modification so that scientific experiment packages could be carried for deployment on the lunar surface. Two hammocks were added for greater comfort of the astronauts while resting on the Moon, and a color television camera substituted for the black and white one used on the lunar surface during Apollo 11.

=== ALSEP ===

The Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (ALSEP) was a suite of scientific instruments designed to be emplaced on the lunar surface by the Apollo astronauts, and thereafter operate autonomously, sending data to Earth. Development of the ALSEP was part of NASA&#x27;s response to some scientists who opposed the crewed lunar landing program (they felt that robotic craft could explore the Moon more cheaply) by demonstrating that some tasks, such as deployment of the ALSEP, required humans. In 1966, a contract to design and build the ALSEPs was awarded to the Bendix Corporation. Due to the limited time the Apollo 11 crew would have on the lunar surface, a smaller suite of experiments was flown, known as the Early Apollo Surface Experiment Package (EASEP). Apollo 12 was the first mission to carry an ALSEP; one would be flown on each of the subsequent lunar landing missions, though the components that were included would vary. Apollo 12&#x27;s ALSEP was to be deployed at least away from the LM to protect the instruments from the debris that would be generated when the ascent stage of the LM took off to return the astronauts to lunar orbit.

Apollo 12&#x27;s ALSEP included a Lunar Surface Magnetometer (LSM), to measure the magnetic field at the Moon&#x27;s surface, a Lunar Atmosphere Detector (LAD, also known as the Cold Cathode Gauge Experiment), intended to measure the density and temperature of the thin lunar atmosphere and how it varies, a Lunar Ionosphere Detector (LID, also known as the Suprathermal Ion Detector Experiment, or SIDE), intended to study the charged particles in the lunar atmosphere, and the Solar Wind Spectrometer, to measure the strength and direction of the solar wind at the Moon&#x27;s surface—the free-standing Solar Wind Composition Experiment, to measure what makes up the solar wind, would be deployed and then brought back to Earth by the astronauts. A Dust Detector was used to measure the accumulation of lunar dust on the equipment. Apollo 12&#x27;s Passive Seismic Experiment (PSE), a seismometer, would measure moonquakes and other movements in the Moon&#x27;s crust, and would be calibrated by the nearby planned impact of the ascent stage of Apollo 12&#x27;s LM, an object of known mass and velocity hitting the Moon at a known location, and projected to be equivalent to the explosive force of one ton of TNT.

The ALSEP experiments left on the Moon by Apollo 12 were connected to a Central Station, which contained a transmitter, receiver, timer, data processor, and equipment for power distribution and control of the experiments. The equipment was powered by SNAP-27, a radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) developed by the Atomic Energy Commission. Containing plutonium, the RTG flown on Apollo 12 was the first use of atomic energy on a crewed NASA spacecraft—some NASA and military satellites had previously used similar systems. The plutonium core was brought from Earth in a cask attached to an LM landing leg, a container designed to survive re-entry in the event of an aborted mission, something NASA considered unlikely. The cask would survive re-entry on Apollo 13, sinking in the Tonga Trench of the Pacific Ocean, apparently without radioactive leakage.

The Apollo 12 ALSEP experiments were activated from Earth on November 19, 1969. The LAD returned only a small amount of useful data due to the failure of its power supply soon after activation. The LSM was deactivated on June 14, 1974, as was the other LSM deployed on the Moon, from Apollo 15. All powered ALSEP experiments that remained active were deactivated on September 30, 1977, principally because of budgetary constraints.

==Mission highlights==
===Launch===
With President Richard Nixon in attendance, the first time a current U.S. president had witnessed a crewed space launch, as well as Vice President Spiro Agnew, Apollo 12 launched as planned on November 14, 1969 from the Kennedy Space Center at 16:22:00 UTC (11:22 am EST, local time at the launch site). This was at the start of a launch window of three hours and four minutes to reach the Moon with optimal lighting conditions at the planned landing point. There were completely overcast rainy skies, and the vehicle encountered winds of during ascent, the strongest of any Apollo mission. There was a NASA rule against launching into a cumulonimbus cloud; this had been waived and it was later determined that the launch vehicle never entered such a cloud. Had the mission been postponed, it could have been launched on November 16 with landing at a backup site where there would be no Surveyor, but since time pressure to achieve a lunar landing had been removed by Apollo 11&#x27;s success, NASA might have waited until December for the next opportunity to go to the Surveyor crater.

Lightning struck the Saturn V 36.5 seconds after lift-off, triggered by the vehicle itself. The static discharge caused a voltage transient that knocked all three fuel cells offline, meaning the spacecraft was being powered entirely from its batteries, which could not supply enough current to meet demand. A second strike at 52 seconds knocked out the &quot;8-ball&quot; attitude indicator. The telemetry stream at Mission Control was garbled, but the Saturn V continued to fly normally; the strikes had not affected the Saturn V instrument unit guidance system, which functioned independently from the CSM. The astronauts unexpectedly had a board red with caution and warning lights, but could not tell exactly what was wrong.

The Electrical, Environmental and Consumables Manager (EECOM) in Mission Control, John Aaron, remembered the telemetry failure pattern from an earlier test when a power loss caused a malfunction in the CSM signal conditioning electronics (SCE), which converted raw signals from instrumentation to data that could be displayed on Mission Control&#x27;s consoles, and knew how to fix it. Aaron made a call, &quot;Flight, EECOM. Try SCE to Aux&quot;, to switch the SCE to a backup power supply. The switch was fairly obscure, and neither Flight Director Gerald Griffin, CAPCOM Gerald P. Carr, nor Conrad knew what it was; Bean, who as LMP was the spacecraft&#x27;s engineer, knew where to find it and threw the switch, after which the telemetry came back online, revealing no significant malfunctions. Bean put the fuel cells back online, and the mission continued. Once in Earth parking orbit, the crew carefully checked out their spacecraft before re-igniting the S-IVB third stage for trans-lunar injection. The lightning strikes caused no serious permanent damage.

Initially, it was feared that the lightning strike could have damaged the explosive bolts that opened the Command Module&#x27;s parachute compartment. The decision was made not to share this with the astronauts and to continue with the flight plan, since they would die if the parachutes failed to deploy, whether following an Earth-orbit abort or upon a return from the Moon, so nothing was to be gained by aborting. The parachutes deployed and functioned normally at the end of the mission.

===Outward journey===
After systems checks in Earth orbit, performed with great care because of the lightning strikes, the trans-lunar injection burn, made with the S-IVB, took place at 02:47:22.80 into the mission, setting Apollo 12 on course for the Moon. An hour and twenty minutes later, the CSM separated from the S-IVB, after which Gordon performed the transposition, docking, and extraction maneuver to dock with the LM and separate the combined craft from the S-IVB, which was then sent on an attempt to reach solar orbit. The stage fired its engines to leave the vicinity of the spacecraft, a change from Apollo 11, where the SM&#x27;s Service Propulsion System (SPS) engine was used to distance it from the S-IVB.

As there were concerns the LM might have been damaged by the lightning strikes, Conrad and Bean entered it on the first day of flight to check its status, earlier than planned. They found no issues. At 30:52.44.36, the only necessary midcourse correction during the translunar coast was made, placing the craft on a hybrid, non-free-return trajectory. Previous crewed missions to lunar orbit had taken a free-return trajectory, allowing an easy return to Earth if the craft&#x27;s engines did not fire to enter lunar orbit. Apollo 12 was the first crewed spacecraft to take a hybrid free-return trajectory, that would require another burn to return to Earth, but one that could be executed by the LM&#x27;s Descent Propulsion System (DPS) if the SPS failed. The use of a hybrid trajectory allowed more flexibility in mission planning. It for example allowed Apollo 12 to launch in daylight and reach the planned landing spot on schedule. Use of a hybrid trajectory meant that Apollo 12 took 8 hours longer to go from trans-lunar injection to lunar orbit.

===Lunar orbit and Moon landing===
Apollo 12 entered a lunar orbit of with an SPS burn of 352.25 seconds at mission time 83:25:26.36. On the first lunar orbit, there was a television transmission that resulted in good-quality video of the lunar surface. On the third lunar orbit, there was another burn to circularize the craft&#x27;s orbit to , and on the next revolution, preparations began for the lunar landing. The CSM and LM undocked at 107:54:02.3; a half hour later there was a burn by the CSM to separate them. The 14.4 second burn by some of the CSM&#x27;s thrusters meant that the two craft would be apart when the LM began the burn to move to a lower orbit in preparation for landing on the Moon.

The LM&#x27;s Descent Propulsion System began a 29-second burn at 109:23:39.9 to move the craft to the lower orbit, from which the 717-second powered descent to the lunar surface began at 110:20:38.1. Conrad had trained to expect a pattern of craters known as &quot;the Snowman&quot; to be visible when the craft underwent &quot;pitchover&quot;, with the Surveyor crater in its center, but had feared he would see nothing recognizable. He was astonished to see the Snowman right where it should be, meaning they were directly on course. He took over manual control, planning to land the LM, as he had in simulations, in an area near the Surveyor crater that had been dubbed &quot;Pete&#x27;s Parking Lot&quot;, but found it rougher than expected. He had to maneuver, and landed the LM
at 110:32:36.2 (06:54:36 UTC on November 19, 1969), just from the Surveyor probe. This achieved one objective of the mission, to perform a precision landing near the Surveyor craft.

The lunar coordinates of the landing site were 3.01239° S latitude, 23.42157° W longitude. The landing caused high velocity sandblasting of the Surveyor probe. It was later determined that the sandblasting removed more dust than it delivered onto the Surveyor, because the probe was covered by a thin layer that gave it a tan hue as observed by the astronauts, and every portion of the surface exposed to the direct sandblasting was lightened back toward the original white color through the removal of lunar dust.

===Lunar surface activities===
When Conrad, the shortest man of the initial groups of astronauts, stepped onto the lunar surface his first words were &quot;Whoopie! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that&#x27;s a long one for me.&quot; This was not an off-the-cuff remark: Conrad had made a bet with reporter Oriana Fallaci he would say these words, after she had queried whether NASA had instructed Neil Armstrong what to say as he stepped onto the Moon. Conrad later said he was never able to collect the money.

To improve the quality of television pictures from the Moon, a color camera was carried on Apollo 12 (unlike the monochrome camera on Apollo 11). When Bean carried the camera to the place near the LM where it was to be set up, he inadvertently pointed it directly into the Sun, destroying the Secondary Electron Conduction (SEC) tube. Television coverage of this mission was thus terminated almost immediately.

After raising a U.S. flag on the Moon, Conrad and Bean devoted much of the remainder of the first EVA to deploying the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (ALSEP). There were minor difficulties with the deployment. Bean had trouble extracting the RTG&#x27;s plutonium fuel element from its protective cask, and the astronauts had to resort to the use of a hammer to hit the cask and dislodge the fuel element. Some of the ALSEP packages proved hard to deploy, though the astronauts were successful in all cases. With the PSE able to detect their footprints as they headed back to the LM, the astronauts secured a core tube full of lunar material, and collected other samples. The first EVA lasted 3 hours, 56 minutes and 3 seconds.

Four possible geologic traverses had been planned, the variable being where the LM might set down. Conrad had landed it between two of these potential landing points, and during the first EVA and the rest break that followed, scientists in Houston combined two of the traverses into one that Conrad and Bean could follow from their landing point. The resultant traverse resembled a rough circle, and when the astronauts emerged from the LM some 13 hours after ending the first EVA, the first stop was Head crater, some from the LM. There, Bean noticed that Conrad&#x27;s footprints showed lighter material underneath, indicating the presence of ejecta from Copernicus crater, to the north, something that scientists examining overhead photographs of the site had hoped to find. After the mission, samples from Head allowed geologists to date the impact that formed Copernicus—according to initial dating, some 810,000,000 years ago.

The astronauts proceeded to Bench crater and Sharp crater and past Halo crater before arriving at Surveyor crater, where the Surveyor 3 probe had landed. Fearing treacherous footing or that the probe might topple on them, they approached Surveyor cautiously, descending into the shallow crater some distance away and then following a contour to reach the craft, but found the footing solid and the probe stable. They collected several pieces of Surveyor, including the television camera, as well as taking rocks that had been studied by television. Conrad and Bean had procured an automatic timer for their Hasselblad cameras, and had brought it with them without telling Mission Control, hoping to take a selfie of the two of them with the probe, but when the time came to use it, could not locate it among the lunar samples they had already placed in their Hand Tool Carrier. Before returning to the LM&#x27;s vicinity, Conrad and Bean went to Block crater, within Surveyor crater. The second EVA lasted 3 hours, 49 minutes, 15 seconds, during which they traveled . During the EVAs, Conrad and Bean went as far as from the LM, and collected of samples.

=== Lunar orbit solo activities ===
After the LM&#x27;s departure, Gordon had little to say as Mission Control focused on the lunar landing. Once that was accomplished, Gordon sent his congratulations and, on the next orbit, was able to spot both the LM and the Surveyor on the ground and convey their locations to Houston. During the first EVA, Gordon prepared for a plane change maneuver, a burn to alter the CSM&#x27;s orbit to compensate for the rotation of the Moon, though at times he had difficulty communicating with Houston since Conrad and Bean were using the same communications circuit. Once the two moonwalkers had returned to the LM, Gordon executed the burn, which ensured he would be in the proper position to rendezvous with the LM when it launched from the Moon.

While alone in orbit, Gordon performed the Lunar Multispectral Photography Experiment, using four Hasselblad cameras arranged in a ring and aimed through one of the CM&#x27;s windows. With each camera having a different color filter, simultaneous photos would be taken by each, showing the appearance of lunar features at different points on the spectrum. Analysis of the images might reveal colors not visible to the naked eye or detectable with ordinary color film, and information could be obtained about the composition of sites that would not soon be visited by humans. Among the sites studied were contemplated landing points for future Apollo missions.

===Return===
LM &quot;Intrepid&quot; lifted off from the Moon at mission time 143:03:47.78, or 14:25:47 UTC on November 20, 1969; after several maneuvers, CSM and LM docked three and a half hours later. At 147:59:31.6, the LM ascent stage was jettisoned, and shortly thereafter the CSM maneuvered away. Under control from Earth, the LM&#x27;s remaining propellant was depleted in a burn that caused it to impact the Moon from the Apollo 12 landing point. The seismometer the astronauts had left on the lunar surface registered the resulting vibrations for more than an hour.

The crew stayed another day in lunar orbit taking photographs of the surface, including of candidate sites for future Apollo landings. A second plane change maneuver was made at 159:04:45.47, lasting 19.25 seconds.

The trans-Earth injection burn, to send the CSM &quot;Yankee Clipper&quot; towards home, was conducted at 172:27:16.81 and lasted 130.32 seconds. Two short midcourse correction burns were made en route. A final television broadcast was made, the astronauts answering questions submitted by the media. There was ample time for rest on the way back to Earth. One event was the photography of a solar eclipse that occurred when the Earth came between the spacecraft and the Sun; Bean described it as the most spectacular sight of the mission.

===Splashdown===
&quot;Yankee Clipper&quot; returned to Earth on November 24, 1969 splashing down in the South Pacific Ocean southeast of Samoa at 244:36:25 (20:58:24 UTC, 10:58:24amHST, local time at the landing site). The landing was hard, resulting in a camera becoming dislodged and striking Bean in the forehead. After recovery by , they entered the Mobile Quarantine Facility (MQF), while lunar samples and Surveyor parts were sent ahead by air to the Lunar Receiving Laboratory (LRL) in Houston. Once the &quot;Hornet&quot; docked in Hawaii, the MQF was offloaded and flown to Ellington Air Force Base near Houston on November 29, from where it was taken to the LRL, where the astronauts remained until released from quarantine on December 10.

==Mission insignia==
The Apollo 12 mission patch shows the crew&#x27;s naval background; all three astronauts at the time of the mission were U.S. Navy commanders. It features a clipper ship arriving at the Moon, representing the CM &quot;Yankee Clipper&quot;. The ship trails fire, and flies the flag of the United States. The mission name APOLLO XII and the crew names are on a wide gold border, with a small blue trim. Blue and gold are traditional U.S. Navy colors. The patch has four stars on it – one each for the three astronauts who flew the mission and one for Clifton Williams, the original LMP on Conrad&#x27;s crew who was killed in 1967 and would have flown the mission. The star was placed there at the suggestion of his replacement, Bean.

The insignia was designed by the crew with the aid of several employees of NASA contractors. The Apollo 12 landing area on the Moon is within the portion of the lunar surface shown on the insignia, based on a photograph of a globe of the Moon, taken by engineers. The clipper ship was based on photographs of such a ship obtained by Bean.

==Aftermath and spacecraft location==
After the mission, Conrad urged his crewmates to join him in the Skylab program, seeing in it the best chance of flying in space again. Bean did so—Conrad commanded Skylab 2, the first crewed mission to the space station, while Bean commanded Skylab 3. Gordon, though, still hoped to walk on the Moon and remained with the Apollo program, serving as backup commander of Apollo 15. He was the likely commander of Apollo 18, but that mission was canceled and he did not fly in space again.

The Apollo 12 command module &quot;Yankee Clipper&quot;, was displayed at the Paris Air Show and was then placed at NASA&#x27;s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia; ownership was transferred to the Smithsonian in July 1971. It is on display at the Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton.

Mission Control had remotely fired the service module&#x27;s thrusters after jettison, hoping to have it skip off the atmosphere and enter a high-apogee orbit, but the lack of tracking data confirming this caused it to conclude it most likely burned up in the atmosphere at the time of CM re-entry. The S-IVB is in a solar orbit that is sometimes affected by the Earth.

The ascent stage of LM &quot;Intrepid&quot; impacted the Moon November 20, 1969, at 22:17:17.7 UT (5:17pm EST). In 2009, the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) photographed the Apollo 12 landing site, where the descent stage, ALSEP, Surveyor3 spacecraft, and astronaut footpaths remain. In 2011, the LRO returned to the landing site at a lower altitude to take higher resolution photographs.

==See also==
* List of artificial objects on the Moon
* List of missions to the Moon
* List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* &quot;Apollo 12&quot; at Encyclopedia Astronautica
* &quot;Apollo 12&quot; at NASA&#x27;s National Space Science Data Center
* Apollo 11, 12, and 14 Traverses, at the Lunar and Planetary Institute
* &quot;Apollo 12 Traverse Map&quot; at the USGS Astrogeology Science Center
* Lunar Orbiter 3 image 154 H2, used for planning the mission (landing site is left of center).
* Lunar Orbiter 1 sequence of images 157, 158, and 159, showing the Apollo 12 landing site and vicinity

===NASA reports===
* &quot;Apollo 12 Preliminary Science Report&quot; (PDF), NASA, NASA SP-235, 1970
* &quot;Analysis of Apollo 12 Lightning Incident&quot;, (PDF) February 1970
* &quot;Analysis of &quot;Surveyor 3&quot; material and photographs returned by Apollo 12&quot; (PDF) 1972
* &quot;Examination of &quot;Surveyor 3&quot; surface sampler scoop&quot;(PDF) 1971
* &quot;Table 2-40. Apollo 12 Characteristics&quot; from &quot;NASA Historical Data Book: Volume III: Programs and Projects 1969–1978&quot; by Linda Neuman Ezell, NASA History Series (1988)
* &quot;The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology&quot; NASA, NASA SP-4009
* &quot;Apollo Program Summary Report&quot; (PDF), NASA, JSC-09423, April 1975

===Multimedia===
* &quot;Apollo 12: Pinpoint For Science&quot; on YouTube
* &quot;Apollo 12: The Bernie Scrivener Audio Tapes&quot; – Apollo 12 audio recordings at the Apollo 12 Flight Journal
* &quot;Apollo 12: There and Back Again&quot; – Image slideshow by &quot;Life&quot; magazine
* &quot;Apollo 12: Patch&quot; – Image of Apollo 12 mission patch

===Archival documents===
* Records tagged &quot;apollo 12&quot; in National Archives Catalog</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188433" start="0" end="9" title="Apollo 12" label="Apollo 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="82" end="96" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="127" end="131" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="174" end="178" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="188" end="208" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="212" end="219" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q213076" start="231" end="262" title="Pete Conrad" label="Charles &amp;quot;Pete&amp;quot; Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="267" end="285" title="Lunar Module Pilot" label="Lunar Module Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q310924" start="286" end="298" title="Alan Bean" label="Alan L. Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="375" end="395" title="Command Module Pilot" label="Command Module Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q502963" start="396" end="413" title="Richard F. Gordon Jr." label="Richard F. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="499" end="508" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="1205" end="1214" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q837685" start="1569" end="1579" title="Surveyor 3" label="Surveyor 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q14965" start="1823" end="1863" title="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package" label="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2181" end="2194" title="Surveyor 3#Retrieved parts" label="removed parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642255" start="2420" end="2430" title="Splashdown (spacecraft landing)" label="splashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2503" end="2507" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213076" start="2527" end="2558" title="Pete Conrad" label="Charles &amp;quot;Pete&amp;quot; Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2683" end="2703" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128819" start="2754" end="2791" title="United States Naval Test Pilot School" label="United States Naval Test Pilot School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972204" start="2795" end="2827" title="Patuxent River Naval Air Station" label="Patuxent River Naval Air Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409842" start="2852" end="2878" title="NASA Astronaut Group 2" label="second group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q725849" start="2900" end="2908" title="Gemini 5" label="Gemini 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q836047" start="2942" end="2951" title="Gemini 11" label="Gemini 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q502963" start="2982" end="3013" title="Richard F. Gordon Jr." label="Richard &amp;quot;Dick&amp;quot; Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="3121" end="3145" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408073" start="3239" end="3246" title="NASA Astronaut Group 3" label="Group 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q709646" start="3366" end="3389" title="Clifton Williams" label="Clifton C. Williams Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q164523" start="3431" end="3435" title="Northrop T-38 Talon" label="T-38"/>
<link wikidata="Q37043" start="3463" end="3474" title="Tallahassee" label="Tallahassee"/>
<link wikidata="Q310924" start="3517" end="3529" title="Alan Bean" label="Alan L. Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="3637" end="3649" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q618933" start="3704" end="3731" title="Apollo Applications Program" label="Apollo Applications Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="3887" end="3906" title="University of Texas" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q203651" start="4107" end="4115" title="Apollo 9" label="Apollo 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q278656" start="4164" end="4178" title="David Scott" label="David R. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q539385" start="4193" end="4209" title="Alfred Worden" label="Alfred M. Worden"/>
<link wikidata="Q297801" start="4239" end="4253" title="James Irwin" label="James B. Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="4301" end="4310" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q364476" start="4515" end="4529" title="James McDivitt" label="James McDivitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q545034" start="4836" end="4847" title="flight plan" label="flight plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q644837" start="4913" end="4927" title="Gerald P. Carr" label="Gerald P. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q390344" start="4929" end="4945" title="Edward Gibson" label="Edward G. Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q536632" start="4950" end="4963" title="Paul J. Weitz" label="Paul J. Weitz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4965" end="4981" title="Flight controller#Flight director" label="Flight directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549046" start="4987" end="5000" title="Gerry Griffin" label="Gerry Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94579995" start="5015" end="5025" title="Pete Frank" label="Pete Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101244" start="5041" end="5065" title="Clifford E. Charlesworth" label="Clifford E. Charlesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41674223" start="5084" end="5098" title="Milton Windler" label="Milton Windler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5281" end="5302" title="Flight controller#Spacecraft communicator (CAPCOM)" label="Capsule communicators"/>
<link wikidata="Q707626" start="5364" end="5372" title="Don Lind" label="Don Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="5849" end="5861" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q583625" start="5940" end="5953" title="Lunar Orbiter" label="Lunar Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q320936" start="6390" end="6408" title="Sea of Tranquility" label="Sea of Tranquility"/>
<link wikidata="Q117895" start="6708" end="6719" title="Sinus Medii" label="Sinus Medii"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="6789" end="6814" title="Manned Spaceflight Center" label="Manned Spaceflight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q837685" start="6887" end="6897" title="Surveyor 3" label="Surveyor 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484225" start="7443" end="7458" title="Samuel C. Phillips" label="Samuel Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804324" start="7491" end="7506" title="Surveyor (crater)" label="Surveyor crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036394" start="7639" end="7652" title="Ewen Whitaker" label="Ewen Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192948" start="7672" end="7685" title="Gerard Kuiper" label="Gerard Kuiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q837692" start="7742" end="7752" title="Surveyor 1" label="Surveyor 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="8320" end="8334" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252" start="8339" end="8350" title="Buzz Aldrin" label="Buzz Aldrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="8543" end="8557" title="Apollo Command Module" label="Command Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877372" start="8718" end="8748" title="Lunar Landing Training Vehicle" label="Lunar Landing Training Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="10923" end="10943" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="11600" end="11608" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q257161" start="12050" end="12055" title="S-IVB" label="S-IVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q223776" start="12195" end="12204" title="gravity assist" label="slingshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q560597" start="12516" end="12526" title="William Kwong Yu Yeung" label="Bill Yeung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981660" start="12565" end="12571" title="J002E3" label="J002E3"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="13570" end="13579" title="call sign" label="call sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q519560" start="13874" end="13897" title="North American Aviation" label="North American Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q463261" start="14137" end="14144" title="Grumman" label="Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780356" start="15108" end="15133" title="Apollo TV camera" label="a color television camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q14965" start="15238" end="15278" title="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package" label="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887137" start="15799" end="15817" title="Bendix Corporation" label="Bendix Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106511752" start="16424" end="16450" title="Lunar Surface Magnetometer" label="Lunar Surface Magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q106511559" start="16568" end="16597" title="Cold Cathode Gauge Experiment" label="Cold Cathode Gauge Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106510632" start="16748" end="16784" title="Suprathermal Ion Detector Experiment" label="Suprathermal Ion Detector Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106512415" start="16869" end="16892" title="Solar Wind Spectrometer" label="Solar Wind Spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="16939" end="16949" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037499" start="17195" end="17205" title="lunar dust" label="lunar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906434" start="17224" end="17267" title="Apollo 12 Passive Seismic Experiment" label="Apollo 12&amp;#x27;s Passive Seismic Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509111" start="17858" end="17865" title="SNAP-27" label="SNAP-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q305208" start="17869" end="17906" title="radioisotope thermoelectric generator" label="radioisotope thermoelectric generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="17930" end="17954" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="17967" end="17976" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="18370" end="18379" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q119294" start="18396" end="18408" title="Tonga Trench" label="Tonga Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="18956" end="18969" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="19088" end="19099" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="19194" end="19197" title="UTC" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="19208" end="19211" title="Eastern Standard Time" label="EST"/>
<link wikidata="Q182311" start="19579" end="19597" title="cumulonimbus cloud" label="cumulonimbus cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q277694" start="20402" end="20420" title="attitude indicator" label="attitude indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="20426" end="20435" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20446" end="20461" title="Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center#Houston (1965–present)" label="Mission Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426817" start="20552" end="20576" title="Saturn V instrument unit" label="Saturn V instrument unit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20764" end="20813" title="Flight controller#EECOM" label="Electrical, Environmental and Consumables Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218012" start="20842" end="20852" title="John Aaron" label="John Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q862717" start="21637" end="21650" title="parking orbit" label="parking orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q863248" start="21745" end="21766" title="trans-lunar injection" label="trans-lunar injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835327" start="22680" end="22718" title="transposition, docking, and extraction" label="transposition, docking, and extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q73994" start="23450" end="23472" title="free-return trajectory" label="free-return trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q570069" start="25784" end="25801" title="Selenographic coordinates" label="lunar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q153700" start="26621" end="26635" title="Oriana Fallaci" label="Oriana Fallaci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27120" end="27160" title="Apollo TV camera#Westinghouse Lunar Color Camera" label="Secondary Electron Conduction (SEC) tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703666" start="27245" end="27276" title="Lunar Flag Assembly" label="raising a U.S. flag on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942237" start="27857" end="27866" title="core sample" label="core tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766000" start="28478" end="28489" title="Head (crater)" label="Head crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131154" start="28634" end="28651" title="Copernicus (lunar crater)" label="Copernicus crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q85746531" start="28939" end="28951" title="Bench (crater)" label="Bench crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800690" start="28956" end="28968" title="Sharp-Apollo (crater)" label="Sharp crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765555" start="28978" end="28989" title="Halo (crater)" label="Halo crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804324" start="29009" end="29024" title="Surveyor (crater)" label="Surveyor crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q64545" start="29518" end="29528" title="Hasselblad" label="Hasselblad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068677" start="29617" end="29623" title="selfie" label="selfie"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804324" start="29857" end="29869" title="block (crater)" label="Block crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804324" start="29878" end="29893" title="Surveyor (crater)" label="Surveyor crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083626" start="30435" end="30456" title="Orbital inclination change" label="plane change maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="31195" end="31203" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="32981" end="32986" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241537" start="33025" end="33028" title="Hawaii–Aleutian Time Zone" label="HST"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886953" start="33198" end="33224" title="Mobile Quarantine Facility" label="Mobile Quarantine Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460747" start="33301" end="33327" title="Lunar Receiving Laboratory" label="Lunar Receiving Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365417" start="33427" end="33451" title="Ellington Air Force Base" label="Ellington Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q13543682" start="33747" end="33757" title="Commander (United States)" label="commanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q273081" start="33773" end="33785" title="clipper ship" label="clipper ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="34793" end="34799" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="Q684467" start="34893" end="34901" title="Skylab 2" label="Skylab 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052421" start="34971" end="34979" title="Skylab 3" label="Skylab 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35140" end="35149" title="Canceled Apollo missions#Follow-on lunar missions" label="Apollo 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q174352" start="35295" end="35309" title="Paris Air Show" label="Paris Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q618731" start="35345" end="35368" title="Langley Research Center" label="Langley Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q342043" start="35372" end="35389" title="Hampton, Virginia" label="Hampton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="35424" end="35435" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934106" start="35474" end="35503" title="Virginia Air and Space Center" label="Virginia Air and Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q331778" start="36013" end="36041" title="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q743127" start="36296" end="36334" title="List of artificial objects on the Moon" label="List of artificial objects on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530844" start="36337" end="36365" title="List of missions to the Moon" label="List of missions to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644755" start="36368" end="36410" title="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999" label="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347705" start="36573" end="36607" title="National Space Science Data Center" label="National Space Science Data Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811561" start="36724" end="36756" title="Astrogeology Research Program" label="USGS Astrogeology Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066370" start="36759" end="36774" title="Lunar Orbiter 3" label="Lunar Orbiter 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q932976" start="36855" end="36870" title="Lunar Orbiter 1" label="Lunar Orbiter 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="37931" end="37935" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="38085" end="38102" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1968" wikidata="Q178871" url="?curid=1968" title="Apollo 14">
<text>Apollo 14 (January 31February 9, 1971) was the eighth crewed mission in the United States Apollo program, the third to land on the Moon, and the first to land in the lunar highlands. It was the last of the &quot;H missions&quot;, landings at specific sites of scientific interest on the Moon for two-day stays with two lunar extravehicular activities (EVAs or moonwalks).

The mission was originally scheduled for 1970, but was postponed because of the investigation following the failure of Apollo 13 to reach the Moon&#x27;s surface, and the need for modifications to the spacecraft as a result. Commander Alan Shepard, Command Module Pilot Stuart Roosa, and Lunar Module Pilot Edgar Mitchell launched on their nine-day mission on Sunday, January 31, 1971, at 4:03:02 p.m. EST. En route to the lunar landing, the crew overcame malfunctions that might have resulted in a second consecutive aborted mission, and possibly, the premature end of the Apollo program.

Shepard and Mitchell made their lunar landing on February 5 in the Fra Mauro formation – originally the target of Apollo 13. During the two walks on the surface, they collected of Moon rocks and deployed several scientific experiments. To the dismay of some geologists, Shepard and Mitchell did not reach the rim of Cone crater as had been planned, though they came close. In Apollo 14&#x27;s most famous event, Shepard hit two golf balls he had brought with him with a makeshift club.

While Shepard and Mitchell were on the surface, Roosa remained in lunar orbit aboard the Command and Service Module, performing scientific experiments and photographing the Moon, including the landing site of the future Apollo 16 mission. He took several hundred seeds on the mission, many of which were germinated on return, resulting in the so-called Moon trees, that were widely distributed in the following years. After liftoff from the lunar surface and a successful docking, the spacecraft was flown back to Earth where the three astronauts splashed down safely in the Pacific Ocean on February 9.

== Astronauts and key Mission Control personnel ==

The mission commander of Apollo 14, Alan Shepard, one of the original Mercury Seven astronauts, became the first American to enter space with a suborbital flight on May 5, 1961. Thereafter, he was grounded by Ménière&#x27;s disease, a disorder of the ear, and served as Chief Astronaut, the administrative head of the Astronaut Office. He had experimental surgery in 1968 which was successful and allowed his return to flight status. Shepard, at age 47, was the oldest U.S. astronaut to fly when he made his trip aboard Apollo 14, and he is the oldest person to walk on the Moon.

Apollo 14&#x27;s Command Module Pilot (CMP), Stuart Roosa, aged 37 when the mission flew, had been a smoke jumper before joining the Air Force in 1953. He became a fighter pilot and then in 1965 successfully completed Aerospace Research Pilot School (ARPS) at Edwards Air Force Base in California prior to his selection as a Group 5 astronaut the following year. He served as a capsule communicator (CAPCOM) for Apollo 9. The Lunar Module Pilot (LMP), Edgar Mitchell, aged 40 at the time of Apollo 14, joined the Navy in 1952 and served as a fighter pilot, beginning in 1954. He was assigned to squadrons aboard aircraft carriers before returning to the United States to further his education while in the Navy, also completing the ARPS prior to his selection as a Group 5 astronaut. He served on the support crew for Apollo 9 and was the LMP of the backup crew for Apollo 10.

Shepard and his crew had originally been designated by Deke Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations and one of the Mercury Seven, as the crew for Apollo 13. NASA&#x27;s management felt that Shepard needed more time for training given he had not flown in space since 1961, and chose him and his crew for Apollo 14 instead. The crew originally designated for Apollo 14, Jim Lovell as the commander, Ken Mattingly as CMP and Fred Haise as LMP, all of whom had backed up Apollo 11, was made the prime crew for Apollo 13 instead.

Mitchell&#x27;s commander on the Apollo 10 backup crew had been another of the original seven, Gordon Cooper, who had tentatively been scheduled to command Apollo 13, but according to author Andrew Chaikin, his casual attitude toward training resulted in him being not selected. Also on that crew, but excluded from further flights, was Donn Eisele, likely because of problems aboard Apollo 7, which he had flown, and because he had been involved in a messy divorce.

Apollo 14&#x27;s backup crew was Eugene A. Cernan as commander, Ronald E. Evans Jr. as CMP and Joe H. Engle as LMP. The backup crew, with Harrison Schmitt replacing Engle, would become the prime crew of Apollo 17. Schmitt flew instead of Engle because there was intense pressure on NASA to fly a scientist to the Moon (Schmitt was a geologist) and Apollo 17 was the last lunar flight. Engle, who had flown the X-15 to the edge of outer space, flew into space for NASA in 1981 on STS-2, the second Space Shuttle flight.

During projects Mercury and Gemini, each mission had a prime and a backup crew. Apollo 9 commander James McDivitt believed meetings that required a member of the flight crew were being missed, so for Apollo a third crew of astronauts was added, known as the support crew. Usually low in seniority, support crew members assembled the mission&#x27;s rules, flight plan, and checklists, and kept them updated; for Apollo 14, they were Philip K. Chapman, Bruce McCandless II, William R. Pogue and C. Gordon Fullerton. CAPCOMs, the individuals in Mission Control responsible for communications with the astronauts were Evans, McCandless, Fullerton and Haise. A veteran of Apollo 13, which had aborted before reaching the Moon, Haise put his training for that mission to use, especially during the EVAs, since both missions were targeted at the same place on the Moon. Had Haise walked on the Moon, he would have been the first Group 5 astronaut to do so, an honor that went to Mitchell.

The flight directors during Apollo had a one-sentence job description, &quot;The flight director may take any actions necessary for crew safety and mission success.&quot; For Apollo 14, they were: Pete Frank, Orange team; Glynn Lunney, Black team; Milt Windler, Maroon team and Gerry Griffin, Gold team.

== Preparation and training ==

Prime and backup crews for both Apollo 13 and 14 were announced on August 6, 1969. Apollo 14 was scheduled for July 1970, but in January of that year, due to budget cuts that saw the cancellation of Apollo 20, NASA decided there would be two Apollo missions per year with 1970 to see Apollo 13 in April and Apollo 14 likely in October or November.

The investigation into the accident which caused an abort of Apollo 13 delayed Apollo 14. On May 7, 1970, NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine announced that Apollo 14 would launch no earlier than December 3, and the landing would be close to the site targeted by Apollo 13. The Apollo 14 astronauts continued their training. On June 30, 1970, following the release of the accident report and a NASA review of what changes to the spacecraft would be necessary, NASA announced that the launch would slip to no earlier than January 31, 1971.

The crew of Apollo 14 trained together for 19 months after assignment to the mission, longer than any other Apollo crew to that point. In addition to the normal training workload, they had to supervise the changes to the command and service module (CSM) made as a result of the Apollo 13 investigation, much of which was delegated by Shepard to Roosa. Mitchell later stated, &quot;We realized that if our mission failed—if we had to turn back—that was probably the end of the Apollo program. There was no way NASA could stand two failures in a row. We figured there was a heavy mantle on our shoulders to make sure we got it right.&quot;

Before the abort of the Apollo 13 mission, the plan was to have Apollo 14 land near Littrow crater, in Mare Serenitatis, where there are features that were thought to be volcanic. After Apollo 13 returned, it was decided that its landing site, near Cone crater in the Fra Mauro formation, was scientifically more important than Littrow. The Fra Mauro formation is composed of ejecta from the impact event that formed Mare Imbrium, and scientists hoped for samples that originated deep under the Moon&#x27;s surface. Cone crater was the result of a young, deep impact, and large enough to have torn through whatever debris was deposited since the Imbrium Event, which geologists hoped to be able to date. Landing at Fra Mauro would also allow orbital photography of another candidate landing site, the Descartes Highlands, which became the landing site for Apollo 16. Although Littrow went unvisited, a nearby area, Taurus-Littrow, was the landing site for Apollo 17. Apollo 14&#x27;s landing site was located slightly closer to Cone crater than the point designated for Apollo 13.

The change in landing site from Littrow to Fra Mauro affected the geological training for Apollo 14. Before the switch, the astronauts had been taken to volcanic sites on Earth; afterwards, they visited crater sites, such as the Ries Crater in West Germany and an artificial crater field created for astronaut training in Arizona&#x27;s Verde Valley. The effectiveness of the training was limited by a lack of enthusiasm shown by Shepard, which set the tone for Mitchell. Harrison Schmitt suggested that the commander had other things on his mind, such as overcoming a ten-year absence from spaceflight and ensuring a successful mission after the near-disaster of Apollo 13.
Roosa undertook training for his period alone in lunar orbit, when he would make observations of the Moon and take photographs. He had been impressed by the training given to Apollo 13 prime crew CMP Mattingly by geologist Farouk El-Baz and got El-Baz to agree to undertake his training. The two men pored over lunar maps depicting the areas the CSM would pass over. When Shepard and Mitchell were on their geology field trips, Roosa would be overhead in an airplane taking photographs of the site and making observations. El-Baz had Roosa make observations while flying his T-38 jet at a speed and altitude simulating the speed at which the lunar surface would pass below the CSM.

Another issue that had marked Apollo 13 was the last-minute change of crew due to exposure to communicable disease. To prevent another such occurrence, for Apollo 14 NASA instituted what was called the Flight Crew Health Stabilization Program. Beginning 21 days before launch, the crew lived in quarters at the launch site, Florida&#x27;s Kennedy Space Center (KSC), with their contacts limited to their spouses, the backup crew, mission technicians, and others directly involved in training. Those individuals were given physical examinations and immunizations, and crew movements were limited as much as possible at KSC and nearby areas.

The Command and Service Modules were delivered to KSC on November 19, 1969; the ascent stage of the LM arrived on November 21 with the descent stage three days later. Thereafter, checkout, testing and equipment installation proceeded. The launch vehicle stack, with the spacecraft on top, was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Pad 39A on November 9, 1970.

== Hardware ==
=== Spacecraft ===

The Apollo 14 spacecraft consisted of Command Module (CM) 110 and Service Module (SM) 110 (together CSM-110), called &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot;, and Lunar Module 8 (LM-8), called &quot;Antares&quot;. Roosa had chosen the CSM&#x27;s call sign after the town in North Carolina where, in 1903, the Wright Brothers first flew their &quot;Wright Flyer&quot; airplane (also known as &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot;). Antares was named by Mitchell after the star in the constellation Scorpius that the astronauts in the LM would use to orient the craft for its lunar landing. Also considered part of the spacecraft were a Launch Escape System and a Spacecraft/Launch Vehicle Adapter, numbered SLA-17.

The changes to the Apollo spacecraft between Apollo 13 and 14 were more numerous than with earlier missions, not only because of the problems with Apollo 13, but because of the more extensive lunar activities planned for Apollo 14. The Apollo 13 accident had been caused by the explosive failure of an oxygen tank, after the insulation of the internal wiring had been damaged by heating of the tank contents pre-launch—that the oxygen had gotten hot enough to damage the insulation had not been realized, since the protective thermostatic switches had failed because they were, through an error, not designed to handle the voltage applied during ground testing. The explosion damaged the other tank or its tubing, causing its contents to leak away.

The changes in response included a redesign of the oxygen tanks, with the thermostats being upgraded to handle the proper voltage. A third tank was also added, placed in Bay1 of the SM, on the side opposite the other two, and was given a valve that could isolate it in an emergency, and allow it to feed the CM&#x27;s environmental system only. The quantity probe in each tank was upgraded from aluminum to stainless steel.

Also in response to the Apollo 13 accident, the electrical wiring in Bay4 (where the explosion had happened) was sheathed in stainless steel. The fuel cell oxygen supply valves were redesigned to isolate the Teflon-coated wiring from the oxygen. The spacecraft and Mission Control monitoring systems were modified to give more immediate and visible warnings of anomalies. The Apollo 13 astronauts had suffered shortages of water and of power after the accident. Accordingly, an emergency supply of of water was stored in Apollo 14&#x27;s CM, and an emergency battery, identical to those that powered the LM&#x27;s descent stage, was placed in the SM. The LM was modified to make the transfer of power from LM to CM easier.

Other changes included the installation of anti-slosh baffles in the LM descent stage&#x27;s propellant tanks. This would prevent the low fuel light from coming on prematurely, as had happened on Apollo 11 and 12. Structural changes were made to accommodate the equipment to be used on the lunar surface, including the Modular Equipment Transporter.

=== Launch vehicle ===
The Saturn V used for Apollo 14 was designated SA-509, and was similar to those used on Apollo 8 through 13. At , it was the heaviest vehicle yet flown by NASA, heavier than the launch vehicle for Apollo 13.

A number of changes were made to avoid pogo oscillations, that had caused an early shutdown of the center J-2 engine on Apollo 13&#x27;s S-II second stage. These included a helium gas accumulator installed in the liquid oxygen (LOX) line of the center engine, a backup cutoff device for that engine, and a simplified 2-position propellant utilization valve on each of the five J-2 engines.

=== ALSEP and other lunar surface equipment ===
The Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (ALSEP) array of scientific instruments carried by Apollo 14 consisted of the Passive Seismic Experiment (PSE), Active Seismic Experiment (ASE), Suprathermal Ion Detector Experiment (SIDE), Cold Cathode Ion Gauge Experiment (CCIG), and Charged Particle Lunar Environment Experiment (CPLEE). Two additional lunar surface experiments not part of the ALSEP were also flown, the Laser Ranging Retroreflector (LRRR or LR3), to be deployed in the ALSEP&#x27;s vicinity, and the Lunar Portable Magnetometer (LPM), to be used by the astronauts during their second EVA. The PSE had been flown on Apollo 12 and 13, the ASE on Apollo 13, the SIDE on Apollo 12, the CCIG on Apollo 12 and 13, and the LRRR on Apollo 11. The LPM was new, but resembled equipment flown on Apollo 12. The ALSEP components flown on Apollo 13 were destroyed when its LM burned up in Earth&#x27;s atmosphere.
Deployment of the ALSEP, and of the other instruments, each formed one of Apollo 14&#x27;s mission objectives.
The PSE was a seismometer, similar to one left on the Moon by Apollo 12, and was to measure seismic activity in the Moon. The Apollo 14 instrument would be calibrated by the impact, after being jettisoned, of the LM&#x27;s ascent stage, since an object of known mass and velocity would be impacting at a known location on the Moon. The Apollo 12 instrument would also be activated by the spent Apollo 14 S-IVB booster, which would impact the Moon after the mission entered lunar orbit. The two seismometers would, in combination with those left by later Apollo missions, constitute a network of such instruments at different locations on the Moon.

The ASE would also measure seismic waves. It consisted of two parts. In the first, one of the crew members would deploy three geophones at distances up to from the ALSEP&#x27;s Central Station, and on his way back from the furthest, fire thumpers every . The second consisted of four mortars (with their launch tubes), of different properties and set to impact at different distances from the experiment. It was hoped that the waves generated from the impacts would provide data about seismic wave transmission in the Moon&#x27;s regolith. The mortar shells were not to be fired until the astronauts had returned to Earth, and in the event were never fired for fear they would damage other experiments. A similar experiment was successfully deployed, and the mortars launched, on Apollo 16.

The LPM was to be carried during the second EVA and used to measure the Moon&#x27;s magnetic field at various points.
The SIDE measured ions on the lunar surface, including from the solar wind. It was combined with the CCIG, which was to measure the lunar atmosphere and detect if it varied over time. The CPLEE measured the particle energies of protons and electrons generated by the Sun that reached the lunar surface. The LRRR acts as a passive target for laser beams, allowing the measurement of the Earth/Moon distance and how it changes over time. The LRRRs from Apollo 11, 14 and 15 are the only experiments left on the Moon by the Apollo astronauts that are still returning data.

Flown for the first time on Apollo 14 was the Buddy Secondary Life Support System (BSLSS), a set of flexible hoses that would enable Shepard and Mitchell to share cooling water should one of their Primary Life Support System (PLSS) backpacks fail. In such an emergency, the astronaut with the failed equipment would get oxygen from his Oxygen Purge System (OPS) backup cylinder, but the BSLSS would ensure he did not have to use oxygen for cooling, extending the life of the OPS. The OPSs used on Apollo 14 were modified from those used on previous missions in that the internal heaters were removed as unnecessary.

Water bags were also taken to the lunar surface, dubbed &quot;Gunga Dins&quot;, for insertion in the astronauts&#x27; helmets, allowing them sips of water during the EVAs. These had been flown on Apollo 13, but Shepard and Mitchell were the first to use them on the Moon. Similarly, Shepard was the first on the lunar surface to wear a spacesuit with commander&#x27;s stripes: red stripes on arms, legs, and on the helmet, though one had been worn by Lovell on Apollo 13. These were instituted because of the difficulty in telling one spacesuited astronaut from the other in photographs.

=== Modular Equipment Transporter ===
The Modular Equipment Transporter (MET) was a two-wheeled handcart, used only on Apollo 14, intended to allow the astronauts to take tools and equipment with them, and store lunar samples, without needing to carry them. On later Apollo program missions, the self-propelled Lunar Roving Vehicle (LRV) was flown instead.

The MET, when deployed for use on the lunar surface, was about long, wide and high. It had pressurized rubber tires wide and in diameter, containing nitrogen and inflated to about . The first use of tires on the Moon, these were developed by Goodyear and were dubbed their XLT (Experimental Lunar Tire) model. Fully loaded, the MET weighed about . Two legs combined with the wheels to provide four-point stability when at rest.

== Mission highlights ==
=== Launch and flight to lunar orbit ===
Apollo 14 launched from Launch Complex 39-A at KSC at 4:03:02 pm (21:03:02 UTC), January 31, 1971. This followed a launch delay due to weather of 40 minutes and 2 seconds; the first such delay in the Apollo program. The original planned time, 3:23 pm, was at the very start of the launch window of just under four hours; had Apollo 14 not launched during it, it could not have departed until March. Apollo 12 had launched during poor weather and twice been struck by lightning, as a result of which the rules had been tightened. Among those present to watch the launch were U.S. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and the Prince of Spain, the future King Juan Carlos I. The mission would take a faster trajectory to the Moon than planned, and thus make up the time in flight. Because it had, just over two days after launch, the mission timers would be put ahead by 40 minutes and 3 seconds so that later events would take place at the times scheduled in the flight plan.

After the vehicle reached orbit, the S-IVB third stage shut down, and the astronauts performed checks of the spacecraft before restarting the stage for translunar injection (TLI), the burn that placed the vehicle on course for the Moon. After TLI, the CSM separated from the S-IVB, and Roosa performed the transposition maneuver, turning it around in order to dock with the LM before the entire spacecraft separated from the stage. Roosa, who had practiced the maneuver many times, hoped to break the record for the least amount of propellant used in docking. But when he gently brought the modules together, the docking mechanism would not activate. He made several attempts over the next two hours, as mission controllers huddled and sent advice. If the LM could not be extracted from its place on the S-IVB, no lunar landing could take place, and with consecutive failures, the Apollo program might end. Mission Control proposed that they try it again with the docking probe retracted, hoping the contact would trigger the latches. This worked, and within an hour the joined spacecraft had separated from the S-IVB. The stage was set on a course to impact the Moon, which it did just over three days later, causing the Apollo 12 seismometer to register vibrations for over three hours.

The crew settled in for its voyage to Fra Mauro. At 60:30 Ground Elapsed Time, Shepard and Mitchell entered the LM to check its systems; while there they photographed a wastewater dump from the CSM, part of a particle contamination study in preparation for Skylab. Two midcourse corrections were performed on the translunar coast, with one burn lasting 10.19 seconds and one lasting 0.65 seconds.

=== Lunar orbit and descent ===

At 81:56:40.70 into the mission (February 4 at 1:59:43 am EST; 06:59:43 UTC), the Service Propulsion System engine in the SM was fired for 370.84 seconds to send the craft into a lunar orbit with apocynthion of and pericynthion of . A second burn, at 86:10:52 mission time, sent the spacecraft into an orbit of by . This was done in preparation for the release of the LM &quot;Antares&quot;. Apollo 14 was the first mission on which the CSM propelled the LM to the lower orbit—though Apollo 13 would have done so had the abort not already occurred. This was done to increase the amount of hover time available to the astronauts, a safety factor since Apollo 14 was to land in rough terrain.

After separating from the command module in lunar orbit, the LM &quot;Antares&quot; had two serious problems. First, the LM computer began getting an ABORT signal from a faulty switch. NASA believed the computer might be getting erroneous readings like this if a tiny ball of solder had shaken loose and was floating between the switch and the contact, closing the circuit. The immediate solution – tapping on the panel next to the switch – did work briefly, but the circuit soon closed again. If the problem recurred after the descent engine fired, the computer would think the signal was real and would initiate an auto-abort, causing the ascent stage to separate from the descent stage and climb back into orbit. NASA and the software teams at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology scrambled to find a solution. The software was hard-wired, preventing it from being updated from the ground. The fix made it appear to the system that an abort had already happened, and it would ignore incoming automated signals to abort. This would not prevent the astronauts from piloting the ship, though if an abort became necessary, they might have to initiate it manually. Mitchell entered the changes with minutes to go until planned ignition.

A second problem occurred during the powered descent, when the LM landing radar failed to lock automatically onto the Moon&#x27;s surface, depriving the navigation computer of vital information on the vehicle&#x27;s altitude and vertical descent speed. After the astronauts cycled the landing radar breaker, the unit successfully acquired a signal near . Mission rules required an abort if the landing radar was out at , though Shepard might have tried to land without it. With the landing radar, Shepard steered the LM to a landing which was the closest to the intended target of the six missions that landed on the Moon.

=== Lunar surface operations ===

Shepard stated, after stepping onto the lunar surface, &quot;And it&#x27;s been a long way, but we&#x27;re here.&quot; The first EVA began at 9:42 am EST (14:42 UTC) on February 5, 1971, having been delayed by a problem with the communications system which set back the start of the first EVA to five hours after landing. The astronauts devoted much of the first EVA to equipment offloading, deployment of the ALSEP and the US flag, as well as setting up and loading the MET. These activities were televised back to Earth, though the picture tended to degenerate during the latter portion of the EVA. Mitchell deployed the ASE&#x27;s geophone lines, unreeling and emplacing the two lines leading out from the ALSEP&#x27;s Central Station. He then fired the thumper explosives, vibrations from which would give scientists back on Earth information about the depth and composition of the lunar regolith. Of the 21 thumpers, five failed to fire. On the way back to the LM, the astronauts collected and documented lunar samples, and took photographs of the area. The first EVA lasted 4 hours, 47 minutes, 50 seconds.
The astronauts had been surprised by the undulating ground, expecting flatter terrain in the area of the landing, and this became an issue on the second EVA, as they set out, MET in tow, for the rim of Cone crater. The craters that Shepard and Mitchell planned to use for navigational landmarks looked very different on the ground than on the maps they had, based on overhead shots taken from lunar orbit. Additionally, they consistently overestimated the distance they travelled. Mission Control and the CAPCOM, Fred Haise, could see nothing of this, as the television camera remained near the LM, but they worried as the clock ticked on the EVA, and monitored the heavy breathing and rapid heartbeats of the astronauts. They topped one ridge that they expected was the crater rim, only to view more such terrain beyond. Although Mitchell strongly suspected the rim was nearby, they had become physically exhausted from the effort. They were then instructed by Haise to sample where they were and then start moving back towards the LM. Later analysis using the pictures they took determined that they had come within about of the crater&#x27;s rim. Images from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) show the tracks of the astronauts and the MET come to within 30 m of the rim. The difficulties faced by Shepard and Mitchell would emphasize the need for a means of transportation on the lunar surface with a navigation system, which was met by the Lunar Roving Vehicle, already planned to fly on Apollo 15.

Once the astronauts returned to the vicinity of the LM and were again within view of the television camera, Shepard performed a stunt he had been planning for years in the event he reached the Moon, and which is probably what Apollo 14 is best remembered for. Shepard brought along a Wilson six iron golf club head, which he had modified to attach to the handle of the contingency sample tool, and two golf balls. Shepard took several one-handed swings (due to the limited flexibility of the EVA suit) and exuberantly exclaimed that the second ball went &quot;miles and miles and miles&quot; in the low lunar gravity. Mitchell then threw a lunar scoop handle as if it were a javelin. The &quot;javelin&quot; and one of the golf balls wound up in a crater together, with Mitchell&#x27;s projectile a bit further. In an interview with Ottawa Golf, Shepard stated the other landed near the ALSEP. The second EVA lasted 4 hours, 34 minutes, 41 seconds. Shepard brought back the club, gave it to the USGA Museum in New Jersey, and had a replica made which he gave to the National Air and Space Museum. In February 2021, to commemorate Apollo 14&#x27;s 50th anniversary, imaging specialist Andy Saunders, who had previously worked to produce the clearest image of Neil Armstrong on the Moon, produced new, digitally enhanced images that were used to estimate the final resting places of the two balls that Shepard hit - the first landed approximately 24 yards from the &quot;tee&quot;, while the second managed 40 yards.
==== Lunar samples ====
A total of of Moon rocks, or lunar samples, were brought back from Apollo 14. Most are breccias, which are rocks composed of fragments of other, older rocks. Breccias form when the heat and pressure of meteorite impacts fuse small rock fragments together. There were a few basalts that were collected in this mission in the form of clasts (fragments) in breccia. The Apollo 14 basalts are generally richer in aluminum and sometimes richer in potassium than other lunar basalts. Most lunar mare basalts collected during the Apollo program were formed from 3.0 to 3.8 billion years ago. The Apollo 14 basalts were formed 4.0 to 4.3 billion years ago, older than the volcanism known to have occurred at any of the mare locations reached during the Apollo program.

Some geologists were pleased enough with the close approach to Cone crater to send a case of scotch to the astronauts while they were in post-mission quarantine, though their enthusiasm was tempered by the fact that Shepard and Mitchell had documented few of the samples they brought back, making it hard and sometimes impossible to discern where they came from. Others were less happy; Don Wilhelms wrote in his book on the geological aspects of Apollo, &quot;the golf game did not set well with most geologists in light of the results at Cone crater. The total haul from the rim-flank of Cone ... was 16 Hasselblad photographs (out of a mission total of 417), six rock-size samples heavier than 50 g, and a grand total of 10 kg of samples, 9 kg of which are in one rock (sample 14321 [i.e., Big Bertha]). That is to say, apart from 14321 we have less than 1 kg of rock—962 g to be exact—from what in my opinion is the most important single point reached by astronauts on the Moon.&quot; Geologist Lee Silver stated, &quot;The Apollo 14 crews did not have the right attitude, did not learn enough about their mission, had the burden of not having the best possible preflight photography, and they weren&#x27;t ready.&quot; In their sourcebook on Apollo, Richard W. Orloff and David M. Harland doubted that if Apollo 13 had reached the Moon, Lovell, and Haise, given a more distant landing point, could have got as close to Cone crater as Shepard and Mitchell did.
In January 2019 research showed that Big Bertha, which weighs , has characteristics that make it likely to be a terrestrial (Earth) meteorite. Granite and quartz, which are commonly found on Earth but very rarely found on the Moon, were confirmed to exist on Big Bertha. To find the sample&#x27;s age, the research team from Curtin University looked at bits of the mineral zircon embedded in its structure. &quot;By determining the age of zircon found in the sample, we were able to pinpoint the age of the host rock at about four billion years old, making it similar to the oldest rocks on Earth,&quot; researcher Alexander Nemchin said, adding that &quot;the chemistry of the zircon in this sample is very different from that of every other zircon grain ever analyzed in lunar samples, and remarkably similar to that of zircons found on Earth.&quot; This would mean Big Bertha is both the first discovered terrestrial meteorite and the oldest known Earth rock.

=== Lunar orbit operations ===

Roosa spent almost two days alone aboard &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot;, performing the first intensive program of scientific observation from lunar orbit, much of which was intended to have been done by Apollo 13. After &quot;Antares&quot; separated and its crew began preparations to land, Roosa in &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot; performed an SPS burn to send the CSM to an orbit of approximately , and later a plane change maneuver to compensate for the rotation of the Moon.

Roosa took pictures from lunar orbit. The Lunar Topographic Camera, also known as the Hycon camera, was supposed to be used to image the surface, including the Descartes Highlands site being considered for Apollo 16, but it quickly developed a fault with the shutter that Roosa could not fix despite considerable help from Houston. Although about half of the photographic targets had to be scrubbed, Roosa was able to obtain photographs of Descartes with a Hasselblad camera and confirm that it was a suitable landing point. Roosa also used the Hasselblad to take photographs of the impact point of Apollo 13&#x27;s S-IVB near Lansburg B crater. After the mission, troubleshooting found a tiny piece of aluminum contaminating the shutter control circuit, which caused the shutter to operate continuously.

Roosa was able to see sunlight glinting off &quot;Antares&quot; and view its lengthy shadow on the lunar surface on Orbit 17; on Orbit 29 he could see the sun reflecting off the ALSEP. He also took astronomical photographs, of the Gegenschein, and of the Lagrangian point of the Sun-Earth system that lies beyond the Earth (L), testing the theory that the Gegenschein is generated by reflections off particles at L. Performing the bistatic radar experiment, he also focused &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot; VHF and S-band transmitters at the Moon so that they would bounce off and be detected on Earth in an effort to learn more about the depth of the lunar regolith.

=== Return, splashdown and quarantine ===

&quot;Antares&quot; lifted off from the Moon at 1:48:42 pm EST (18:48:42 UTC) on February 6, 1971. Following the first direct (first orbit) rendezvous on a lunar landing mission, docking took place an hour and 47 minutes later. Despite concerns based on the docking problems early in the mission, the docking was successful on the first attempt, though the LM&#x27;s Abort Guidance System, used for navigation, failed just before the two craft docked. After crew, equipment, and lunar samples were transferred to &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot;, the ascent stage was jettisoned, and impacted the Moon, setting off waves registered by the seismometers from Apollo 12 and 14.

A trans-earth injection burn took place on February 6 at 8:39:04 pm (February 7 at 01:39:04 UTC) taking 350.8 seconds, during &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot; 34th lunar revolution. During the trans-earth coast, two tests of the oxygen system were performed, one to ensure the system would operate properly with low densities of oxygen in the tanks, the second to operate the system at a high flow rate, as would be necessary for the in-flight EVAs scheduled for Apollo 15 and later. Additionally, a navigation exercise was done to simulate a return to Earth following a loss of communications. All were successful. During his rest periods on the voyage, Mitchell conducted ESP experiments without NASA&#x27;s knowledge or sanction, attempting by prearrangement to send images of cards he had brought with him to four people on Earth. He stated after the mission that two of the four had gotten 51 out of 200 correct (the others were less successful), whereas random chance would have dictated 40.
On the final evening in space, the crew conducted a press conference, with the questions submitted to NASA in advance and read to the astronauts by the CAPCOM.

The command module &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot; splashed down in the South Pacific Ocean on February 9, 1971, at 21:05 [UTC], approximately south of American Samoa. After recovery by the ship USS &quot;New Orleans&quot;, the crew was flown to Pago Pago International Airport in Tafuna, then to Honolulu, then to Ellington Air Force Base near Houston in a plane containing a Mobile Quarantine Facility trailer before they continued their quarantine in the Lunar Receiving Laboratory. They remained there until their release from quarantine on February 27, 1971. The Apollo 14 astronauts were the last lunar explorers to be quarantined on their return from the Moon. They were the only Apollo crew to be quarantined both before and after the flight.

Roosa, who worked in forestry in his youth, took several hundred tree seeds on the flight. These were germinated after the return to Earth, and were widely distributed around the world as commemorative Moon trees. Some seedlings were given to state forestry associations in 1975 and 1976 to mark the United States Bicentennial.
== Mission insignia ==
The mission insignia is an oval depicting the Earth and the Moon, and an astronaut pin drawn with a comet trail. The pin is leaving Earth and is approaching the Moon. A gold band around the edge includes the mission and astronaut names. The designer was Jean Beaulieu, who based it on a sketch by Shepard, who had been head of the Astronaut Office and meant the pin to symbolize that through him, the entire corps was in spirit flying to the Moon.

The backup crew spoofed the patch with its own version, with revised artwork showing a Wile E. Coyote cartoon character depicted as gray-bearded (for Shepard, who was 47 at the time of the mission and the oldest man on the Moon), pot-bellied (for Mitchell, who had a pudgy appearance) and red-furred (for Roosa&#x27;s red hair), still on the way to the Moon, while Road Runner (for the backup crew) is already on the Moon, holding a U.S. flag and a flag labelled &quot;1st Team&quot;. The flight name is replaced by &quot;BEEP BEEP&quot; and the backup crew&#x27;s names are given. Several of these patches were hidden by the backup crew and found during the flight by the crew in notebooks and storage lockers in both the CSM &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot; and the LM &quot;Antares&quot;, and one patch was stored in the MET lunar handcart. One patch, attached to Shepard&#x27;s PLSS, was worn on the lunar surface, and, mounted on a plaque, was presented by him to Cernan after the mission.
== Spacecraft locations ==
The Apollo 14 command module &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot; is on display at the Apollo/Saturn V Center at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex after being on display at the United States Astronaut Hall of Fame near Titusville, Florida, for several years. At the time of its transfer of ownership from NASA to the Smithsonian in July 1977, it was on display at the facilities of North American Rockwell (the company that had constructed it) in Downey, California. The SM reentered Earth&#x27;s atmosphere and was destroyed, though there was no tracking or sightings of it.

The S-IVB booster impacted the Moon on February4 at . The ascent stage of lunar module &quot;Antares&quot; impacted the Moon on February7, 1971, at 00:45:25.7 UT (February 6, 7:45 pm EST), at . &quot;Antares&quot;&#x27; descent stage and the mission&#x27;s other equipment remain at Fra Mauro at .

Photographs taken in 2009 by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter were released on July 17, and the Fra Mauro equipment was the most visible Apollo hardware at that time, owing to particularly good lighting conditions. In 2011, the LRO returned to the landing site at a lower altitude to take higher resolution photographs.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Google Moon
* List of artificial objects on the Moon
* List of missions to the Moon
* List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* &quot;Apollo 14&quot; at Encyclopedia Astronautica
* Apollo 11, 12, and 14 Traverses, at the Lunar and Planetary Institute
* Apollo 14 Traverse Map – United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Apollo Mission Traverse Maps – Several maps showing routes of moonwalks
* Apollo 14 Science Experiments at the Lunar and Planetary Institute

NASA reports
* &quot;The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology&quot; NASA, NASA SP-4009
* &quot;Table 2-42. Apollo 14 Characteristics&quot; from NASA Historical Data Book: Volume III: Programs and Projects 1969–1978 by Linda Neuman Ezell, NASA History Series (1988)
* &quot;Masking the Abort Discrete&quot; – by Paul Fjeld at the Apollo 14 Lunar Surface Journal. NASA. Detailed technical article describing the ABORT signal problem and its solution
* &quot;Apollo 14 Technical Air-to-Ground Voice Transcription&quot; (PDF) Manned Spacecraft Center, NASA, February 1971

Multimedia
* – slideshow by &quot;Life&quot; magazine
* &quot;The Apollo Astronauts&quot; – Interview with the Apollo 14 astronauts, March 31, 1971, from the Commonwealth Club of California Records at the Hoover Institution Archives
* &quot;Apollo 14 Lunar Liftoff – Video&quot; at Maniac World
* , with Cone crater
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178871" start="0" end="9" title="Apollo 14" label="Apollo 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="90" end="104" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="119" end="135" title="Moon landing" label="land on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="166" end="181" title="Geology of the Moon#Highlands" label="lunar highlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="212" end="222" title="List of Apollo missions#Alphabetical mission types" label="H missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="325" end="350" title="extravehicular activities" label="extravehicular activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="492" end="501" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="608" end="620" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="622" end="642" title="Command Module Pilot" label="Command Module Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q375065" start="643" end="655" title="Stuart Roosa" label="Stuart Roosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="661" end="679" title="Lunar Module Pilot" label="Lunar Module Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q295873" start="680" end="694" title="Edgar Mitchell" label="Edgar Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="775" end="778" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EST"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208566" start="1031" end="1050" title="Fra Mauro formation" label="Fra Mauro formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q318438" start="1144" end="1153" title="Moon rock" label="Moon rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q14965" start="1176" end="1198" title="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package" label="scientific experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753795" start="1280" end="1291" title="Cone (crater)" label="Cone crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q919777" start="1392" end="1401" title="golf ball" label="golf ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q210448" start="1517" end="1528" title="lunar orbit" label="lunar orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="1540" end="1566" title="Command and Service Module" label="Command and Service Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q188168" start="1671" end="1680" title="Apollo 16" label="Apollo 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="1755" end="1765" title="Germination" label="germinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907628" start="1804" end="1813" title="Moon tree" label="Moon tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2026" end="2039" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="2144" end="2156" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q597154" start="2178" end="2191" title="Mercury Seven" label="Mercury Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q832435" start="2252" end="2269" title="Sub-orbital spaceflight" label="suborbital flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q460167" start="2317" end="2339" title="Ménière&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Ménière&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667787" start="2378" end="2393" title="Chief Astronaut" label="Chief Astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869369" start="2426" end="2442" title="Astronaut Office" label="Astronaut Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="2582" end="2591" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q375065" start="2734" end="2746" title="Stuart Roosa" label="Stuart Roosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379497" start="2790" end="2802" title="smoke jumper" label="smoke jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428253" start="2907" end="2938" title="U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School" label="Aerospace Research Pilot School"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="2949" end="2971" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Edwards Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q579376" start="3014" end="3021" title="NASA Astronaut Group 5" label="Group 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563791" start="3067" end="3087" title="capsule communicator" label="capsule communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q203651" start="3101" end="3109" title="Apollo 9" label="Apollo 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q295873" start="3141" end="3155" title="Edgar Mitchell" label="Edgar Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q191746" start="3555" end="3564" title="Apollo 10" label="Apollo 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="3622" end="3634" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q111240" start="3939" end="3949" title="Jim Lovell" label="Jim Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q318513" start="3968" end="3981" title="Ken Mattingly" label="Ken Mattingly"/>
<link wikidata="Q318965" start="3993" end="4003" title="Fred Haise" label="Fred Haise"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="4038" end="4047" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q312833" start="4192" end="4205" title="Gordon Cooper" label="Gordon Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440786" start="4288" end="4302" title="Andrew Chaikin" label="Andrew Chaikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q449706" start="4434" end="4445" title="Donn Eisele" label="Donn Eisele"/>
<link wikidata="Q188486" start="4481" end="4489" title="Apollo 7" label="Apollo 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q158486" start="4598" end="4614" title="Gene Cernan" label="Eugene A. Cernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313543" start="4629" end="4648" title="Ronald Evans (astronaut)" label="Ronald E. Evans Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q374034" start="4660" end="4672" title="Joe Engle" label="Joe H. Engle"/>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="4703" end="4719" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Harrison Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="4768" end="4777" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q221269" start="4975" end="4979" title="X-15" label="X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q217538" start="5044" end="5049" title="STS-2" label="STS-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="5062" end="5075" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="5101" end="5108" title="Project Mercury" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="5113" end="5119" title="Project Gemini" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q364476" start="5184" end="5198" title="James McDivitt" label="James McDivitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q545034" start="5440" end="5451" title="flight plan" label="flight plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705403" start="5517" end="5534" title="Philip K. Chapman" label="Philip K. Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q433608" start="5536" end="5555" title="Bruce McCandless II" label="Bruce McCandless II"/>
<link wikidata="Q460440" start="5557" end="5573" title="William R. Pogue" label="William R. Pogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q519268" start="5578" end="5597" title="C. Gordon Fullerton" label="C. Gordon Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q94579995" start="6265" end="6275" title="Pete Frank" label="Pete Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032002" start="6290" end="6302" title="Glynn Lunney" label="Glynn Lunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41674223" start="6316" end="6328" title="Milt Windler" label="Milt Windler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549046" start="6346" end="6359" title="Gerald D. Griffin" label="Gerry Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13227060" start="6604" end="6613" title="Apollo 20" label="Apollo 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367762" start="6879" end="6894" title="Thomas O. Paine" label="Thomas O. Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="7514" end="7540" title="Apollo command and service module" label="command and service module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865962" start="8016" end="8030" title="Littrow (crater)" label="Littrow crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q169625" start="8035" end="8051" title="Mare Serenitatis" label="Mare Serenitatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753795" start="8181" end="8192" title="Cone (crater)" label="Cone crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208566" start="8200" end="8219" title="Fra Mauro formation" label="Fra Mauro formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="8349" end="8361" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263681" start="8733" end="8752" title="Descartes Highlands" label="Descartes Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q188168" start="8788" end="8797" title="Apollo 16" label="Apollo 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516188" start="8847" end="8861" title="Taurus-Littrow" label="Taurus-Littrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="8888" end="8897" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q538553" start="9243" end="9254" title="Nördlinger Ries" label="Ries Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031810" start="9351" end="9363" title="Verde Valley" label="Verde Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750619" start="9912" end="9925" title="Farouk El-Baz" label="Farouk El-Baz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164523" start="10264" end="10268" title="Northrop T-38 Talon" label="T-38"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="10711" end="10731" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q901058" start="11326" end="11351" title="Vehicle Assembly Building" label="Vehicle Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="11565" end="11577" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q628311" start="11664" end="11672" title="Kitty Hawk, North Carolina" label="the town"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="11711" end="11726" title="Wright Brothers" label="Wright Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q688605" start="11750" end="11762" title="Wright Flyer" label="Wright Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12166" start="11818" end="11825" title="Antares" label="Antares"/>
<link wikidata="Q8865" start="11884" end="11892" title="Scorpius" label="Scorpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957832" start="14320" end="14349" title="Modular Equipment Transporter" label="Modular Equipment Transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="14379" end="14387" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="14463" end="14471" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295906" start="14623" end="14639" title="pogo oscillation" label="pogo oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q967676" start="14690" end="14693" title="Rocketdyne J-2" label="J-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093699" start="14721" end="14725" title="S-II" label="S-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q305268" start="14853" end="14859" title="Blanking and piercing" label="cutoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q14965" start="15027" end="15067" title="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package" label="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q106153486" start="15180" end="15205" title="Active Seismic Experiment" label="Active Seismic Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106510632" start="15213" end="15249" title="Suprathermal Ion Detector Experiment" label="Suprathermal Ion Detector Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106511559" start="15258" end="15291" title="Cold Cathode Gauge Experiment" label="Cold Cathode Ion Gauge Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907171" start="15304" end="15349" title="Charged Particle Lunar Environment Experiment" label="Charged Particle Lunar Environment Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q120665636" start="15443" end="15471" title="Laser Ranging Retroreflector" label="Laser Ranging Retroreflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q188433" start="16114" end="16123" title="Apollo 12" label="Apollo 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q257161" start="16456" end="16461" title="S-IVB" label="S-IVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q361564" start="16827" end="16835" title="geophone" label="geophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="16985" end="16991" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188168" start="17481" end="17490" title="Apollo 16" label="Apollo 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="17675" end="17685" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q115507" start="17743" end="17759" title="lunar atmosphere" label="lunar atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403169" start="18379" end="18406" title="Primary Life Support System" label="Primary Life Support System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18518" end="18537" title="Oxygen Purge System" label="Oxygen Purge System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957832" start="19430" end="19459" title="Modular Equipment Transporter" label="Modular Equipment Transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="19699" end="19719" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="19988" end="19996" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="20835" end="20849" title="Spiro T. Agnew" label="Spiro T. Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244359" start="20858" end="20873" title="Prince of Spain" label="Prince of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="20891" end="20904" title="Juan Carlos I" label="Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q257161" start="21246" end="21251" title="S-IVB" label="S-IVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="22756" end="22762" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="23126" end="23137" title="apocynthion" label="apocynthion"/>
<link wikidata="Q210448" start="23145" end="23157" title="pericynthion" label="pericynthion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24263" end="24275" title="Apollo Lunar Module#Ascent stage" label="ascent stage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24297" end="24310" title="Apollo Lunar Module#Descent stage" label="descent stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="24373" end="24410" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334213" start="24929" end="24942" title="Doppler radar" label="landing radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703666" start="25941" end="25952" title="Lunar Flag Assembly" label="the US flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q331778" start="27800" end="27828" title="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023213" start="28427" end="28433" title="Wilson Staff" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072283" start="28434" end="28457" title="Iron (golf)" label="six iron golf club head"/>
<link wikidata="Q178108" start="28818" end="28825" title="Javelin throw" label="javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866415" start="29138" end="29149" title="USGA Museum" label="USGA Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="29209" end="29238" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q123663368" start="29327" end="29340" title="Andy Saunders (film restorer)" label="Andy Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="29401" end="29415" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="29769" end="29776" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="30165" end="30175" title="lunar mare" label="lunar mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091676" start="30831" end="30843" title="Don Wilhelms" label="Don Wilhelms"/>
<link wikidata="Q65086118" start="31217" end="31229" title="Big Bertha (lunar sample)" label="sample 14321"/>
<link wikidata="Q65086118" start="31237" end="31247" title="Big Bertha (lunar sample)" label="Big Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524893" start="31443" end="31453" title="Leon Silver" label="Lee Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145497" start="32234" end="32251" title="Curtin University" label="Curtin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083626" start="33302" end="33314" title="plane change" label="plane change"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33996" end="34013" title="Lansberg (crater)#Satellite craters" label="Lansburg B crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061350" start="34406" end="34417" title="Gegenschein" label="Gegenschein"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="34430" end="34446" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625855" start="34606" end="34620" title="bistatic radar" label="bistatic radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833514" start="35545" end="35566" title="Trans-Earth injection" label="trans-earth injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q790024" start="36207" end="36210" title="Extrasensory perception" label="ESP"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="36835" end="36849" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872242" start="36878" end="36905" title="USS New Orleans (LPH-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;New Orleans&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q939904" start="36929" end="36960" title="Pago Pago International Airport" label="Pago Pago International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019488" start="36964" end="36970" title="Tafuna, American Samoa" label="Tafuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365417" start="36998" end="37022" title="Ellington Air Force Base" label="Ellington Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886953" start="37060" end="37086" title="Mobile Quarantine Facility" label="Mobile Quarantine Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460747" start="37141" end="37167" title="Lunar Receiving Laboratory" label="Lunar Receiving Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907628" start="37637" end="37646" title="Moon tree" label="Moon tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="37735" end="37761" title="United States Bicentennial" label="United States Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q822524" start="38322" end="38336" title="Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner" label="Wile E. Coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q822524" start="38600" end="38611" title="Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner" label="Road Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q234668" start="39059" end="39067" title="handcart" label="handcart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39320" end="39342" title="Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex#Apollo/Saturn V Center" label="Apollo/Saturn V Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q742943" start="39417" end="39453" title="United States Astronaut Hall of Fame" label="United States Astronaut Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q983779" start="39459" end="39478" title="Titusville, Florida" label="Titusville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="39557" end="39568" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q519560" start="39622" end="39645" title="North American Rockwell" label="North American Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q488946" start="39687" end="39705" title="Downey, California" label="Downey, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q257161" start="39821" end="39826" title="S-IVB" label="S-IVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q42274" start="40468" end="40479" title="Google Moon" label="Google Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q743127" start="40482" end="40520" title="List of artificial objects on the Moon" label="List of artificial objects on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530844" start="40523" end="40551" title="List of missions to the Moon" label="List of missions to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644755" start="40554" end="40596" title="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999" label="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="40830" end="40861" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q239221" start="40982" end="41011" title="Lunar and Planetary Institute" label="Lunar and Planetary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="41530" end="41554" title="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="41605" end="41621" title="Life (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1969" wikidata="Q194068" url="?curid=1969" title="Apollo 15">
<text>Apollo 15 (July 26August 7, 1971) was the ninth crewed mission in the Apollo program and the fourth Moon landing. It was the first J mission, with a longer stay on the Moon and a greater focus on science than earlier landings. Apollo 15 saw the first use of the Lunar Roving Vehicle.

The mission began on July 26 and ended on August 7, with the lunar surface exploration taking place between July 30 and August 2. Commander David Scott and Lunar Module Pilot James Irwin landed near Hadley Rille and explored the local area using the rover, allowing them to travel further from the Lunar Module than had been possible on previous missions. They spent 18 hours on the Moon&#x27;s surface on four extravehicular activities (EVA), and collected of surface material.

At the same time, Command Module Pilot Alfred Worden orbited the Moon, operating the sensors in the scientific instrument module (SIM) bay of the service module. This suite of instruments collected data on the Moon and its environment using a panoramic camera, a gamma-ray spectrometer, a mapping camera, a laser altimeter, a mass spectrometer, and a lunar subsatellite deployed at the end of the moonwalks. The Lunar Module returned safely to the command module and, at the end of Apollo 15&#x27;s 74th lunar orbit, the engine was fired for the journey home. During the return trip, Worden performed the first spacewalk in deep space. The Apollo 15 mission splashed down safely on August7 despite the partial opening of one of its three parachutes.

The mission accomplished its goals and also saw the collection of the Genesis Rock, thought to be part of the Moon&#x27;s early crust, and Scott&#x27;s use of a hammer and a feather to validate Galileo&#x27;s theory that when there is no air resistance, objects fall at the same rate due to gravity regardless of their mass. The mission received negative publicity the following year when it emerged that the crew had carried unauthorized postal covers to the lunar surface, some of which were sold by a West German stamp dealer. The members of the crew were reprimanded for poor judgment, and did not fly in space again.

== Background ==
In 1962, NASA contracted for the construction of fifteen Saturn V rockets to achieve the Apollo program&#x27;s goal of a crewed landing on the Moon by 1970; at the time no one knew how many missions this would require. In 1969 Apollo 11 succeeded in landing on the Moon with the sixth SaturnV, so nine rockets remained available for a hoped-for total of ten landings. These plans included a heavier, extended version of the Apollo spacecraft to be used in the last five missions (Apollo 16 through 20). The revamped Lunar Module would be capable of up to a 75-hour stay, and would carry a Lunar Roving Vehicle to the Moon&#x27;s surface. The service module would house a package of orbital experiments to gather data on the Moon. In the original plan Apollo 15 was to be the last of the non-extended missions to land in Censorinus crater. But in anticipation of budget cuts, NASA cancelled three landing missions by September 1970. Apollo 15 became the first of three extended missions, known as J missions, and the landing site was moved to Hadley Rille, originally planned for Apollo 19.

== Crew and key Mission Control personnel ==

=== Crew ===
Scott was born in 1932 in San Antonio, Texas, and, after spending his freshman year at the University of Michigan on a swimming scholarship, transferred to the United States Military Academy, from which he graduated in 1954. Serving in the Air Force, Scott had received two advanced degrees from MIT in 1962 before being selected as one of the third group of astronauts the following year. He flew in Gemini 8 in 1966 alongside Neil Armstrong and as command module pilot of Apollo 9 in 1969. Worden was born in 1932 in Jackson, Michigan, and like his commander, had attended West Point (class of 1955) and served in the Air Force. Worden earned two master&#x27;s degrees in engineering from Michigan in 1963. Irwin had been born in 1930 in Pittsburgh, and had attended the United States Naval Academy, graduating in 1951 and serving in the Air Force, receiving a master&#x27;s degree from Michigan in 1957. Both Worden and Irwin were selected in the fifth group of astronauts (1966), and Apollo 15 would be their only spaceflight. All three future astronauts had attended Michigan, and two had taken degrees from there; it had been the first university to offer an aeronautical engineering program.
The backup crew was Richard F. Gordon Jr. as commander, Vance D. Brand as command module pilot and Harrison H. Schmitt as Lunar Module pilot. By the usual rotation of crews, the three would most likely have flown Apollo 18, which was canceled. Brand flew later on the Apollo–Soyuz Test Project and on STS-5, the first operational Space Shuttle mission. With NASA under intense pressure to send a professional scientist to the Moon, Schmitt, a geologist, was selected as LMP of Apollo 17 instead of Joe Engle.
Apollo 15&#x27;s support crew consisted of astronauts Joseph P. Allen, Robert A. Parker and Karl G. Henize. All three were scientist-astronauts, selected in 1967, as the prime crew felt they needed more assistance with the science than with the piloting. None of the support crew would fly during the Apollo program, waiting until the Space Shuttle program to go into space.

=== Mission Control ===
The flight directors for Apollo 15 were as follows:
* Gerry Griffin, Gold team
* Milton Windler, Maroon team
* Glynn Lunney, Black team
* Gene Kranz, White team

During a mission the capsule communicators (CAPCOMs), always fellow astronauts, were the only people who normally would speak to the crew. For Apollo 15, the CAPCOMs were Allen, Brand, C. Gordon Fullerton, Gordon, Henize, Edgar D. Mitchell, Parker, Schmitt and Alan B. Shepard.

== Planning and training ==
Schmitt and other scientist-astronauts advocated for a greater place for science on the early Apollo missions. They were often met with disinterest from other astronauts, or found science displaced by higher priorities. Schmitt realized that what was needed was an expert teacher who could fire the astronauts&#x27; enthusiasm, and contacted Caltech geologist Lee Silver, whom Schmitt introduced to Apollo 13&#x27;s commander, Jim Lovell, and to its Lunar Module pilot, Fred Haise, then in training for their mission. Lovell and Haise were willing to go on a field expedition with Silver, and geology became a significant part of their training. Geologist Farouk El-Baz trained the prime crew&#x27;s command module pilot, Ken Mattingly to inform his planned observations from lunar orbit. The crew&#x27;s newly acquired skills mostly went unused, due to the explosion that damaged the Apollo 13 spacecraft, and caused an abort of the mission. Apollo 14&#x27;s CMP, Stuart Roosa, was enthusiastic about geology, but the mission commander, Shepard, less so.
Already familiar with the spacecraft as the backup crew for Apollo 12, Scott, Worden and Irwin could devote more of their training time as prime crew for Apollo 15 to geology and sampling techniques. Scott was determined that his crew bring back the maximum amount of scientific data possible, and met with Silver in April 1970 to begin planning the geological training. Schmitt&#x27;s assignment as Apollo 15&#x27;s backup LMP made him an insider, and allowed him to spark competition between the prime and backup crews. The cancellation of two Apollo missions in September 1970 transformed Apollo 15 into a J mission, with a longer stay on the lunar surface, and the first Lunar Roving Vehicle (LRV). This change was welcomed by Scott, who according to David West Reynolds in his account of the Apollo program, was &quot;something more than a hotshot pilot. Scott had the spirit of a true explorer&quot;, one determined to get the most from the J mission. The additional need for communications, including from planned experiments and the rover, required the near-rebuilding of the Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station in Australia.
Geology field trips took place about once a month throughout the crew&#x27;s 20 months of training. At first, Silver would take the commanders and LMPs from the prime and backup crews to geological sites in Arizona and New Mexico as if for a normal field geology lesson, but closer to launch, these trips became more realistic. Crews began to wear mock-ups of the backpacks they would carry while hiking near the Rio Grande Gorge, and communicate using walkie-talkies to a CAPCOM in a tent. The CAPCOM was accompanied by a geologist unfamiliar with the area who would rely on the astronauts&#x27; descriptions to interpret the findings, and familiarized the crew members with describing landscapes to people who could not see them. Considering himself a serious amateur, Scott came to enjoy field geology.

The decision to land at Hadley came in September 1970. The Site Selection Committee had narrowed the field down to two sites—Hadley Rille, a deep channel on the edge of Mare Imbrium close to the Apennine mountains or the crater Marius, near which were a group of low, possibly volcanic, domes. Although not ultimately his decision, the commander of a mission always held great sway. To David Scott the choice was clear, as Hadley &quot;had more variety. There is a certain intangible quality which drives the spirit of exploration and I felt that Hadley had it. Besides it looked beautiful and usually when things look good they are good.&quot; The selection of Hadley was made although NASA lacked high resolution images of the landing site; none had been made as the site was considered too rough to risk one of the earlier Apollo missions. The proximity of the Apennine mountains to the Hadley site required a landing approach trajectory of 26 degrees, far steeper than the 15 degrees in earlier Apollo landings.

The expanded mission meant that Worden spent much of his time at North American Rockwell&#x27;s facilities at Downey, California, where the command and service module (CSM) was being built. He undertook a different kind of geology training. Working with El-Baz, he studied maps and photographs of the craters he would pass over while orbiting alone in the CSM. As El-Baz listened and gave feedback, Worden learned how to describe lunar features in a way that would be useful to the scientists who would listen to his transmissions back on Earth. Worden found El-Baz to be an enjoyable and inspiring teacher. Worden usually accompanied his crewmates on their geology field trips, though he was often in an airplane overhead, describing features of the landscape as the plane simulated the speed at which the lunar landscape would pass below the CSM.

The demands of the training strained both Worden&#x27;s and Irwin&#x27;s marriages; each sought Scott&#x27;s advice, fearing a divorce might endanger their places on the mission as not projecting the image NASA wanted for the astronauts. Scott consulted Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton, their boss, who stated what was important was that the astronauts do their jobs. Although the Irwins overcame their marital difficulties, the Wordens divorced before the mission.

== Hardware ==

=== Spacecraft ===

Apollo 15 used command and service module CSM-112, which was given the call sign &quot;Endeavour&quot;, named after HMS &quot;Endeavour&quot;, and Lunar Module LM-10, call sign &quot;Falcon&quot;, named after the United States Air Force Academy mascot. Scott explained the choice of the name &quot;Endeavour&quot; on the grounds that its captain, James Cook, had commanded the first purely scientific sea voyage, and Apollo 15 was the first lunar landing mission on which there was a heavy emphasis on science. Apollo 15 took with it a small piece of wood from Cook&#x27;s ship, while &quot;Falcon&quot; carried two falcon feathers to the Moon in recognition of the crew&#x27;s service in the Air Force. Also part of the spacecraft were a Launch Escape System and a Spacecraft-Lunar Module Adapter, numbered SLA-19.

Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center had some problems with the instruments in the service module&#x27;s scientific instrument module (SIM) bay. Some instruments were late in arriving, and principal investigators or representatives of NASA contractors sought further testing or to make small changes. Mechanical problems came from the fact the instruments were designed to operate in space, but had to be tested on the surface of the Earth. As such, things like the 7.5 m (24 ft) booms for the mass and gamma ray spectrometers could be tested only using equipment that tried to mimic the space environment, and, in space, the mass spectrometer boom several times did not fully retract.

On the Lunar Module, the fuel and oxidizer tanks were enlarged on both the descent and ascent stages, and the engine bell on the descent stage was extended. Batteries and solar cells were added for increased electrical power. In all this increased the weight of the Lunar Module to , heavier than previous models.

If Apollo 15 had flown as an H mission, it would have been with CSM-111 and LM-9. That CSM was used by the Apollo–Soyuz Test Project in 1975, but the lunar module went unused and is now at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex. &quot;Endeavour&quot; is on display at the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio, following its transfer of ownership from NASA to the Smithsonian in December 1974.

=== Launch vehicle ===
The Saturn V that launched Apollo 15 was designated SA-510, the tenth flight-ready model of the rocket. As the payload of the rocket was greater, changes were made to the rocket and to its launch trajectory. It was launched in a more southerly direction (80–100 degrees azimuth) than previous missions, and the Earth parking orbit was lowered to . These two changes meant more could be launched. The propellant reserves were reduced and the number of retrorockets on the S-IC first stage (used to separate the spent first stage from the S-II second stage) reduced from eight to four. The four outboard engines of the S-IC would be burned longer and the center engine would also burn longer. Changes were also made to the S-II to dampen pogo oscillations.

Once all major systems were installed in the SaturnV, it was moved from the Vehicle Assembly Building to the launch site, Launch Complex 39A. During late June and early July 1971, the rocket and Launch Umbilical Tower (LUT) were struck by lightning at least four times. There was no damage to the vehicle, and only minor damage to ground support equipment.

=== Space suits ===
The Apollo 15 astronauts wore redesigned space suits. On all previous Apollo flights, including the non-lunar flights, the commander and lunar module pilot had worn suits with the life support, liquid cooling, and communications connections in two parallel rows of three. On Apollo 15, the new suits, dubbed the &quot;A7LB&quot;, had the connectors situated in triangular pairs. This new arrangement, along with the relocation of the entry zipper (which went in an up-down motion on the old suits), to run diagonally from the right shoulder to the left hip, aided in suiting and unsuiting in the cramped confines of the spacecraft. It also allowed for a new waist joint, letting the astronauts bend completely over, and sit on the rover. Upgraded backpacks allowed for longer-duration moonwalks. As in all missions from and after Apollo 13, the commander&#x27;s suit bore a red stripe on the helmet, arms and legs.

Worden wore a suit similar to those worn by the Apollo 14 astronauts, but modified to interface with Apollo 15&#x27;s equipment. Gear needed only for lunar surface EVAs, such as the liquid cooling garment, was not included with Worden&#x27;s suit, as the only EVA he was expected to do was one to retrieve film cartridges from the SIM bay on the flight home.

=== Lunar Roving Vehicle ===

A vehicle that could operate on the surface of the Moon had been considered by NASA since the early 1960s. An early version was called MOLAB, which had a closed cabin and would have massed about ; some scaled-down prototypes were tested in Arizona. As it became clear NASA would not soon establish a lunar base, such a large vehicle seemed unnecessary. Still, a rover would enhance the J missions, which were to concentrate on science, though its mass was limited to about and it was not then clear that so light a vehicle could be useful. NASA did not decide to proceed with a rover until May 1969, as Apollo 10, the dress rehearsal for the Moon landing, made its way home from lunar orbit. Boeing received the contract for three rovers on a cost-plus basis; overruns (especially in the navigation system) meant the three vehicles eventually cost a total of $40 million. These cost overruns gained considerable media attention at a time of greater public weariness with the space program, when NASA&#x27;s budget was being cut.

The Lunar Roving Vehicle could be folded into a space 5 ft by 20 in (1.5 m by 0.5 m). Unloaded, it weighed 460 lb (209 kg) and when carrying two astronauts and their equipment, 1500 lb (700 kg). Each wheel was independently driven by a horsepower (200 W) electric motor. Although it could be driven by either astronaut, the commander always drove. Travelling at speeds up to 6to 8mph (10to 12km/h), astronauts for the first time could travel far afield from their lander and still have enough time to do some scientific experiments. The Apollo 15 rover bore a plaque, reading: &quot;Man&#x27;s First Wheels on the Moon, Delivered by Falcon, July 30, 1971&quot;. During pre-launch testing, the LRV was given additional bracing, lest it collapse if someone sat on it under Earth conditions.

=== Particles and Fields Subsatellite ===
The Apollo 15 Particles and Fields Subsatellite (PFS-1) was a small satellite released into lunar orbit from the SIM bay just before the mission left orbit to return to Earth. Its main objectives were to study the plasma, particle, and magnetic field environment of the Moon and map the lunar gravity field. Specifically, it measured plasma and energetic particle intensities and vector magnetic fields, and facilitated tracking of the satellite velocity to high precision. A basic requirement was that the satellite acquire fields and particle data everywhere on the orbit around the Moon. As well as measuring magnetic fields, the satellite contained sensors to study the Moon&#x27;s mass concentrations, or mascons. The satellite orbited the Moon and returned data from August 4, 1971, until January 1973, when, following multiple failures of the subsatellite&#x27;s electronics, ground support was terminated. It is believed to have crashed into the Moon sometime thereafter.

== Mission highlights ==

=== Launch and outbound trip ===

Apollo 15 was launched on July 26, 1971, at 9:34am EDT from the Kennedy Space Center at Merritt Island, Florida. The time of launch was at the very start of the two-hour, 37-minute launch window, which would allow Apollo 15 to arrive at the Moon with the proper lighting conditions at Hadley Rille; had the mission been postponed beyond another window on July 27, it could not have been rescheduled until late August. The astronauts had been awakened five and a quarter hours before launch by Slayton, and after breakfast and suiting up, had been taken to Pad 39A, launch site of all seven attempts at crewed lunar landing, and entered the spacecraft about three hours before launch. There were no unplanned delays in the countdown.

At 000:11:36 into the mission, the S-IVB engine shut down, leaving Apollo 15 in its planned parking orbit in low Earth orbit. The mission remained there for 2hours and 40 minutes, allowing the crew (and Houston, via telemetry) to check the spacecraft&#x27;s systems. At 002:50.02.6 into the mission, the S-IVB was restarted for trans-lunar injection (TLI), placing the craft on a path to the Moon. Before TLI, the craft had completed 1.5 orbits around the Earth.
The command and service module (CSM) and the Lunar Module remained attached to the nearly-exhausted S-IVB booster. Once trans-lunar injection had been achieved, placing the spacecraft on a trajectory towards the Moon, explosive cords separated the CSM from the booster as Worden operated the CSM&#x27;s thrusters to push it away. Worden then maneuvered the CSM to dock with the LM (mounted on the end of the S-IVB), and the combined craft was then separated from the S-IVB by explosives. After Apollo 15 separated from the booster, the S-IVB maneuvered away, and, as planned, impacted the Moon about an hour after the crewed spacecraft entered lunar orbit, though due to an error the impact was away from the intended target. The booster&#x27;s impact was detected by the seismometers left on the Moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14, providing useful scientific data.

There was a malfunctioning light on the craft&#x27;s service propulsion system (SPS); after considerable troubleshooting, the astronauts did a test burn of the system that also served as a midcourse correction. This occurred about 028:40:00 into the mission. Fearing that the light meant the SPS might unexpectedly fire, the astronauts avoided using the control bank with the faulty light, bringing it online only for major burns, and controlling it manually. After the mission returned, the malfunction proved to be caused by a tiny bit of wire trapped within the switch.
After purging and renewing the LM&#x27;s atmosphere to eliminate any contamination, the astronauts entered the LM about 34 hours into the mission, needing to check the condition of its equipment and move in items that would be required on the Moon. Much of this work was televised back to Earth, the camera operated by Worden. The crew discovered a broken outer cover on the Range/Range Rate tapemeter. This was a concern not only because an important piece of equipment, providing information on distance and rate of approach, might not work properly, but because bits of the glass cover were floating around &quot;Falcon&quot; interior. The tapemeter was supposed to be in a helium atmosphere, but due to the breakage, it was in the LM&#x27;s oxygen atmosphere. Testing on the ground verified the tapemeter would still work properly, and the crew removed most of the glass using a vacuum cleaner and adhesive tape.

As yet, there had been only minor problems, but at about 61:15:00 mission time (the evening of July 28 in Houston), Scott discovered a leak in the water system while preparing to chlorinate the water supply. The crew could not tell where it was coming from, and the issue had the potential to become serious. The experts in Houston found a solution, which was successfully implemented by the crew. The water was mopped up with towels, which were then put out to dry in the tunnel between the command module (CM) and Lunar Module—Scott stated it looked like someone&#x27;s laundry.

At 073:31:14 into the mission, a second midcourse correction, with less than a second of burn, was made. Although there were four opportunities to make midcourse corrections following TLI, only two were needed. Apollo 15 approached the Moon on July 29, and the lunar orbit insertion (LOI) burn had to be made using the SPS, on the far side of the Moon, out of radio contact with Earth. If no burn occurred, Apollo 15 would emerge from the lunar shadow and come back in radio contact faster than expected; the continued lack of communication allowed Mission Control to conclude that the burn had taken place. When contact resumed, Scott did not immediately give the particulars of the burn, but spoke admiringly of the beauty of the Moon, causing Alan Shepard, the Apollo 14 commander, who was awaiting a television interview, to grumble, &quot;To hell with that shit, give us details of the burn.&quot; The 398.36-second burn took place at 078:31:46.7 into the mission at an altitude of above the Moon, and placed Apollo 15 in an elliptical lunar orbit of .

=== Lunar orbit and landing ===
On Apollo 11 and 12, the Lunar Module decoupled from the CSM and was piloted to a much lower orbit from which the lunar landing attempt commenced; to save fuel in an increasingly heavy lander, beginning with Apollo 14, the SPS in the service module made that burn, known as descent orbit insertion (DOI), with the lunar module still attached to the CSM. The initial orbit Apollo 15 was in had its apocynthion, or high point, over the landing site at Hadley; a burn at the opposite point in the orbit was performed, with the result that Hadley would now be under the craft&#x27;s pericynthion, or low point. The DOI burn was performed at 082:39:49.09 and took 24.53 seconds; the result was an orbit with apocynthion of and pericynthion of . Overnight between July 29 and 30, as the crew rested, it became apparent to Mission Control that mass concentrations in the Moon were making Apollo 15&#x27;s orbit increasingly elliptical—pericynthion was by the time the crew was awakened on July 30. This, and uncertainty as to the exact altitude of the landing site, made it desirable that the orbit be modified, or trimmed. Using the craft&#x27;s RCS thrusters, this took place at 095:56:44.70, lasting 30.40 seconds, and raised the pericynthion to and the apocynthion to .

As well as preparing the Lunar Module for its descent, the crew continued observations of the Moon (including of the landing site at Hadley) and provided television footage of the surface. Then, Scott and Irwin entered the Lunar Module in preparation for the landing attempt. Undocking was planned for 100:13:56, over the far side of the Moon, but nothing happened when separation was attempted. After analyzing the problem, the crew and Houston decided the probe instrumentation umbilical was likely loose or disconnected; Worden went into the tunnel connecting the command and lunar modules and determined this was so, seating it more firmly. With the problem resolved, &quot;Falcon&quot; separated from &quot;Endeavour&quot; at 100:39:16.2, about 25 minutes late, at an altitude of . Worden in &quot;Endeavour&quot; executed a SPS burn at 101:38:58.98 to send &quot;Endeavour&quot; to an orbit of by in preparation for his scientific work.

Aboard &quot;Falcon&quot;, Scott and Irwin prepared for powered descent initiation (PDI), the burn that was to place them on the lunar surface, and, after Mission Control gave them permission, they initiated PDI at 104:30:09.4 at an altitude of , slightly higher than planned. During the first part of the descent, &quot;Falcon&quot; was aligned so the astronauts were on their backs and thus could not see the lunar surface below them, but after the craft made a pitchover maneuver, they were upright and could see the surface in front of them. Scott, who as commander performed the landing, was confronted with a landscape that did not at first seem to resemble what he had seen during simulations. Part of this was due to an error in the landing path of some , of which CAPCOM Ed Mitchell informed the crew prior to pitchover; part because the craters Scott had relied on in the simulator were difficult to make out under lunar conditions, and he initially could not see Hadley Rille. He concluded that they were likely to overshoot the planned landing site, and, once he could see the rille, started maneuvering the vehicle to move the computer&#x27;s landing target back towards the planned spot, and looked for a relatively smooth place to land.
Below about , Scott could see nothing of the surface because of the quantities of lunar dust being displaced by &quot;Falcon&quot; exhaust. &quot;Falcon&quot; had a larger engine bell than previous LMs, in part to accommodate a heavier load, and the importance of shutting down the engine at initial contact rather than risk &quot;blowback&quot;, the exhaust reflecting off the lunar surface and going back into the engine (possibly causing an explosion) had been impressed on the astronauts by mission planners. Thus, when Irwin called &quot;Contact&quot;, indicating that one of the probes on the landing leg extensions had touched the surface, Scott immediately shut off the engine, letting the lander fall the remaining distance to the surface. Already moving downward at about per second, &quot;Falcon&quot; dropped from a height of . Scott&#x27;s speed resulted in what was likely the hardest lunar landing of any of the crewed missions, at about per second, causing a startled Irwin to yell &quot;Bam!&quot; Scott had landed &quot;Falcon&quot; on the rim of a small crater he could not see, and the lander settled back at an angle of 6.9 degrees and to the left of 8.6 degrees. Irwin described it in his autobiography as the hardest landing he had ever been in, and he feared that the craft would keep tipping over, forcing an immediate abort.

&quot;Falcon&quot; landed at 104:42:29.3 (22:16:29 GMT on July 30), with approximately 103 seconds of fuel remaining, about from the planned landing site. After Irwin&#x27;s exclamation, Scott reported, &quot;Okay, Houston. The &quot;Falcon&quot; is on the Plain at Hadley.&quot; Once within the planned landing zone, the increased mobility provided by the Lunar Roving Vehicle made unnecessary any further maneuvering.

=== Lunar surface ===
==== Stand-up EVA and first EVA ====
With &quot;Falcon&quot; due to remain on the lunar surface for almost three days, Scott deemed it important to maintain the circadian rhythm they were used to, and as they had landed in the late afternoon, Houston time, the two astronauts were to sleep before going onto the surface. But the time schedule allowed Scott to open the lander&#x27;s top hatch (usually used for docking) and spend a half hour looking at their surroundings, describing them, and taking photographs. Lee Silver had taught him the importance of going to a high place to survey a new field site, and the top hatch served that purpose. Deke Slayton and other managers were initially opposed due to the oxygen that would be lost, but Scott got his way. During the only stand-up extravehicular activity (EVA) ever performed through the LM&#x27;s top hatch on the lunar surface, Scott was able to make plans for the following day&#x27;s EVA. He offered Irwin a chance to look out as well, but this would have required rearranging the umbilicals connecting Irwin to &quot;Falcon&quot; life support system, and he declined. After repressurizing the spacecraft, Scott and Irwin removed their space suits for sleep, becoming the first astronauts to doff their suits while on the Moon.
Throughout the sleep period Mission Control in Houston monitored a slow but steady oxygen loss. Scott and Irwin eventually were awakened an hour early, and the source of the problem was found to be an open valve on the urine transfer device. In post-mission debriefing, Scott recommended that future crews be woken at once under similar circumstances. After the problem was solved, the crew began preparation for the first Moon walk.

After donning their suits and depressurizing the cabin, Scott and Irwin began their first full EVA, becoming the seventh and eighth humans, respectively, to walk on the Moon. They began deploying the lunar rover, stored folded up in a compartment of &quot;Falcon&quot; descent stage, but this proved troublesome due to the slant of the lander. The experts in Houston suggested lifting the front end of the rover as the astronauts pulled it out, and this worked. Scott began a system checkout. One of the batteries gave a zero voltage reading, but this was only an instrumentation problem. A greater concern was that the front wheel steering would not work. However, the rear wheel steering was sufficient to maneuver the vehicle. Completing his checkout, Scott said &quot;Okay. Out of detent; we&#x27;re moving&quot;, maneuvering the rover away from &quot;Falcon&quot; in mid-sentence. These were the first words uttered by a human while driving a vehicle on the Moon. The rover carried a television camera, controlled remotely from Houston by NASA&#x27;s Ed Fendell. The resolution was not high compared to the still photographs that would be taken, but the camera allowed the geologists on Earth to indirectly participate in Scott and Irwin&#x27;s activities.

The rille was not visible from the landing site, but as Scott and Irwin drove over the rolling terrain, it came into view. They were able to see Elbow crater, and they began to drive in that direction. Reaching Elbow, a known location, allowed Mission Control to backtrack and get closer to pinpointing the location of the lander. The astronauts took samples there, and then drove to another crater on the flank of Mons Hadley Delta, where they took more. After concluding this stop, they returned to the lander to drop off their samples and prepare to set up the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (ALSEP), the scientific instruments that would remain when they left. Scott had difficulty drilling the holes required for the heat flow experiment, and the work was not completed when they had to return to the lander. The first EVA lasted 6hours and 32 minutes.

==== Second and third EVAs ====
The rover&#x27;s front steering, inoperative during the first EVA, worked during the second and third ones. The target of the second EVA, on August 1, was the slope of Mons Hadley Delta, where the pair sampled boulders and craters along the Apennine Front. They spent an hour at Spur crater, during which the astronauts collected a sample dubbed the Genesis Rock. This rock, an anorthosite, is believed to be part of the early lunar crust—the hope of finding such a specimen had been one reason the Hadley area had been chosen. Once back at the landing site, Scott continued to try to drill holes for experiments at the ALSEP site, with which he had struggled the day before. After conducting soil-mechanics experiments and raising the U.S. flag, Scott and Irwin returned to the LM. EVA2 lasted 7hours and 12 minutes.

Although Scott had eventually been successful at drilling the holes, he and Irwin had been unable to retrieve a core sample, and this was an early order of business during EVA 3, their third and final moonwalk. Time that could have been devoted to geology ticked away as Scott and Irwin attempted to pull it out. Once it had been retrieved, more time passed as they attempted to break the core into pieces for transport to Earth. Hampered by an incorrectly mounted vise on the rover, they eventually gave up on this—the core would be transported home with one segment longer than planned. Scott wondered if the core was worth the amount of time and effort invested, and the CAPCOM, Joe Allen, assured him it was. The core proved one of the most important items brought back from the Moon, revealing much about its history, but the expended time meant the planned visit to a group of hills known as the North Complex had to be scrubbed. Instead, the crew again ventured to the edge of Hadley Rille, this time to the northwest of the immediate landing site.
Once the astronauts were beside the LM, Scott used a kit provided by the Postal Service to cancel a first day cover of two stamps being issued on August 2, the current date. Scott then performed an experiment in view of the television camera, using a falcon feather and hammer to demonstrate Galileo&#x27;s theory that all objects in a given gravity field fall at the same rate, regardless of mass, in the absence of aerodynamic drag. He dropped the hammer and feather at the same time; because of the negligible lunar atmosphere, there was no drag on the feather, which hit the ground at the same time as the hammer. This was Joe Allen&#x27;s idea (he also served as CAPCOM during it) and was part of an effort to find a memorable popular science experiment to do on the Moon along the lines of Shepard&#x27;s hitting of golf balls. The feather was most likely from a female gyrfalcon (a type of falcon), a mascot at the United States Air Force Academy.
Scott then drove the rover to a position away from the LM, where the television camera could be used to observe the lunar liftoff. Near the rover, he left a small aluminum statuette called &quot;Fallen Astronaut&quot;, along with a plaque bearing the names of 14 known American astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts who had died in the furtherance of space exploration. The memorial was left while the television camera was turned away; he told Mission Control he was doing some cleanup activities around the rover. Scott disclosed the memorial in a post-flight news conference. He also placed a Bible on the control panel of the rover before leaving it for the last time to enter the LM.

The EVA lasted 4 hours, 49 minutes and 50 seconds. In total, the two astronauts spent 18 hours outside the LM and collected approximately of lunar samples.

=== Command module activities ===
After the departure of &quot;Falcon&quot;, Worden in &quot;Endeavour&quot; executed a burn to take the CSM to a higher orbit. While &quot;Falcon&quot; was on the Moon, the mission effectively split, Worden and the CSM being assigned their own CAPCOM and flight support team.
Worden got busy with the tasks that were to occupy him for much of the time he spent in space alone: photography and operating the instruments in the SIM bay. The door to the SIM bay had been explosively jettisoned during the translunar coast. Filling previously unused space in the service module, the SIM bay contained a gamma-ray spectrometer, mounted on the end of a boom, an X-ray spectrometer and a laser altimeter, which failed part way through the mission. Two cameras, a stellar camera and a metric camera, together comprised the mapping camera, which was complemented by a panoramic camera, derived from spy technology. The altimeter and cameras permitted the exact time and location from which pictures were taken to be determined. Also present were an alpha particle spectrometer, which could be used to detect evidence of lunar volcanism, and a mass spectrometer, also on a boom in the hope it would be unaffected by contamination from the ship. The boom would prove troublesome, as Worden would not always be able to get it to retract.
&quot;Endeavour&quot; was slated to pass over the landing site at the moment of planned landing, but Worden could not see &quot;Falcon&quot; and did not spot it until a subsequent orbit. He also exercised to avoid muscle atrophy, and Houston kept him up to date on Scott and Irwin&#x27;s activities on the lunar surface. The panoramic camera did not operate perfectly, but provided enough images that no special adjustment was made. Worden took many photographs through the command module&#x27;s windows, often with shots taken at regular intervals. His task was complicated by the lack of a working mission timer in the Lower Equipment Bay of the command module, as its circuit breaker had popped en route to the Moon. Worden&#x27;s observations and photographs would inform the decision to send Apollo 17 to Taurus-Littrow to search for evidence of volcanic activity. There was a communications blackout when the CSM passed over the far side of the Moon from Earth; Worden greeted each resumption of contact with the words, &quot;Hello, Earth. Greetings from &quot;Endeavour&quot;&quot;, expressed in different languages. Worden and El-Baz had come up with the idea, and the geology instructor had aided the astronaut in accumulating translations.

Results from the SIM bay experiments would include the conclusion, from data gathered by the X-ray spectrometer, that there was greater fluorescent X-ray flux than anticipated, and that the lunar highlands were richer in aluminum than were the mares. &quot;Endeavour&quot; was in a more inclined orbit than previous crewed missions, and Worden saw features that were not known previously, supplementing photographs with thorough descriptions.

By the time Scott and Irwin were ready to take off from the lunar surface and return to &quot;Endeavour&quot;, the CSM&#x27;s orbit had drifted due to the rotation of the Moon, and a plane change burn was required to ensure that the CSM&#x27;s orbit would be in the same plane as that of the LM once it took off from the Moon. Worden accomplished the 18-second burn with the SPS.

=== Return to Earth ===

&quot;Falcon&quot; lifted off the Moon at 17:11:22 GMT on August2 after 66 hours and 55 minutes on the lunar surface. Docking with the CSM took place just under two hours later. After the astronauts transferred samples and other items from the LM to the CSM, the LM was sealed off, jettisoned, and intentionally crashed into the lunar surface, an impact registered by the seismometers left by Apollo 12, 14 and 15. The jettison proved difficult because of problems getting airtight seals, requiring a delay in discarding the LM. After the jettison, Slayton came on the loop to recommend the astronauts take sleeping pills, or at least that Scott and Irwin do so. Scott as mission commander refused to allow it, feeling there was no need. During the EVAs, the doctors had noticed irregularities in both Scott&#x27;s and Irwin&#x27;s heartbeats, but the crew were not informed during the flight. Irwin had heart problems after retiring as an astronaut and died in 1991 of a heart attack; Scott felt that he as commander should have been informed of the biomedical readings. NASA doctors at the time theorized the heart readings were due to potassium deficiency, due to their hard work on the surface and inadequate resupply through liquids.
The crew spent the next two days working on orbital science experiments, including more observations of the Moon from orbit and releasing the subsatellite. &quot;Endeavour&quot; departed lunar orbit with another burn of the SPS engine of 2minutes 21 seconds at 21:22:45 GMT on August4. The next day, during the return to Earth, Worden performed a 39-minute EVA to retrieve film cassettes from the service module&#x27;s scientific instrument module (SIM) bay, with assistance from Irwin who remained at the command module&#x27;s hatch. At approximately 171,000 nautical miles (197,000 mi; 317,000 km) from Earth, it was the first &quot;deep space&quot; EVA in history, performed at great distance from any planetary body. As of , it remains one of only three such EVAs, all performed during Apollo&#x27;s J missions under similar circumstances. Later that day, the crew set a record for the longest Apollo flight to that point.

On approach to Earth on August7, the service module was jettisoned, and the command module reentered the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. Although one of the three parachutes on the CM failed after deploying, likely due to damage as the spacecraft vented fuel, only two were required for a safe landing (one extra for redundancy). Upon landing in the North Pacific Ocean, the CM and crew were recovered and taken aboard the recovery ship, , after a mission lasting 12 days, 7hours, 11 minutes and 53 seconds.

== Assessment ==
The mission objectives for Apollo 15 were to &quot;perform inspection, survey, and sampling of materials and surface features in a pre-selected area of the Hadley–Apennine region. Emplace and activate surface experiments. Evaluate the capability of the Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased extravehicular operations, and surface mobility. [and] Conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit.&quot; It achieved all those objectives. The mission also completed a long list of other tasks, including experiments. One of the photographic objectives, to obtain images of the gegenschein from lunar orbit, was not completed, as the camera was not pointed at the proper spot in the sky. According to the conclusions in the &quot;Apollo 15 Mission Report&quot;, the journey &quot;was the fourth lunar landing and resulted in the collection of a wealth of scientific information. The Apollo system, in addition to providing a means of transportation, excelled as an operational scientific facility.&quot;

Apollo 15 saw an increase in public interest in the Apollo program, in part due to fascination with the LRV, as well as the attractiveness of the Hadley Rille site and the increased television coverage.
According to David Woods in the &quot;Apollo Lunar Flight Journal&quot;,
== Controversies ==

Despite the successful mission, the careers of the crew were tarnished by a deal they had made before the flight to carry postal covers to the Moon in exchange for about $7,000 each, which they planned to set aside for their children. Walter Eiermann, who had many professional and social contacts with NASA employees and the astronaut corps, served as intermediary between the astronauts and a West German stamp dealer, Hermann Sieger, and Scott carried about 400 covers onto the spacecraft; they were subsequently transferred into &quot;Falcon&quot; and remained inside the lander during the astronauts&#x27; activities on the surface of the Moon. After the return to Earth, 100 of the covers were given to Eiermann, who passed them on to Sieger, receiving a commission. No permission had been received from Slayton to carry the covers, as required.

The 100 covers were put on sale to Sieger&#x27;s customers in late 1971 at a price of about $1,500 each. After receiving the agreed payments, the astronauts returned them, and accepted no compensation. In April 1972, Slayton learned that unauthorized covers had been carried, and removed the three as the backup crew for Apollo 17. The matter became public in June 1972 and the three astronauts were reprimanded for poor judgment; none ever flew in space again. During the investigation, the astronauts had surrendered those covers still in their possession; after Worden filed suit, they were returned in 1983, something &quot;Slate&quot; magazine deemed an exoneration.

Another controversy arose later, this time surrounding the &quot;Fallen Astronaut&quot; statuette that Scott had left on the Moon. Before the mission, Scott had made a verbal agreement with Belgian artist Paul Van Hoeydonck to sculpt the statuette. Scott&#x27;s intent, in keeping with NASA&#x27;s strict policy against commercial exploitation of the US government&#x27;s space program, was for a simple memorial with a minimum of publicity, keeping the artist anonymous, no commercial replicas being made except for a single copy for public exhibit at the National Air and Space Museum commissioned after the sculpture&#x27;s public disclosure during the post-flight press conference. Van Hoeydonck claims to have had a different understanding of the agreement, by which he would have received recognition as the creator of a tribute to human space exploration, with rights to sell replicas to the public. Under pressure from NASA, Van Hoeydonck canceled a plan to publicly sell 950 signed copies.

In 2021, Scott published a document entitled &quot;Memorandum for the Record&quot;, in which he stated that the figurine left on the Moon was designed and fabricated by NASA personnel. While testifying before a Senate committee in 1972, he had stated that the figurine had been made and provided by Van Hoeydonck at Scott&#x27;s request.

During those congressional hearings into the postal covers and Fallen Astronaut matters, two Bulova timepieces taken on the mission by Scott were also matters of controversy. Before the mission, Scott had been introduced to Bulova&#x27;s representative, General James McCormack by Apollo 8 commander Frank Borman. Bulova had been seeking to have its timepieces taken on Apollo missions, but after evaluation, NASA had selected Omega watches instead. Scott brought the Bulova timepieces on the mission, without disclosing them to Slayton. During Scott&#x27;s second EVA, the crystal on his NASA standard issue Omega Speedmaster watch popped off, and, during the third EVA, he used a Bulova watch. The Bulova Chronograph Model #88510/01 that Scott wore on the lunar surface was a prototype, given to him by the Bulova Company, and it is the only privately owned watch to have been worn while walking on the lunar surface. There are images of him wearing this watch, when he saluted the American flag on the Moon, with the Hadley Delta expanse in the background. In 2015, the watch sold for $1.625 million, which makes it one of the most expensive astronaut-owned artifact ever sold at auction and one of the most expensive watches sold at auction.

== Mission insignia ==

The Apollo 15 mission patch carries Air Force motifs, a nod to the crew&#x27;s service there, just as the Apollo 12 all-Navy crew&#x27;s patch had featured a sailing ship. The circular patch features stylized red, white and blue birds flying over Hadley Rille. Immediately behind the birds, a line of craters forms the Roman numeral XV. The Roman numerals were hidden in emphasized outlines of some craters after NASA insisted that the mission number be displayed in Arabic numerals. The artwork is circled in red, with a white band giving the mission and crew names and a blue border. Scott contacted fashion designer Emilio Pucci to design the patch, who came up with the basic idea of the three-bird motif on a square patch.
The crew changed the shape to round and the colors from blues and greens to a patriotic red, white and blue. Worden stated that each bird also represented an astronaut, white being his own color (and as Command Module Pilot, uppermost), Scott being the blue bird and Irwin the red. The colors matched Chevrolet Corvettes leased by the astronauts at KSC; a Florida car dealer had, since the time of Project Mercury, been leasing Chevrolets to astronauts for $1 and later selling them to the public. The astronauts were photographed with the cars and the training LRV for the June 11, 1971, edition of &quot;Life&quot; magazine.

== Visibility from space ==
The halo area of the Apollo 15 landing site, created by the LM&#x27;s exhaust plume, was observed by a camera aboard the Japanese lunar orbiter SELENE and confirmed by comparative analysis of photographs in May 2008. This corresponds well to photographs taken from the Apollo 15 command module showing a change in surface reflectivity due to the plume, and was the first visible trace of crewed landings on the Moon seen from space since the close of the Apollo program.
== Gallery ==

=== Still images ===
=== Multimedia ===
== See also ==

* List of artificial objects on the Moon
* List of missions to the Moon
* List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Apollo Lunar Flight Journal ===
=== Apollo Lunar Surface Journal ===
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Apollo 15 Preliminary Science Report (1972) by the Manned Spacecraft Center
* Apollo 15 Traverses, 41B4S4(25), Lunar Photomap at Lunar and Planetary Institute
* 1975 summary report by NASA
* 1972 NASA press releases at collectSPACE
* &quot;Moonport: A History of Apollo Launch Facilities and Operations&quot;, a 1978 book published by NASA
* Part 1 and part 2 of &quot;Apollo 15: In the Mountains of the Moon&quot;, a NASA documentary film on the Apollo 15 mission, at the Internet Archive
* 2011 podcast interview with AstrotalkUK
* 2016 interview with Worden at Medium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="0" end="9" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="70" end="84" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="100" end="112" title="Moon landing" label="Moon landing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="131" end="140" title="List of Apollo missions#Alphabetical mission types" label="J mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="168" end="172" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="262" end="282" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="415" end="424" title="Apollo Commander" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q278656" start="425" end="436" title="David Scott" label="David Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="441" end="459" title="Lunar Module Pilot" label="Lunar Module Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q297801" start="460" end="471" title="James Irwin" label="James Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="484" end="496" title="Hadley–Apennine#Rima Hadley" label="Hadley Rille"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="583" end="595" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="696" end="721" title="extravehicular activities" label="extravehicular activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="783" end="803" title="Command Module Pilot" label="Command Module Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q539385" start="804" end="817" title="Alfred Worden" label="Alfred Worden"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="865" end="893" title="scientific instrument module" label="scientific instrument module"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="911" end="925" title="Apollo service module" label="service module"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520325" start="1028" end="1050" title="gamma-ray spectrometer" label="gamma-ray spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q216197" start="1078" end="1087" title="altimeter" label="altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="1091" end="1108" title="Mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210448" start="1269" end="1280" title="lunar orbit" label="lunar orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="1376" end="1385" title="spacewalk" label="spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502096" start="1586" end="1598" title="Genesis Rock" label="Genesis Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="1644" end="1649" title="crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518616" start="1710" end="1731" title="Galileo&amp;#x27;s Leaning Tower of Pisa experiment" label="Galileo&amp;#x27;s theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q914838" start="1921" end="1968" title="Apollo 15 postal covers incident" label="the crew had carried unauthorized postal covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="2020" end="2031" title="West German" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2165" end="2169" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="2213" end="2221" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="2383" end="2392" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2501" end="2522" title="Canceled Apollo missions#Follow-on lunar missions" label="total of ten landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q430728" start="2580" end="2597" title="Apollo spacecraft" label="Apollo spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="2745" end="2765" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q210353" start="2976" end="2993" title="Censorinus (crater)" label="Censorinus crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637998" start="3198" end="3210" title="Hadley Rille" label="Hadley Rille"/>
<link wikidata="Q13227060" start="3235" end="3244" title="Apollo 19" label="Apollo 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="3332" end="3350" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="3397" end="3419" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="3466" end="3496" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="3546" end="3555" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="3602" end="3605" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3650" end="3675" title="List of astronauts by year of selection#1963" label="third group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q617651" start="3707" end="3715" title="Gemini 8" label="Gemini 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="3734" end="3748" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q203651" start="3780" end="3788" title="Apollo 9" label="Apollo 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q984374" start="3825" end="3842" title="Jackson, Michigan" label="Jackson, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="4046" end="4056" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="4079" end="4106" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4256" end="4281" title="List of astronauts by year of selection#1966" label="fifth group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q502963" start="4525" end="4546" title="Richard F. Gordon Jr." label="Richard F. Gordon Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q463833" start="4561" end="4575" title="Vance D. Brand" label="Vance D. Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="4604" end="4623" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Harrison H. Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13227060" start="4718" end="4727" title="Canceled Apollo missions" label="Apollo 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q208759" start="4773" end="4798" title="Apollo–Soyuz Test Project" label="Apollo–Soyuz Test Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q281398" start="4806" end="4811" title="STS-5" label="STS-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="4835" end="4848" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="4982" end="4991" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q374034" start="5003" end="5012" title="Joe Engle" label="Joe Engle"/>
<link wikidata="Q443994" start="5068" end="5083" title="Joseph P. Allen" label="Joseph P. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q534597" start="5085" end="5101" title="Robert A. Parker" label="Robert A. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q722390" start="5106" end="5120" title="Karl Gordon Henize" label="Karl G. Henize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5159" end="5175" title="List of astronauts by selection#1967" label="selected in 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549046" start="5468" end="5481" title="Gerry Griffin" label="Gerry Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41674223" start="5495" end="5509" title="Milton Windler" label="Milton Windler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032002" start="5525" end="5537" title="Glynn Lunney" label="Glynn Lunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q711493" start="5552" end="5562" title="Gene Kranz" label="Gene Kranz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5597" end="5618" title="Flight controller#CAPCOM" label="capsule communicators"/>
<link wikidata="Q519268" start="5761" end="5780" title="C. Gordon Fullerton" label="C. Gordon Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q295873" start="5798" end="5815" title="Edgar D. Mitchell" label="Edgar D. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="5837" end="5852" title="Alan B. Shepard" label="Alan B. Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="6225" end="6232" title="Caltech" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524893" start="6243" end="6253" title="Leon Silver" label="Lee Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="6282" end="6291" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q111240" start="6310" end="6320" title="Jim Lovell" label="Jim Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q318965" start="6353" end="6363" title="Fred Haise" label="Fred Haise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750619" start="6539" end="6552" title="Farouk El-Baz" label="Farouk El-Baz"/>
<link wikidata="Q318513" start="6605" end="6618" title="Ken Mattingly" label="Ken Mattingly"/>
<link wikidata="Q375065" start="6848" end="6860" title="Stuart Roosa" label="Stuart Roosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="7614" end="7634" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893941" start="8023" end="8057" title="Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station" label="Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="8291" end="8301" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154374" start="8485" end="8501" title="Rio Grande Gorge" label="Rio Grande Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q938319" start="8525" end="8538" title="walkie-talkie" label="walkie-talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="9048" end="9060" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q499037" start="9074" end="9092" title="Montes Apenninus" label="Apennine mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q723773" start="9107" end="9113" title="Marius (crater)" label="Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646960" start="9133" end="9171" title="Marius Hills" label="group of low, possibly volcanic, domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="9961" end="9984" title="Rockwell International" label="North American Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q488946" start="10006" end="10024" title="Downey, California" label="Downey, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="11035" end="11047" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="11336" end="11345" title="call sign" label="call sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q312224" start="11381" end="11406" title="HMS Endeavour" label="HMS &amp;quot;Endeavour&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="11478" end="11509" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="11612" end="11622" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q907773" start="12004" end="12024" title="Launch Escape System" label="Launch Escape System"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="12101" end="12121" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="12220" end="12223" title="scientific instrument module" label="SIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="12579" end="12583" title="Mass spectrometry" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520325" start="12588" end="12610" title="gamma ray spectrometer" label="gamma ray spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="12797" end="12801" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="12806" end="12814" title="oxidizer" label="oxidizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054585" start="12882" end="12893" title="Rocket engine nozzle" label="engine bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="12943" end="12953" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208759" start="13194" end="13219" title="Apollo–Soyuz Test Project" label="Apollo–Soyuz Test Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389687" start="13280" end="13316" title="Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex" label="Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422977" start="13361" end="13407" title="National Museum of the United States Air Force" label="National Museum of the United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="13411" end="13442" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="13446" end="13458" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="13513" end="13524" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="13571" end="13579" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q124274" start="13837" end="13844" title="azimuth" label="azimuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q862717" start="13884" end="13897" title="parking orbit" label="parking orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="13967" end="13977" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029937" start="14038" end="14042" title="S-IC" label="S-IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093699" start="14104" end="14108" title="S-II" label="S-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295906" start="14303" end="14319" title="pogo oscillation" label="pogo oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q901058" start="14399" end="14424" title="Vehicle Assembly Building" label="Vehicle Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q845774" start="14445" end="14462" title="Launch Complex 39" label="Launch Complex 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="14562" end="14571" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q223571" start="14742" end="14752" title="space suit" label="space suit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15019" end="15023" title="Apollo/Skylab A7L#A7LB Spacesuit (Apollo, Skylab and ASTP)" label="A7LB"/>
<link wikidata="Q191746" start="16610" end="16619" title="Apollo 10" label="Apollo 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="16699" end="16705" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995824" start="16750" end="16765" title="cost-plus contract" label="cost-plus basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160857" start="17273" end="17283" title="horsepower" label="horsepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q220717" start="18555" end="18574" title="Mass concentration (astronomy)" label="mass concentrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="18961" end="18964" title="Eastern time" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="18974" end="18994" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q991010" start="18998" end="19012" title="Merritt Island" label="Merritt Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q257161" start="19679" end="19684" title="S-IVB" label="S-IVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="19753" end="19768" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q863248" start="19972" end="19993" title="trans-lunar injection" label="trans-lunar injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472852" start="20325" end="20340" title="Detonating cord" label="explosive cords"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="20879" end="20890" title="seismometer" label="seismometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="21025" end="21050" title="service propulsion system" label="service propulsion system"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="23376" end="23396" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112041" start="23594" end="23609" title="Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center" label="Mission Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="23791" end="23803" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="24533" end="24544" title="apocynthion" label="apocynthion"/>
<link wikidata="Q210448" start="24715" end="24727" title="pericynthion" label="pericynthion"/>
<link wikidata="Q220717" start="24973" end="24992" title="Mass concentration (astronomy)" label="mass concentrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321971" start="25276" end="25279" title="Reaction control system" label="RCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q295873" start="27128" end="27139" title="Edgar Mitchell" label="Ed Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054585" start="27772" end="27783" title="Rocket engine nozzle" label="engine bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="29556" end="29572" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="30183" end="30206" title="extravehicular activity" label="extravehicular activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265658" start="31904" end="31910" title="detent" label="detent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780356" start="32108" end="32125" title="Apollo TV camera" label="television camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q24229344" start="32527" end="32532" title="Elbow (lunar crater)" label="Elbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472624" start="32797" end="32814" title="Mons Hadley Delta" label="Mons Hadley Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14965" start="32946" end="32986" title="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package" label="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q106563970" start="33114" end="33134" title="Heat Flow Experiment" label="heat flow experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q499037" start="33524" end="33538" title="Montes Apenninus" label="Apennine Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712734" start="33562" end="33566" title="Spur (lunar crater)" label="Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502096" start="33633" end="33645" title="Genesis Rock" label="Genesis Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q567788" start="33661" end="33672" title="anorthosite" label="anorthosite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703666" start="34019" end="34028" title="Lunar Flag Assembly" label="U.S. flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q25058313" start="35004" end="35017" title="North Complex" label="North Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="35231" end="35245" title="United States Postal Service" label="Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q825187" start="35258" end="35273" title="first day cover" label="first day cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="35450" end="35457" title="Galileo" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="35575" end="35591" title="aerodynamic drag" label="aerodynamic drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q177688" start="36034" end="36043" title="gyrfalcon" label="gyrfalcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="36080" end="36111" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161218" start="36308" end="36324" title="Fallen Astronaut" label="Fallen Astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q256812" start="37878" end="37892" title="Corona (satellite)" label="spy technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="39111" end="39120" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516188" start="39124" end="39138" title="Taurus-Littrow" label="Taurus-Littrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q794086" start="41553" end="41573" title="hypokalemia" label="potassium deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="42673" end="42710" title="Atmospheric reentry" label="reentered the Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637998" start="43257" end="43272" title="Hadley–Apennine" label="Hadley–Apennine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061350" start="43729" end="43740" title="gegenschein" label="gegenschein"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="45627" end="45636" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="45928" end="45954" title="Slate (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Slate&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161218" start="46044" end="46060" title="Fallen Astronaut" label="Fallen Astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="46206" end="46212" title="sculpture" label="sculpt"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="46536" end="46565" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q663300" start="47411" end="47417" title="Bulova" label="Bulova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139225" start="47580" end="47595" title="James McCormack" label="James McCormack"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="47599" end="47607" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q18762" start="47618" end="47630" title="Frank Borman" label="Frank Borman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414495" start="47927" end="47944" title="Omega Speedmaster" label="Omega Speedmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q499521" start="48338" end="48350" title="Hadley Delta" label="Hadley Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519100" start="48513" end="48562" title="List of most expensive watches sold at auction" label="one of the most expensive watches sold at auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878835" start="48603" end="48616" title="mission patch" label="mission patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="48908" end="48921" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="49056" end="49071" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q604667" start="49208" end="49220" title="Emilio Pucci" label="Emilio Pucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="49618" end="49636" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="49715" end="49730" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="49917" end="49933" title="Life (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q205408" start="50117" end="50123" title="SELENE" label="SELENE"/>
<link wikidata="Q743127" start="50517" end="50555" title="List of artificial objects on the Moon" label="List of artificial objects on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530844" start="50558" end="50586" title="List of missions to the Moon" label="List of missions to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644755" start="50589" end="50631" title="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999" label="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="50855" end="50879" title="Manned Spacecraft Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="50988" end="50992" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146017" start="51023" end="51035" title="collectSPACE" label="collectSPACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="51227" end="51243" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="51277" end="51293" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186120" start="51368" end="51374" title="Medium (website)" label="Medium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1970" wikidata="Q188168" url="?curid=1970" title="Apollo 16">
<text>Apollo 16 (April 1627, 1972) was the tenth crewed mission in the United States Apollo space program, administered by NASA, and the fifth and penultimate to land on the Moon. It was the second of Apollo&#x27;s &quot;J missions&quot;, with an extended stay on the lunar surface, a focus on science, and the use of the Lunar Roving Vehicle (LRV). The landing and exploration were in the Descartes Highlands, a site chosen because some scientists expected it to be an area formed by volcanic action, though this proved not to be the case.

The mission was crewed by Commander John Young, Lunar Module Pilot Charles Duke and Command Module Pilot Ken Mattingly. Launched from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida on April 16, 1972, Apollo 16 experienced a number of minor glitches en route to the Moon. These culminated with a problem with the spacecraft&#x27;s main engine that resulted in a six-hour delay in the Moon landing as NASA managers contemplated having the astronauts abort the mission and return to Earth, before deciding the problem could be overcome. Although they permitted the lunar landing, NASA had the astronauts return from the mission one day earlier than planned.

After flying the Lunar Module to the Moon&#x27;s surface on April 21, Young and Duke spent 71 hours—just under three days—on the lunar surface, during which they conducted three extravehicular activities or moonwalks, totaling 20 hours and 14 minutes. The pair drove the lunar rover, the second used on the Moon, for . On the surface, Young and Duke collected of lunar samples for return to Earth, including Big Muley, the largest Moon rock collected during the Apollo missions. During this time Mattingly orbited the Moon in the command and service module (CSM), taking photos and operating scientific instruments. Mattingly, in the command module, spent 126 hours and 64 revolutions in lunar orbit. After Young and Duke rejoined Mattingly in lunar orbit, the crew released a subsatellite from the service module (SM). During the return trip to Earth, Mattingly performed a one-hour spacewalk to retrieve several film cassettes from the exterior of the service module. Apollo 16 returned safely to Earth on April 27, 1972.

==Crew and key Mission Control personnel==

John Young, the mission commander, was 41 years old and a captain in the Navy at the time of Apollo 16. Becoming an astronaut in 1962 as part of the second group to be selected by NASA, he flew in Gemini 3 with Gus Grissom in 1965, becoming the first American not of the Mercury Seven to fly in space. He thereafter flew in Gemini 10 (1966) with Michael Collins and as command module pilot of Apollo 10 (1969). With Apollo 16, he became the second American, after Jim Lovell, to fly in space four times.

Thomas Kenneth &quot;Ken&quot; Mattingly, the command module pilot, was 36 years old and a lieutenant commander in the Navy at the time of Apollo 16. Mattingly had been selected in NASA&#x27;s fifth group of astronauts in 1966. He was a member of the support crew for Apollo 8 and Apollo 9. Mattingly then undertook parallel training with Apollo 11&#x27;s backup CMP, William Anders, who had announced his resignation from NASA effective at the end of July 1969 and would thus be unavailable if the first lunar landing mission was postponed. Had Anders left NASA before Apollo 11 flew, Mattingly would have taken his place on the backup crew.

Mattingly had originally been assigned to the prime crew of Apollo 13, but was exposed to rubella through Charles Duke, at that time with Young on Apollo 13&#x27;s backup crew; Duke had caught it from one of his children. Mattingly never contracted the illness, but three days before launch was removed from the crew and replaced by his backup, Jack Swigert. Duke, also a Group 5 astronaut and a space rookie, had served on the support crew of Apollo 10 and was a capsule communicator (CAPCOM) for Apollo 11. A lieutenant colonel in the Air Force, Duke was 36 years old at the time of Apollo 16, which made him the youngest of the twelve astronauts who walked on the Moon during Apollo as of the time of the mission. All three men were announced as the prime crew of Apollo 16 on March 3, 1971.

Apollo 16&#x27;s backup crew consisted of Fred W. Haise Jr. (commander, who had flown on Apollo 13), Stuart A. Roosa (CMP, who had flown on Apollo 14) and Edgar D. Mitchell (LMP, also Apollo 14). Although not officially announced, Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton, the astronauts&#x27; supervisor, had originally planned to have a backup crew of Haise as commander, William R. Pogue (CMP) and Gerald P. Carr (LMP), who were targeted for the prime crew assignment on Apollo 19. However, after the cancellations of Apollos 18 and 19 were announced in September 1970, it made more sense to use astronauts who had already flown lunar missions as backups, rather than training others on what would likely be a dead-end assignment. Subsequently, Roosa and Mitchell were assigned to the backup crew, while Pogue and Carr were reassigned to the Skylab program where they flew on Skylab 4.

For projects Mercury and Gemini, a prime and a backup crew had been designated, but for Apollo, a third group of astronauts, known as the support crew, was also designated. Slayton created the support crews early in the Apollo Program on the advice of Apollo crew commander James McDivitt, who would lead Apollo 9. McDivitt believed that, with preparation going on in facilities across the U.S., meetings that needed a member of the flight crew would be missed. Support crew members were to assist as directed by the mission commander. Usually low in seniority, they assembled the mission&#x27;s rules, flight plan, and checklists, and kept them updated. For Apollo 16, they were: Anthony W. England, Karl G. Henize, Henry W. Hartsfield Jr., Robert F. Overmyer and Donald H. Peterson.

Flight directors were Pete Frank and Philip Shaffer, first shift, Gene Kranz and Donald R. Puddy, second shift, and Gerry Griffin, Neil B. Hutchinson and Charles R. Lewis, third shift. Flight directors during Apollo had a one-sentence job description: &quot;The flight director may take any actions necessary for crew safety and mission success.&quot; CAPCOMs were Haise, Roosa, Mitchell, James B. Irwin, England, Peterson, Hartsfield, and C. Gordon Fullerton.

==Mission insignia and call signs==

The insignia of Apollo 16 is dominated by a rendering of an American eagle and a red, white and blue shield, representing the people of the United States, over a gray background representing the lunar surface. Overlaying the shield is a gold NASA vector, orbiting the Moon. On its gold-outlined blue border, there are 16 stars, representing the mission number, and the names of the crew members: Young, Mattingly, Duke. The insignia was designed from ideas originally submitted by the crew of the mission, by Barbara Matelski of the graphics shop at the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.

Young and Duke chose &quot;Orion&quot; for the Lunar Module&#x27;s call sign, while Mattingly chose &quot;Casper&quot; for the command and service module. According to Duke, he and Young chose &quot;Orion&quot; for the LM because they wanted something connected with the stars. Orion is one of the brightest constellations as seen from Earth, and one visible to the astronauts throughout their journey. Duke also stated, &quot;it is a prominent constellation and easy to pronounce and transmit to Mission Control&quot;. Mattingly said he chose &quot;Casper&quot;, evoking Casper the Friendly Ghost, because &quot;there are enough serious things in this flight, so I picked a non-serious name.&quot;

==Planning and training==

===Landing site selection===
Apollo 16 was the second of Apollo&#x27;s J missions, featuring the use of the Lunar Roving Vehicle, increased scientific capability, and three-day lunar surface stays. As Apollo 16 was the penultimate mission in the Apollo program and there was no major new hardware or procedures to test on the lunar surface, the last two missions (the other being Apollo 17) presented opportunities for astronauts to clear up some of the uncertainties in understanding the Moon&#x27;s characteristics. Scientists sought information on the Moon&#x27;s early history, which might be obtained from its ancient surface features, the lunar highlands. Previous Apollo expeditions, including Apollo 14 and Apollo 15, had obtained samples of pre-mare lunar material, likely thrown from the highlands by meteorite impacts. These were dated from before lava began to upwell from the Moon&#x27;s interior and flood the low areas and basins. Nevertheless, no Apollo mission had actually visited the lunar highlands.

Apollo 14 had visited and sampled a ridge of material ejected by the impact that created the Mare Imbrium impact basin. Likewise, Apollo 15 had also sampled material in the region of Imbrium, visiting the basin&#x27;s edge. Because the Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 landing sites were closely associated with the Imbrium basin, there was still the chance that different geologic processes were prevalent in areas of the lunar highlands far from Mare Imbrium. Scientist Dan Milton, studying photographs of the highlands from Lunar Orbiter photographs, saw an area in the Descartes region of the Moon with unusually high albedo that he theorized might be due to volcanic rock; his theory quickly gained wide support. Several members of the scientific community noted that the central lunar highlands resembled regions on Earth that were created by volcanism processes and hypothesized the same might be true on the Moon. They hoped scientific output from the Apollo 16 mission would provide an answer. Some scientists advocated for a landing near the large crater, Tycho, but its distance from the lunar equator and the fact that the Lunar Module would have to approach over very rough terrain ruled it out.

The Ad Hoc Apollo Site Evaluation Committee met in April and May 1971 to decide the Apollo 16 and 17 landing sites; it was chaired by Noel Hinners of Bellcomm. There was consensus the final landing sites should be in the lunar highlands, and among the sites considered for Apollo 16 were the Descartes Highlands region west of Mare Nectaris and the crater Alphonsus. The considerable distance between the Descartes site and previous Apollo landing sites would also be beneficial for the network of seismometers, deployed on each landing mission beginning with Apollo 12.

At Alphonsus, three scientific objectives were determined to be of primary interest and paramount importance: the possibility of old, pre-Imbrium impact material from within the crater&#x27;s wall, the composition of the crater&#x27;s interior and the possibility of past volcanic activity on the floor of the crater at several smaller &quot;dark halo&quot; craters. Geologists feared, however, that samples obtained from the crater might have been contaminated by the Imbrium impact, thus preventing Apollo 16 from obtaining samples of pre-Imbrium material. There also remained the distinct possibility that this objective would have already been satisfied by the Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 missions, as the Apollo 14 samples had not yet been completely analyzed and samples from Apollo 15 had not yet been obtained.

On June 3, 1971, the site selection committee decided to target the Apollo 16 mission for the Descartes site. Following the decision, the Alphonsus site was considered the most likely candidate for Apollo 17, but was eventually rejected. With the assistance of orbital photography obtained on the Apollo 14 mission, the Descartes site was determined to be safe enough for a crewed landing. The specific landing site was between two young impact craters, North Ray and South Ray craters – in diameter, respectively – which provided &quot;natural drill holes&quot; which penetrated through the lunar regolith at the site, thus leaving exposed bedrock that could be sampled by the crew.

After the selection, mission planners made the Descartes and Cayley formations, two geologic units of the lunar highlands, the primary sampling interest of the mission. It was these formations that the scientific community widely suspected were formed by lunar volcanism, but this hypothesis was proven incorrect by the composition of lunar samples from the mission.

===Training===

In addition to the usual Apollo spacecraft training, Young and Duke, along with backup commander Fred Haise, underwent an extensive geological training program that included several field trips to introduce them to concepts and techniques they would use in analyzing features and collecting samples on the lunar surface. During these trips, they visited and provided scientific descriptions of geologic features they were likely to encounter. The backup LMP, Mitchell, was unavailable during the early part of the training, occupied with tasks relating to Apollo 14, but by September 1971 had joined the geology field trips. Before that, Tony England (a member of the support crew and the lunar EVA CAPCOM) or one of the geologist trainers would train alongside Haise on geology field trips.

Since Descartes was believed to be volcanic, a good deal of this training was geared towards volcanic rocks and features, but field trips were made to sites featuring other sorts of rock. As Young later commented, the non-volcanic training proved more useful, given that Descartes did not prove to be volcanic. In July 1971, they visited Sudbury, Ontario, Canada, for geology training exercises, the first time U.S. astronauts trained in Canada. The Apollo 14 landing crew had visited a site in West Germany; geologist Don Wilhelms related that unspecified incidents there had caused Slayton to rule out further European training trips. Geologists chose Sudbury because of a wide crater created about 1.8 billion years ago by a large meteorite. The Sudbury Basin shows evidence of shatter cone geology, familiarizing the Apollo crew with geologic evidence of a meteorite impact. During the training exercises the astronauts did not wear space suits, but carried radio equipment to converse with each other and England, practicing procedures they would use on the lunar surface. By the end of the training, the field trips had become major exercises, involving up to eight astronauts and dozens of support personnel, attracting coverage from the media. For the exercise at the Nevada Test Site, where the massive craters left by nuclear explosions simulated the large craters to be found on the Moon, all participants had to have security clearance and a listed next-of-kin, and an overflight by CMP Mattingly required special permission.
In addition to the field geology training, Young and Duke also trained to use their EVA space suits, adapt to the reduced lunar gravity, collect samples, and drive the Lunar Roving Vehicle. The fact that they had been backups for Apollo 13, planned to be a landing mission, meant that they could spend about 40 percent of their time training for their surface operations. They also received survival training and prepared for technical aspects of the mission. The astronauts spent much time studying the lunar samples brought back by earlier missions, learning about the instruments to be carried on the mission, and hearing what the principal investigators in charge of those instruments expected to learn from Apollo 16. This training helped Young and Duke, while on the Moon, quickly realize that the expected volcanic rocks were not there, even though the geologists in Mission Control initially did not believe them. Much of the training—according to Young, 350 hours—was conducted with the crew wearing space suits, something that Young deemed vital, allowing the astronauts to know the limitations of the equipment in doing their assigned tasks. Mattingly also received training in recognizing geological features from orbit by flying over the field areas in an airplane, and trained to operate the Scientific Instrument Module from lunar orbit.

==Equipment==
===Launch vehicle===
The launch vehicle which took Apollo 16 to the Moon was a Saturn V, designated as AS-511. This was the eleventh Saturn V to be flown and the ninth used on crewed missions. Apollo 16&#x27;s Saturn V was almost identical to Apollo 15&#x27;s. One change that was made was the restoration of four retrorockets to the S-IC first stage, meaning there would be a total of eight, as on Apollo 14 and earlier. The retrorockets were used to minimize the risk of collision between the jettisoned first stage and the Saturn V. These four retrorockets had been omitted from Apollo 15&#x27;s Saturn V to save weight, but analysis of Apollo 15&#x27;s flight showed that the S-IC came closer than expected after jettison, and it was feared that if there were only four rockets and one failed, there might be a collision.

===ALSEP and other surface equipment===

As on all lunar landing missions after Apollo 11, an Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (ALSEP) was flown on Apollo 16. This was a suite of nuclear-powered experiments designed to keep functioning after the astronauts who set them up returned to Earth. Apollo 16&#x27;s ALSEP consisted of a Passive Seismic Experiment (PSE, a seismometer), an Active Seismic Experiment (ASE), a Lunar Heat Flow Experiment (HFE), and a Lunar Surface Magnetometer (LSM). The ALSEP was powered by a SNAP-27 radioisotope thermoelectric generator, developed by the Atomic Energy Commission.
The PSE added to the network of seismometers left by Apollo 12, 14 and 15. NASA intended to calibrate the Apollo 16 PSE by crashing the LM&#x27;s ascent stage near it after the astronauts were done with it, an object of known mass and velocity impacting at a known location. However, NASA lost control of the ascent stage after jettison, and this did not occur. The ASE, designed to return data about the Moon&#x27;s geologic structure, consisted of two groups of explosives: one, a line of &quot;thumpers&quot; were to be deployed attached to three geophones. The thumpers would be exploded during the ALSEP deployment. A second group was four mortars of different sizes, to be set off remotely once the astronauts had returned to Earth. Apollo 14 had also carried an ASE, though its mortars were never set off for fear of affecting other experiments.

The HFE involved the drilling of two holes into the lunar surface and emplacement of thermometers which would measure how much heat was flowing from the lunar interior. This was the third attempt to emplace a HFE: the first flew on Apollo 13 and never reached the lunar surface, while on Apollo 15, problems with the drill meant the probes did not go as deep as planned. The Apollo 16 attempt would fail after Duke had successfully emplaced the first probe; Young, unable to see his feet in the bulky spacesuit, pulled out and severed the cable after it wrapped around his leg. NASA managers vetoed a repair attempt due to the amount of time it would take. A HFE flew, and was deployed, on Apollo 17.
The LSM was designed to measure the strength of the Moon&#x27;s magnetic field, which is only a small fraction of Earth&#x27;s. Additional data would be returned by the use of the Lunar Portable Magnetometer (LPM), to be carried on the lunar rover and activated at several geology stops. Scientists also hoped to learn from an Apollo 12 sample, to be briefly returned to the Moon on Apollo 16, from which &quot;soft&quot; magnetism had been removed, to see if it had been restored on its journey. Measurements after the mission found that &quot;soft&quot; magnetism had returned to the sample, although at a lower intensity than before.

A Far Ultraviolet Camera/Spectrograph (UVC) was flown, the first astronomical observations taken from the Moon, seeking data on hydrogen sources in space without the masking effect of the Earth&#x27;s corona. The instrument was placed in the LM&#x27;s shadow and pointed at nebulae, other astronomical objects, the Earth itself, and any suspected volcanic vents seen on the lunar surface. The film was returned to Earth. When asked to summarize the results for a general audience, Dr. George Carruthers of the Naval Research Laboratory stated, &quot;the most immediately obvious and spectacular results were really for the Earth observations, because this was the first time that the Earth had been photographed from a distance in ultraviolet (UV) light, so that you could see the full extent of the hydrogen atmosphere, the polar auroris and what we call the tropical airglow belt.&quot;

Four panels mounted on the LM&#x27;s descent stage comprised the Cosmic Ray Detector, designed to record cosmic ray and solar wind particles. Three of the panels were left uncovered during the voyage to the Moon, with the fourth uncovered by the crew early in the EVA. The panels would be bagged for return to Earth. The free-standing Solar Wind Composition Experiment flew on Apollo 16, as it had on each of the lunar landings, for deployment on the lunar surface and return to Earth. Platinum foil was added to the aluminum of the previous experiments, to minimize contamination.

===Particles and Fields Subsatellite PFS-2===
The Apollo 16 Particles and Fields Subsatellite (PFS-2) was a small satellite released into lunar orbit from the service module. Its principal objective was to measure charged particles and magnetic fields all around the Moon as the Moon orbited Earth, similar to its sister spacecraft, PFS-1, released eight months earlier by Apollo 15. The two probes were intended to have similar orbits, ranging from above the lunar surface.

Like the Apollo 15 subsatellite, PFS-2 was expected to have a lifetime of at least a year before its orbit decayed and it crashed onto the lunar surface. The decision to bring Apollo 16 home early after there were difficulties with the main engine meant that the spacecraft did not go to the orbit which had been planned for PFS-2. Instead, it was ejected into a lower-than-planned orbit and crashed into the Moon a month later on May 29, 1972, after circling the Moon 424 times. This brief lifetime was because lunar mascons were near to its orbital ground track and helped pull PFS-2 into the Moon.

==Mission events==
Elements of the spacecraft and launch vehicle began arriving at Kennedy Space Center in July 1970, and all had arrived by September 1971. Apollo 16 was originally scheduled to launch on March 17, 1972. One of the bladders for the CM&#x27;s reaction control system burst during testing. This issue, in combination with concerns that one of the explosive cords that would jettison the LM from the CSM after the astronauts returned from the lunar surface would not work properly, and a problem with Duke&#x27;s spacesuit, made it desirable to slip the launch to the next launch window. Thus, Apollo 16 was postponed to April 16. The launch vehicle stack, which had been rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building on December 13, 1971, was returned thereto on January 27, 1972. It was rolled out again to Launch Complex 39A on February 9.

The official mission countdown began on Monday, April 10, 1972, at 8:30 am, six days before the launch. At this point the SaturnV rocket&#x27;s three stages were powered up, and drinking water was pumped into the spacecraft. As the countdown began, the crew of Apollo 16 was participating in final training exercises in anticipation of a launch on April 16. The astronauts underwent their final preflight physical examination on April 11. The only holds in the countdown were the ones pre-planned in the schedule, and the weather was fair as the time for launch approached.

===Launch and outward journey===

The Apollo 16 mission launched from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at 12:54 pm EST on April 16, 1972. The launch was nominal; the crew experienced vibration similar to that on previous missions. The first and second stages of the SaturnV (the S-IC and S-II) performed nominally; the spacecraft entered orbit around Earth just under 12 minutes after lift-off.

After reaching orbit, the crew spent time adapting to the zero-gravity environment and preparing the spacecraft for trans-lunar injection (TLI), the burn of the third-stage rocket that would propel them to the Moon. In Earth orbit, the crew faced minor technical issues, including a potential problem with the environmental control system and the S-IVB third stage&#x27;s attitude control system, but eventually resolved or compensated for them as they prepared to depart towards the Moon.

After two orbits, the rocket&#x27;s third stage reignited for just over five minutes, propelling the craft towards the Moon at about . Six minutes after the burn of the S-IVB, the command and service modules (CSM), containing the crew, separated from the rocket and traveled away from it before turning around and retrieving the lunar module from inside the expended rocket stage. The maneuver, performed by Mattingly and known as transposition, docking, and extraction, went smoothly.

Following transposition and docking, the crew noticed the exterior surface of the Lunar Module was giving off particles from a spot where the LM&#x27;s skin appeared torn or shredded; at one point, Duke estimated they were seeing about five to ten particles per second. Young and Duke entered the Lunar Module through the docking tunnel connecting it with the command module to inspect its systems, at which time they did not spot any major issues.

Once on course towards the Moon, the crew put the spacecraft into a rotisserie &quot;barbecue&quot; mode in which the craft rotated along its long axis three times per hour to ensure even heat distribution about the spacecraft from the Sun. After further preparing the craft for the voyage, the crew began the first sleep period of the mission just under 15 hours after launch.

By the time Mission Control issued the wake-up call to the crew for flight day two, the spacecraft was about away from the Earth, traveling at about . As it was not due to arrive in lunar orbit until flight day four, flight days two and three were largely preparatory, consisting of spacecraft maintenance and scientific research. On day two, the crew performed an electrophoresis experiment, also performed on Apollo 14, in which they attempted to demonstrate that electrophoretic separation in their near-weightless environment could be used to produce substances of greater purity than would be possible on Earth. Using two different sizes of polystyrene particles, one size colored red and one blue, separation of the two types via electrophoresis was achieved, though electro-osmosis in the experiment equipment prevented the clear separation of two particle bands.

The remainder of day two included a two-second mid-course correction burn performed by the CSM&#x27;s service propulsion system (SPS) engine to tweak the spacecraft&#x27;s trajectory. Later in the day, the astronauts entered the Lunar Module for the second time to further inspect the landing craft&#x27;s systems. The crew reported they had observed additional paint peeling from a portion of the LM&#x27;s outer aluminum skin. Despite this, the crew discovered that the spacecraft&#x27;s systems were performing nominally. Following the LM inspection, the crew reviewed checklists and procedures for the following days in anticipation of their arrival and the Lunar Orbit Insertion (LOI) burn. Command Module Pilot Mattingly reported &quot;gimbal lock&quot;, meaning that the system to keep track of the craft&#x27;s attitude was no longer accurate. Mattingly had to realign the guidance system using the Sun and Moon. At the end of day two, Apollo 16 was about away from Earth.

When the astronauts were awakened for flight day three, the spacecraft was about away from the Earth. The velocity of the craft steadily decreased, as it had not yet reached the lunar sphere of gravitational influence. The early part of day three was largely housekeeping, spacecraft maintenance and exchanging status reports with Mission Control in Houston. The crew performed the Apollo light flash experiment, or ALFMED, to investigate &quot;light flashes&quot; that were seen by Apollo lunar astronauts when the spacecraft was dark, regardless of whether their eyes were open. This was thought to be caused by the penetration of the eye by cosmic ray particles. During the second half of the day, Young and Duke again entered the Lunar Module to power it up and check its systems, and perform housekeeping tasks in preparation for the lunar landing. The systems were found to be functioning as expected. Following this, the crew donned their space suits and rehearsed procedures that would be used on landing day. Just before the end of flight day three at 59 hours, 19 minutes, 45 seconds after liftoff, while from the Earth and from the Moon, the spacecraft&#x27;s velocity began increasing as it accelerated towards the Moon after entering the lunar sphere of influence.

After waking up on flight day four, the crew began preparations for the LOI maneuver that would brake them into orbit. At an altitude of the scientific instrument module (SIM) bay cover was jettisoned. At just over 74 hours into the mission, the spacecraft passed behind the Moon, temporarily losing contact with Mission Control. While over the far side, the SPS burned for 6minutes and 15 seconds, braking the spacecraft into an orbit with a low point (pericynthion) of 58.3 and a high point (apocynthion) of 170.4 nautical miles (108.0 and 315.6 km, respectively). After entering lunar orbit, the crew began preparations for the Descent Orbit Insertion (DOI) maneuver to further modify the spacecraft&#x27;s orbital trajectory. The maneuver decreased the craft&#x27;s pericynthion to . The remainder of flight day four was spent making observations and preparing for activation of the Lunar Module, undocking, and landing the following day.

===Lunar surface===
The crew continued preparing for Lunar Module activation and undocking shortly after waking up to begin flight day five. The boom that extended the mass spectrometer in the SIM bay was stuck, semi-deployed. It was decided that Young and Duke would visually inspect the boom after undocking the LM from the CSM. They entered the LM for activation and checkout of the spacecraft&#x27;s systems. Despite entering the LM 40 minutes ahead of schedule, they completed preparations only 10 minutes early due to numerous delays in the process. With the preparations finished, they undocked 96 hours, 13 minutes, 31 seconds into the mission.

For the rest of the two crafts&#x27; passes over the near side of the Moon, Mattingly prepared to shift &quot;Casper&quot; to a higher, near-circular orbit, while Young and Duke prepared &quot;Orion&quot; for the descent to the lunar surface. At this point, during tests of the CSM&#x27;s steerable rocket engine in preparation for the burn to modify the craft&#x27;s orbit, Mattingly detected oscillations in the SPS engine&#x27;s backup gimbal system. According to mission rules, under such circumstances, &quot;Orion&quot; was to re-dock with &quot;Casper&quot;, in case Mission Control decided to abort the landing and use the Lunar Module&#x27;s engines for the return trip to Earth. Instead, the two craft kept station, maintaining positions close to each other. After several hours of analysis, mission controllers determined that the malfunction could be worked around, and Young and Duke could proceed with the landing.

Powered descent to the lunar surface began about six hours behind schedule. Because of the delay, Young and Duke began their descent to the surface at an altitude higher than that of any previous mission, at . After descending to an altitude of about , Young was able to view the landing site in its entirety. Throttle-down of the LM&#x27;s landing engine occurred on time, and the spacecraft tilted forward to its landing orientation at an altitude of . The LM landed north and west of the planned landing site at 104 hours, 29 minutes, and 35 seconds into the mission, at 2:23:35 UTC on April 21 (8:23:35 pm on April 20 in Houston). The availability of the Lunar Roving Vehicle rendered their distance from the targeted point trivial.

After landing, Young and Duke began powering down some of the LM&#x27;s systems to conserve battery power. Upon completing their initial procedures, the pair configured &quot;Orion&quot; for their three-day stay on the lunar surface, removed their space suits and took initial geological observations of the immediate landing site. They then settled down for their first meal on the surface. After eating, they configured the cabin for sleep. The landing delay caused by the malfunction in the CSM&#x27;s main engine necessitated significant modifications to the mission schedule. Apollo 16 would spend one less day in lunar orbit after surface exploration had been completed to afford the crew ample margins in the event of further problems. In order to improve Young&#x27;s and Duke&#x27;s sleep schedule, the third and final moonwalk of the mission was trimmed from seven hours to five.

==== First moonwalk ====
After waking up on April 21, Young and Duke ate breakfast and began preparations for the first extravehicular activity (EVA), or moonwalk. After the pair donned and pressurized their space suits and depressurized the Lunar Module cabin, Young climbed out onto the &quot;porch&quot; of the LM, a small platform above the ladder. Duke handed Young a jettison bag full of trash to dispose of on the surface. Young then lowered the equipment transfer bag (ETB), containing equipment for use during the EVA, to the surface. Young descended the ladder and, upon setting foot on the lunar surface, became the ninth human to walk on the Moon. Upon stepping onto the surface, Young expressed his sentiments about being there: &quot;There you are: Mysterious and unknown Descartes. Highland plains. Apollo 16 is gonna change your image. I&#x27;m sure glad they got ol&#x27; Brer Rabbit, here, back in the briar patch where he belongs.&quot; Duke soon descended the ladder and joined Young on the surface, becoming the tenth person to walk on the Moon. Duke was then aged 36; no younger human has ever walked on the lunar surface. Duke expressed his excitement, stating to CAPCOM Anthony England: &quot;Fantastic! Oh, that first foot on the lunar surface is super, Tony!&quot; The pair&#x27;s first task of the moonwalk was to offload the Lunar Roving Vehicle, the Far Ultraviolet Camera/Spectrograph, and other equipment. This was done without problems. On first driving the lunar rover, Young discovered that the rear steering was not working. He alerted Mission Control to the problem before setting up the television camera, after which Duke erected the United States flag. During lunar surface operations, Commander Young always drove the rover, while Lunar Module Pilot Duke assisted with navigation; this was a division of responsibilities used consistently throughout Apollo&#x27;s J missions.
The day&#x27;s next task was to deploy the ALSEP; while they were parking the lunar rover, on which the TV camera was mounted, to observe the deployment, the rear steering began functioning. After ALSEP deployment, they collected samples in the vicinity. About four hours after the beginning of EVA-1, they mounted the lunar rover and drove to the first geologic stop, Plum Crater, a crater on the rim of Flag Crater, about across. There, at a distance of from the LM, they sampled material in the vicinity, which scientists believed had penetrated through the upper regolith layer to the underlying Cayley Formation. It was there that Duke retrieved, at the request of Mission Control, the largest rock returned by an Apollo mission, a breccia nicknamed Big Muley after mission geology principal investigator William R. Muehlberger. The next stop of the day was Buster Crater, a small crater located north of the larger Spook Crater, about from the LM. There, Duke took pictures of Stone Mountain and South Ray Crater, while Young deployed the LPM. By this point, scientists were beginning to reconsider their pre-mission hypothesis that Descartes had been the setting of ancient volcanic activity, as the two astronauts had yet to find any volcanic material. Following their stop at Buster, Young did a &quot;Grand Prix&quot; demonstration drive of the lunar rover, which Duke filmed with a 16 mm movie camera. This had been attempted on Apollo 15, but the camera had malfunctioned. After completing more tasks at the ALSEP, they returned to the LM to close out the moonwalk. They reentered the LM 7hours, 6minutes, and 56 seconds after the start of the EVA. Once inside, they pressurized the LM cabin, went through a half-hour debriefing with scientists in Mission Control, and configured the cabin for the sleep period.

==== Second moonwalk ====
Waking up three and a half minutes earlier than planned, they discussed the day&#x27;s timeline of events with Houston. The second lunar excursion&#x27;s primary objective was to visit Stone Mountain to climb up the slope of about 20 degrees to reach a cluster of five craters known as &quot;Cinco craters&quot;. They drove there in the LRV, traveling from the LM. At above the valley floor, the pair were at the highest elevation above the LM of any Apollo mission. They marveled at the view (including South Ray) from the side of Stone Mountain, which Duke described as &quot;spectacular&quot;, then gathered samples in the vicinity. After spending 54 minutes on the slope, they climbed aboard the lunar rover en route to the day&#x27;s second stop, dubbed Station 5, a crater across. There, they hoped to find Descartes material that had not been contaminated by ejecta from South Ray Crater, a large crater south of the landing site. The samples they collected there, despite still uncertain origin, are according to geologist Wilhelms, &quot;a reasonable bet to be Descartes&quot;.

The next stop, Station 6, was a blocky crater, where the astronauts believed they could sample the Cayley Formation as evidenced by the firmer soil found there. Bypassing station seven to save time, they arrived at Station 8 on the lower flank of Stone Mountain, where they sampled material on a ray from South Ray crater for about an hour. There, they collected black and white breccias and smaller, crystalline rocks rich in plagioclase. At Station 9, an area known as the &quot;Vacant Lot&quot;, which was believed to be free of ejecta from South Ray, they spent about 40 minutes gathering samples. Twenty-five minutes after departing the Vacant Lot, they arrived at the final stop of the day, halfway between the ALSEP site and the LM. There, they dug a double core and conducted several penetrometer tests along a line stretching east of the ALSEP. At the request of Young and Duke, the moonwalk was extended by ten minutes. After returning to the LM to wrap up the second lunar excursion, they climbed back inside the landing craft&#x27;s cabin, sealing and pressurizing the interior after 7hours, 23 minutes, and 26 seconds of EVA time, breaking a record that had been set on Apollo 15. After eating a meal and proceeding with a debriefing on the day&#x27;s activities with Mission Control, they reconfigured the LM cabin and prepared for the sleep period.

==== Third moonwalk ====
Flight day seven was their third and final day on the lunar surface, returning to orbit to rejoin Mattingly in the CSM following the day&#x27;s moonwalk. During the third and final lunar excursion, they were to explore North Ray crater, the largest of any of the craters any Apollo expedition had visited. After exiting &quot;Orion&quot;, the pair drove to North Ray crater. The drive was smoother than that of the previous day, as the craters were shallower and boulders were less abundant north of the immediate landing site. After passing Palmetto crater, boulders gradually became larger and more abundant as they approached North Ray in the lunar rover. Upon arriving at the rim of North Ray crater, they were away from the LM. After their arrival, the duo took photographs of the wide and deep crater. They visited a large boulder, taller than a four-story building, which became known as &#x27;House Rock&#x27;. Samples obtained from this boulder delivered the final blow to the pre-mission volcanic hypothesis, proving it incorrect. House Rock had numerous bullet hole-like marks where micrometeoroids from space had impacted the rock.

About 1hour and 22 minutes after arriving at the North Ray crater, they departed for Station 13, a large boulder field about from North Ray. On the way, they set a lunar speed record, traveling at an estimated downhill. They arrived at a high boulder, which they called &quot;Shadow Rock&quot;. Here, they sampled permanently shadowed soil. During this time, Mattingly was preparing the CSM in anticipation of their return approximately six hours later. After three hours and six minutes, they returned to the LM, where they completed several experiments and unloaded the rover. A short distance from the LM, Duke placed a photograph of his family and an Air Force commemorative medallion on the surface. Young drove the rover to a point about east of the LM, known as the &#x27;VIP site,&#x27; so its television camera, controlled remotely by Mission Control, could observe Apollo 16&#x27;s liftoff from the Moon. They then reentered the LM after a 5-hour and 40-minute final excursion. After pressurizing the LM cabin, the crew began preparing to return to lunar orbit.

===Solo activities===

After &quot;Orion&quot; was cleared for the landing attempt, &quot;Casper&quot; maneuvered away, and Mattingly performed a burn that took his spacecraft to an orbit of in preparation for his scientific work. The SM carried a suite of scientific instruments in its SIM bay, similar to those carried on Apollo 15. Mattingly had compiled a busy schedule operating the various SIM bay instruments, one that became even busier once Houston decided to bring Apollo 16 home a day early, as the flight directors sought to make up for lost time.

His work was hampered by various malfunctions: when the Panoramic Camera was turned on, it appeared to take so much power from one of the CSM&#x27;s electrical systems, that it initiated the spacecraft Master Alarm. It was immediately shut off, though later analysis indicated that the drain might have been from the spacecraft&#x27;s heaters, which came on at the same time. Its work was also hampered by the delay in the beginning of &quot;Casper&quot;″s orbital scientific work and the early return to Earth, and by a malfunction resulting in the overexposure of many of the photographs. Nevertheless, it was able to take a photograph of the Descartes area in which &quot;Orion&quot; is visible. The Mass Spectrometer boom did not fully retract following its initial extension, as had happened on Apollo 15, though it retracted far enough to allow the SPS engine to be fired safely when &quot;Casper&quot; maneuvered away from &quot;Orion&quot; before the LM began its Moon landing attempt. Although the Mass Spectrometer was able to operate effectively, it stuck near its fully deployed position prior to the burn that preceded rendezvous, and had to be jettisoned. Scientists had hoped to supplement the lunar data gained with more on the trans-Earth coast, but Apollo 15 data could be used instead. The Mapping Camera also did not function perfectly; later analysis found it to have problems with its glare shield. The changes to the flight plan meant that some areas of the lunar surface that were supposed to be photographed could not be; also, a number of images were overexposed. The Laser Altimeter, designed to accurately measure the spacecraft altitude, slowly lost accuracy due to reduced power, and finally failed just before it was due to be used for the last time.

===Return to Earth===

Eight minutes before the planned departure from the lunar surface, CAPCOM James Irwin notified Young and Duke from Mission Control that they were go for liftoff. Two minutes before launch, they activated the &quot;Master Arm&quot; switch and then the &quot;Abort Stage&quot; button, causing small explosive charges to sever the ascent stage from the descent stage, with cables connecting the two severed by a guillotine-like mechanism. At the pre-programmed moment, there was liftoff and the ascent stage blasted away from the Moon, as the camera aboard the LRV followed the first moments of the flight. Six minutes after liftoff, at a speed of about , Young and Duke reached lunar orbit. Young and Duke rendezvoused and re-docked with Mattingly in the CSM. To minimize the transfer of lunar dust from the LM cabin into the CSM, Young and Duke cleaned the cabin before opening the hatch separating the two spacecraft. After opening the hatch and reuniting with Mattingly, the crew transferred the samples Young and Duke had collected on the surface into the CSM for transfer to Earth. After transfers were completed, the crew would sleep before jettisoning the empty Lunar Module ascent stage the next day, when it was to be crashed intentionally into the lunar surface in order to calibrate the seismometer Young and Duke had left on the surface.

The next day, after final checks were completed, the expended LM ascent stage was jettisoned. Likely because of a failure by the crew to activate a certain switch in the LM before sealing it off, it tumbled after separation. NASA could not control it, and it did not execute the rocket burn necessary for the craft&#x27;s intentional de-orbit. The ascent stage eventually crashed into the lunar surface nearly a year after the mission. The crew&#x27;s next task, after jettisoning the Lunar Module ascent stage, was to release a subsatellite into lunar orbit from the CSM&#x27;s scientific instrument bay. The burn to alter the CSM&#x27;s orbit to that desired for the subsatellite had been cancelled; as a result, the subsatellite lasted just over a month in orbit, far less than its anticipated one year. Just under five hours after the subsatellite release, on the CSM&#x27;s 65th orbit around the Moon, its service propulsion system main engine was reignited to propel the craft on a trajectory that would return it to Earth. The SPS engine performed the burn flawlessly despite the malfunction that had delayed their landing several days previously.

During the return to Earth, Mattingly performed an 83-minute EVA to retrieve film cassettes from the cameras in the SIM bay, with assistance from Duke who remained at the command module&#x27;s hatch. At approximately from Earth, it was the second &quot;deep space&quot; EVA in history, performed at great distance from any planetary body. , it remains one of only three such EVAs, all performed during Apollo&#x27;s J-missions under similar circumstances. During the EVA, Mattingly set up a biological experiment, the Microbial Ecology Evaluation Device (MEED), an experiment unique to Apollo 16, to evaluate the response of microbes to the space environment. The crew carried out various housekeeping and maintenance tasks aboard the spacecraft and ate a meal before concluding the day.

The penultimate day of the flight was largely spent performing experiments, aside from a twenty-minute press conference during the second half of the day. During the press conference, the astronauts answered questions pertaining to several technical and non-technical aspects of the mission prepared and listed by priority at the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston by journalists covering the flight. In addition to numerous housekeeping tasks, the astronauts prepared the spacecraft for its atmospheric reentry the next day. At the end of the crew&#x27;s final full day in space, the spacecraft was approximately from Earth and closing at a rate of about .

When the wake-up call was issued to the crew for their final day in space by CAPCOM England, the CSM was about from Earth, traveling just over . Just over three hours before splashdown in the Pacific Ocean, the crew performed a final course correction burn, using the spacecraft&#x27;s thrusters to change their velocity by . Approximately ten minutes before reentry into Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, the cone-shaped command module containing the three crewmembers separated from the service module, which would burn up during reentry. At 265 hours and 37 minutes into the mission, at a velocity of about , Apollo 16 began atmospheric reentry. At its maximum, the temperature of the heat shield was between . After parachute deployment and less than 14 minutes after reentry began, the command module splashed down in the Pacific Ocean southeast of the island of Kiritimati 265 hours, 51 minutes, 5seconds after liftoff. The spacecraft and its crew was retrieved by the aircraft carrier . The astronauts were safely aboard the &quot;Ticonderoga&quot; 37 minutes after splashdown.

== Scientific results and aftermath ==
Scientific analysis of the rocks brought back to Earth confirmed that the Cayley Formation was not volcanic in nature. There was less certainty regarding the Descartes Formation, as it was not clear which if any of the rocks came from there. There was no evidence that showed that Stone Mountain was volcanic. One reason why Descartes had been selected was that it was visually different from previous Apollo landing sites, but rocks from there proved to be closely related to those from the Fra Mauro Formation, Apollo 14&#x27;s landing site. Geologists realized that they had been so certain that Cayley was volcanic, they had not been open to dissenting views, and that they had been over-reliant on analogues from Earth, a flawed model because the Moon does not share much of the Earth&#x27;s geologic history. They concluded that there are few if any volcanic mountains on the Moon. These conclusions were informed by observations from Mattingly, the first CMP to use binoculars in his observations, who had seen that from the perspective of lunar orbit, there was nothing distinctive about the Descartes Formation—it fit right in with the Mare Imbrium structure. Other results gained from Apollo 16 included the discovery of two new auroral belts around Earth.

After the mission, Young and Duke served as backups for Apollo 17, and Duke retired from NASA in December 1975. Young and Mattingly both flew the Space Shuttle: Young, who served as Chief Astronaut from 1974 to 1987, commanded the first Space Shuttle mission, STS-1 in 1981, as well as STS-9 in 1983, on the latter mission becoming the first person to journey into space six times. He retired from NASA in 2004. Mattingly also twice commanded Shuttle missions, STS-4 (1982) and STS-51-C (1985), before retiring from NASA in 1985.

==Locations of spacecraft and other equipment==

The &quot;Ticonderoga&quot; delivered the Apollo 16 command module to the North Island Naval Air Station, near San Diego, California, on Friday, May 5, 1972. On Monday, May 8, ground service equipment being used to empty the residual toxic reaction control system fuel in the command module tanks exploded in a Naval Air Station hangar. Forty-six people were sent to the hospital for 24 to 48 hours&#x27; observation, most suffering from inhalation of toxic fumes. Most seriously injured was a technician who suffered a fractured kneecap when a cart overturned on him. A hole was blown in the hangar roof 250 feet above; about 40 windows in the hangar were shattered. The command module suffered a three-inch gash in one panel.

The Apollo 16 command module &quot;Casper&quot; is on display at the U.S. Space &amp; Rocket Center in Huntsville, Alabama, following a transfer of ownership from NASA to the Smithsonian in November 1973. The Lunar Module ascent stage separated from the CSM on April 24, 1972, but NASA lost control of it. It orbited the Moon for about a year. Its impact site remains unknown, though research published in 2023 suggests an impact date of May 29, 1972 (the same as for the subsattelite) and an impact location of 9.99° N, 104.26° E.
The S-IVB was deliberately crashed into the Moon. However, due to a communication failure before impact the exact location was unknown until January 2016, when it was discovered within Mare Insularum by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, approximately southwest of Copernicus Crater.
Duke left two items on the Moon, both of which he photographed while there. One is a plastic-encased photo portrait of his family. The reverse of the photo is signed by Duke&#x27;s family and bears this message: &quot;This is the family of Astronaut Duke from Planet Earth. Landed on the Moon, April 1972.&quot; The other item was a commemorative medal issued by the United States Air Force, which was celebrating its 25th anniversary in 1972. He took two medals, leaving one on the Moon and donating the other to the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio.

In 2006, shortly after Hurricane Ernesto affected Bath, North Carolina, eleven-year-old Kevin Schanze discovered a piece of metal debris on the ground near his beach home. Schanze and a friend discovered a &quot;stamp&quot; on the flat metal sheet, which upon further inspection turned out to be a faded copy of the Apollo 16 mission insignia. NASA later confirmed the object to be a piece of the first stage of the SaturnV that had launched Apollo 16 into space. In July 2011, after returning the piece of debris at NASA&#x27;s request, 16-year-old Schanze was given an all-access tour of the Kennedy Space Center and VIP seating for the launch of STS-135, the final mission of the Space Shuttle program.

==See also==
* List of artificial objects on the Moon
* List of missions to the Moon
* List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999

==References==

===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Apollo 16 Traverses, Lunar Photomap 78D2S2(25)
* &quot;On the Moon with Apollo 16: A guidebook to the Descartes Region&quot; by Gene Simmons, NASA, EP-95, 1972
* &quot;Apollo 16: &quot;Nothing so hidden...&quot;&quot; (Part 1) – NASA film on the Apollo 16 mission at the Internet Archive
* &quot;Apollo 16: &quot;Nothing so hidden...&quot;&quot; (Part 2) – NASA film on the Apollo 16 mission at the Internet Archive
* Apollo Lunar Surface VR Panoramas – QTVR panoramas at moonpans.com
* Apollo 16 Science Experiments at the Lunar and Planetary Institute
* Audio recording of Apollo 16 landing as recorded at the Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station
* Interview with the Apollo 16 Astronauts (28 June 1972) from the Commonwealth Club of California Records at the Hoover Institution Archives
* &quot;Apollo 16: Driving on the Moon&quot; – Apollo 16 film footage of lunar rover at the Astronomy Picture of the Day, 29 January 2013
* Astronaut&#x27;s Eye View of Apollo 16 Site, from LROC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188168" start="0" end="9" title="Apollo 16" label="Apollo 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="43" end="49" title="human spaceflight" label="crewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="79" end="99" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="117" end="121" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="156" end="172" title="Moon landing" label="land on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="215" end="225" title="List of Apollo missions#Alphabetical mission types" label="J missions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="262" end="275" title="Geology of the Moon#Lunar landscape" label="lunar surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="316" end="336" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064739" start="360" end="371" title="Exploration of the Moon" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263681" start="384" end="403" title="Descartes Highlands" label="Descartes Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="562" end="571" title="Astronaut ranks and positions" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q107667" start="572" end="582" title="John Young (astronaut)" label="John Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="584" end="602" title="Lunar Module Pilot" label="Lunar Module Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q112284" start="603" end="615" title="Charles Duke" label="Charles Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q868320" start="620" end="640" title="Command Module Pilot" label="Command Module Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q318513" start="641" end="654" title="Ken Mattingly" label="Ken Mattingly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="674" end="694" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="698" end="705" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="1198" end="1210" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="1359" end="1384" title="Extravehicular activity" label="extravehicular activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906056" start="1589" end="1598" title="Big Muley" label="Big Muley"/>
<link wikidata="Q318438" start="1612" end="1621" title="Moon rock" label="Moon rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="1711" end="1737" title="command and service module" label="command and service module"/>
<link wikidata="Q210448" start="1869" end="1880" title="lunar orbit" label="lunar orbit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1958" end="1970" title="Apollo 16#Particles and Fields Subsatellite PFS-2" label="subsatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="1980" end="1994" title="Apollo service module" label="service module"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="2308" end="2315" title="Captain (United States O-6)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2323" end="2327" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409842" start="2395" end="2411" title="NASA Astronaut Group 2" label="the second group"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2430" end="2434" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q682628" start="2447" end="2455" title="Gemini 3" label="Gemini 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="2461" end="2472" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q597154" start="2521" end="2534" title="Mercury Seven" label="Mercury Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q752799" start="2574" end="2583" title="Gemini 10" label="Gemini 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859" start="2596" end="2611" title="Michael Collins (astronaut)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q191746" start="2643" end="2652" title="Apollo 10" label="Apollo 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q111240" start="2714" end="2724" title="Jim Lovell" label="Jim Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983433" start="2846" end="2866" title="Lieutenant commander (United States)" label="lieutenant commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q579376" start="2948" end="2973" title="NASA Astronaut Group 5" label="fifth group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="3023" end="3031" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q203651" start="3036" end="3044" title="Apollo 9" label="Apollo 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="3094" end="3103" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q19242" start="3123" end="3137" title="William Anders" label="William Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="3459" end="3468" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q155857" start="3489" end="3496" title="rubella" label="rubella"/>
<link wikidata="Q348358" start="3744" end="3756" title="Jack Swigert" label="Jack Swigert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3863" end="3883" title="Flight controller#CAPCOM" label="capsule communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544459" start="3910" end="3928" title="Lieutenant colonel (United States)" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="3936" end="3945" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q318965" start="4237" end="4254" title="Fred Haise" label="Fred W. Haise Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q375065" start="4296" end="4311" title="Stuart Roosa" label="Stuart A. Roosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178871" start="4335" end="4344" title="Apollo 14" label="Apollo 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q295873" start="4350" end="4367" title="Edgar Mitchell" label="Edgar D. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="4461" end="4473" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q460440" start="4576" end="4592" title="William R. Pogue" label="William R. Pogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q644837" start="4603" end="4617" title="Gerald P. Carr" label="Gerald P. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q13227060" start="4706" end="4740" title="Canceled Apollo missions" label="cancellations of Apollos 18 and 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="5047" end="5053" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239477" start="5081" end="5089" title="Skylab 4" label="Skylab 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="5105" end="5112" title="Project Mercury" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="5117" end="5123" title="Project Gemini" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q364476" start="5366" end="5380" title="James McDivitt" label="James McDivitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q545034" start="5695" end="5706" title="flight plan" label="flight plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q574124" start="5773" end="5791" title="Anthony W. England" label="Anthony W. England"/>
<link wikidata="Q722390" start="5793" end="5807" title="Karl Gordon Henize" label="Karl G. Henize"/>
<link wikidata="Q460161" start="5809" end="5832" title="Henry Hartsfield" label="Henry W. Hartsfield Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q519149" start="5834" end="5852" title="Robert F. Overmyer" label="Robert F. Overmyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q557058" start="5857" end="5875" title="Donald H. Peterson" label="Donald H. Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5878" end="5894" title="Flight controller#Flight director" label="Flight directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q94579995" start="5900" end="5910" title="Pete Frank" label="Pete Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q711493" start="5944" end="5954" title="Gene Kranz" label="Gene Kranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549046" start="5994" end="6007" title="Gerry Griffin" label="Gerry Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6230" end="6237" title="Flight controller#Spacecraft communicator (CAPCOM)" label="CAPCOMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q297801" start="6267" end="6281" title="James B. Irwin" label="James B. Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q519268" start="6318" end="6337" title="C. Gordon Fullerton" label="C. Gordon Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="6437" end="6451" title="Bald eagle" label="American eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="6931" end="6955" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="7247" end="7252" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442531" start="7541" end="7566" title="Casper the Friendly Ghost" label="Casper the Friendly Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7767" end="7777" title="List of Apollo missions#Alphabetical mission types" label="J missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="7804" end="7824" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="8076" end="8085" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8341" end="8356" title="Geology of the Moon#Highlands" label="lunar highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="8411" end="8420" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="8450" end="8454" title="Lunar mare" label="mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="8507" end="8516" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="8555" end="8559" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358214" start="8585" end="8605" title="Internal structure of the Moon" label="Moon&amp;#x27;s interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="8810" end="8835" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium impact basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q583625" start="9235" end="9248" title="Lunar Orbiter" label="Lunar Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="9371" end="9384" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q631696" start="9774" end="9779" title="Tycho (lunar crater)" label="Tycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q18002736" start="10052" end="10064" title="Noel Hinners" label="Noel Hinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="10068" end="10076" title="Bellcomm" label="Bellcomm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263681" start="10210" end="10229" title="Descartes Highlands" label="Descartes Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q210964" start="10245" end="10258" title="Mare Nectaris" label="Mare Nectaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339467" start="10274" end="10283" title="Alphonsus (crater)" label="Alphonsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="10416" end="10427" title="seismometer" label="seismometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632867" start="11760" end="11769" title="North Ray (crater)" label="North Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900369" start="11774" end="11783" title="South Ray (crater)" label="South Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q106551" start="11904" end="11912" title="regolith" label="regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="11947" end="11954" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="12507" end="12517" title="geology" label="geological"/>
<link wikidata="Q383434" start="13506" end="13513" title="Greater Sudbury" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="13663" end="13675" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091676" start="13687" end="13699" title="Don Wilhelms" label="Don Wilhelms"/>
<link wikidata="Q281965" start="13917" end="13930" title="Sudbury Basin" label="Sudbury Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194012" start="13949" end="13961" title="shatter cone" label="shatter cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q286518" start="14105" end="14116" title="Apollo/Skylab A7L" label="space suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="14444" end="14460" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050251" start="14828" end="14841" title="Gravitation of the Moon" label="lunar gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="16153" end="16161" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q571875" start="16388" end="16399" title="retrorocket" label="retrorocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029937" start="16408" end="16412" title="S-IC" label="S-IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14965" start="16995" end="17035" title="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package" label="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q106153486" start="17291" end="17316" title="Active Seismic Experiment" label="Active Seismic Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106563970" start="17332" end="17352" title="Heat Flow Experiment" label="Heat Flow Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106511752" start="17366" end="17392" title="Lunar Surface Magnetometer" label="Lunar Surface Magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509111" start="17427" end="17434" title="SNAP-27" label="SNAP-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q305208" start="17435" end="17472" title="radioisotope thermoelectric generator" label="radioisotope thermoelectric generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="17491" end="17515" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q361564" start="18067" end="18075" title="geophone" label="geophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="18162" end="18168" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037706" start="19136" end="19150" title="Magnetic field of the Moon" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975687" start="19712" end="19747" title="Far Ultraviolet Camera/Spectrograph" label="Far Ultraviolet Camera/Spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="19984" end="19990" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760460" start="20195" end="20212" title="George Carruthers" label="George Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="20220" end="20245" title="Naval Research Laboratory" label="Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="20441" end="20452" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="20541" end="20548" title="aurora" label="auroris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="20705" end="20715" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="20720" end="20730" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298367" start="20935" end="20968" title="Solar Wind Composition Experiment" label="Solar Wind Composition Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="21516" end="21521" title="PFS-1" label="PFS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918240" start="21760" end="21773" title="Orbital decay" label="orbit decayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q220717" start="22177" end="22183" title="mascon" label="mascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="22344" end="22364" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321971" start="22520" end="22543" title="reaction control system" label="reaction control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q855377" start="22848" end="22861" title="launch window" label="launch window"/>
<link wikidata="Q901058" start="22967" end="22992" title="Vehicle Assembly Building" label="Vehicle Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q24256513" start="23084" end="23102" title="Launch Complex 39A" label="Launch Complex 39A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093699" start="23985" end="23989" title="S-II" label="S-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="24035" end="24040" title="Low Earth orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299309" start="24151" end="24163" title="weightlessness" label="zero-gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q863248" start="24209" end="24230" title="trans-lunar injection" label="trans-lunar injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q257161" start="24440" end="24445" title="S-IVB" label="S-IVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835327" start="25015" end="25053" title="transposition, docking, and extraction" label="transposition, docking, and extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112041" start="25912" end="25927" title="Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center" label="Mission Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q185098" start="26265" end="26280" title="electrophoresis" label="electrophoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="26546" end="26557" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="26874" end="26899" title="service propulsion system" label="service propulsion system"/>
<link wikidata="Q210448" start="27434" end="27455" title="Lunar orbit" label="Lunar Orbit Insertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q467258" start="27514" end="27525" title="gimbal lock" label="gimbal lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q751290" start="27591" end="27599" title="attitude (aircraft)" label="attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="28391" end="28394" title="Human eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="28398" end="28408" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="29174" end="29202" title="scientific instrument module" label="scientific instrument module"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="29378" end="29386" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="30145" end="30162" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q782867" start="30684" end="30705" title="near side of the Moon" label="near side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100095" start="31343" end="31355" title="Orbital station-keeping" label="kept station"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="32220" end="32240" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q925172" start="34079" end="34090" title="Brer Rabbit" label="Brer Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703666" start="34876" end="34880" title="Lunar Flag Assembly" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712724" start="35511" end="35522" title="Flag (crater)" label="Flag Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051986" start="35706" end="35722" title="Cayley (crater)" label="Cayley Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="35843" end="35850" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906056" start="35861" end="35870" title="Big Muley" label="Big Muley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019161" start="35916" end="35938" title="William R. Muehlberger" label="William R. Muehlberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712732" start="36027" end="36039" title="Spook (crater)" label="Spook Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q194383" start="36499" end="36504" title="16 mm film" label="16 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452603" start="37249" end="37262" title="Cinco (crater)" label="Cinco craters"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="38446" end="38453" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="38472" end="38483" title="plagioclase" label="plagioclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q902845" start="38837" end="38849" title="penetrometer" label="penetrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632867" start="39654" end="39663" title="North Ray (crater)" label="North Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q18392292" start="39977" end="39985" title="Palmetto (crater)" label="Palmetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q589534" start="40529" end="40543" title="micrometeoroid" label="micrometeoroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q271960" start="42764" end="42776" title="exposure (photography)" label="overexposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q297801" start="44094" end="44105" title="James Irwin" label="James Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44370" end="44383" title="Apollo Lunar Module#Descent stage" label="descent stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="44429" end="44439" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="47644" end="47668" title="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="47807" end="47826" title="atmospheric entry" label="atmospheric reentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642255" start="48148" end="48158" title="splashdown (spacecraft landing)" label="splashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="48833" end="48843" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208566" start="49582" end="49601" title="Fra Mauro Formation" label="Fra Mauro Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="50414" end="50423" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="50504" end="50517" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667787" start="50540" end="50555" title="Chief Astronaut" label="Chief Astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q217543" start="50618" end="50623" title="STS-1" label="STS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q312052" start="50644" end="50649" title="STS-9" label="STS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q682663" start="50819" end="50824" title="STS-4" label="STS-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q606269" start="50836" end="50844" title="STS-51-C" label="STS-51-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800390" start="51012" end="51042" title="Naval Air Station North Island" label="North Island Naval Air Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347952" start="51736" end="51766" title="U.S. Space &amp;amp; Rocket Center" label="U.S. Space &amp;amp; Rocket Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="51770" end="51789" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="51842" end="51853" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q333864" start="52384" end="52398" title="Mare Insularum" label="Mare Insularum"/>
<link wikidata="Q331778" start="52406" end="52434" title="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131154" start="52463" end="52480" title="Copernicus (lunar crater)" label="Copernicus Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422977" start="53000" end="53046" title="National Museum of the United States Air Force" label="National Museum of the United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="53050" end="53081" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051586" start="53115" end="53132" title="Hurricane Ernesto (2006)" label="Hurricane Ernesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q547581" start="53142" end="53162" title="Bath, North Carolina" label="Bath, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q309080" start="53741" end="53748" title="STS-135" label="STS-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775296" start="53775" end="53796" title="Space Shuttle program" label="Space Shuttle program"/>
<link wikidata="Q743127" start="53814" end="53852" title="List of artificial objects on the Moon" label="List of artificial objects on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530844" start="53855" end="53883" title="List of missions to the Moon" label="List of missions to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644755" start="53886" end="53928" title="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999" label="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="54275" end="54291" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q239221" start="54528" end="54557" title="Lunar and Planetary Institute" label="Lunar and Planetary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893941" start="54616" end="54650" title="Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station" label="Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q752071" start="54884" end="54912" title="Astronomy Picture of the Day" label="Astronomy Picture of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q331778" start="54982" end="54986" title="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="LROC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1971" wikidata="Q180971" url="?curid=1971" title="Apollo 17">
<text>Apollo 17 (December 7–19, 1972) was the eleventh and final mission of NASA&#x27;s Apollo program, the sixth and most recent time humans have set foot on the Moon. Commander Gene Cernan and Lunar Module Pilot Harrison Schmitt walked on the Moon, while Command Module Pilot Ronald Evans orbited above. Schmitt was the only professional geologist to land on the Moon; he was selected in place of Joe Engle, as NASA had been under pressure to send a scientist to the Moon. The mission&#x27;s heavy emphasis on science meant the inclusion of a number of new experiments, including a biological experiment containing five mice that was carried in the command module.

Mission planners had two primary goals in deciding on the landing site: to sample lunar highland material older than that at Mare Imbrium and to investigate the possibility of relatively recent volcanic activity. They therefore selected Taurus–Littrow, where formations that had been viewed and pictured from orbit were thought to be volcanic in nature. Since all three crew members had backed up previous Apollo lunar missions, they were familiar with the Apollo spacecraft and had more time for geology training.

Launched at 12:33 a.m. Eastern Standard Time (EST) on December 7, 1972, following the only launch-pad delay in the Apollo program, which was caused by a hardware problem, Apollo 17 was a &quot;J-type&quot; mission that included three days on the lunar surface, expanded scientific capability, and the use of the third Lunar Roving Vehicle (LRV). Cernan and Schmitt landed in the Taurus–Littrow valley, completed three moonwalks, took lunar samples and deployed scientific instruments. Orange soil was discovered at Shorty crater; it proved to be volcanic in origin, although from early in the Moon&#x27;s history. Evans remained in lunar orbit in the command and service module (CSM), taking scientific measurements and photographs. The spacecraft returned to Earth on December 19.

The mission broke several records for crewed spaceflight, including the longest crewed lunar landing mission (12 days, 14 hours), greatest distance from a spacecraft during an extravehicular activity of any type (7.6 kilometers or 4.7 miles), longest time on the lunar surface (75 hours), longest total duration of lunar-surface extravehicular activities (22 hours, 4 minutes), largest lunar-sample return (approximately 115 kg or 254 lb), longest time in lunar orbit (6 days, 4 hours), and greatest number of lunar orbits (75).

== Crew and key Mission Control personnel ==
In 1969, NASA announced that the backup crew of Apollo 14 would be Gene Cernan, Ronald Evans, and former X-15 pilot Joe Engle. This put them in line to be the prime crew of Apollo 17, because the Apollo program&#x27;s crew rotation generally meant that a backup crew would fly as prime crew three missions later. Harrison Schmitt, who was a professional geologist as well as an astronaut, had served on the backup crew of Apollo 15, and thus, because of the rotation, would have been due to fly as lunar module pilot on Apollo 18.

In September 1970, the plan to launch Apollo 18 was cancelled. The scientific community pressed NASA to assign a geologist, rather than a pilot with non-professional geological training, to an Apollo landing. NASA subsequently assigned Schmitt to Apollo 17 as the lunar module pilot. After that, NASA&#x27;s director of flight crew operations, Deke Slayton, was left with the question of who would fill the two other Apollo 17 slots: the rest of the Apollo 15 backup crew (Dick Gordon and Vance Brand), or Cernan and Evans from the Apollo 14 backup crew. Slayton ultimately chose Cernan and Evans. Support at NASA for assigning Cernan was not unanimous. Cernan had crashed a Bell 47G helicopter into the Indian River near Cape Kennedy during a training exercise in January 1971; the accident was later attributed to pilot error, as Cernan had misjudged his altitude before crashing into the water. Jim McDivitt, who was manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the time, objected to Cernan&#x27;s selection because of this accident, but Slayton dismissed the concern. After Cernan was offered command of the mission, he advocated for Engle to fly with him on the mission, but it was made clear to him that Schmitt would be assigned instead, with or without Cernan, so he acquiesced. The prime crew of Apollo 17 was publicly announced on August 13, 1971.

When assigned to Apollo 17, Cernan was a 38-year-old captain in the United States Navy; he had been selected in the third group of astronauts in 1963, and flown as pilot of Gemini 9A in 1966 and as lunar module pilot of Apollo 10 in 1969 before he served on Apollo 14&#x27;s backup crew. Evans, 39 years old when assigned to Apollo 17, had been selected as part of the fifth group of astronauts in 1966, and had been a lieutenant commander in the United States Navy. Schmitt, a civilian, was 37 years old when assigned Apollo 17, had a doctorate in geology from Harvard University, and had been selected in the fourth group of astronauts in 1965. Both Evans and Schmitt were making their first spaceflights.

For the backup crews of Apollo 16 and 17, the final Apollo lunar missions, NASA selected astronauts who had already flown Apollo lunar missions, to take advantage of their experience, and avoid investing time and money in training rookies who would be unlikely to ever fly an Apollo mission. The original backup crew for Apollo 17, announced at the same time as the prime crew, was the crew of Apollo 15: David Scott as commander, Alfred Worden as CMP and James Irwin as LMP, but in May 1972 they were removed from the backup crew because of their roles in the Apollo 15 postal covers incident. They were replaced with the landing crew of Apollo 16: John W. Young as backup crew commander, Charles Duke as LMP, and Apollo 14&#x27;s CMP, Stuart Roosa. Originally, Apollo 16&#x27;s CMP, Ken Mattingly, was to be assigned along with his crewmates, but he declined so he could spend more time with his family, his son having just been born, and instead took an assignment to the Space Shuttle program. Roosa had also served as backup CMP for Apollo 16.

For the Apollo program, in addition to the prime and backup crews that had been used in the Mercury and Gemini programs, NASA assigned a third crew of astronauts, known as the support crew. Their role was to provide any assistance in preparing for the missions that the missions director assigned then. Preparations took place in meetings at facilities across the US and sometimes needed a member of the flight crew to attend them. Because McDivitt was concerned that problems could be created if a prime or backup crew member was unable to attend a meeting, Slayton created the support crews to ensure that someone would be able to attend in their stead. Usually low in seniority, they also assembled the mission&#x27;s rules, flight plan and checklists, and kept them updated; for Apollo 17, they were Robert F. Overmyer, Robert A. Parker and C. Gordon Fullerton.

Flight directors were Gerry Griffin, first shift, Gene Kranz and Neil B. Hutchinson, second shift, and Pete Frank and Charles R. Lewis, third shift. According to Kranz, flight directors during the program Apollo had a one-sentence job description, &quot;The flight director may take any actions necessary for crew safety and mission success.&quot; Capsule communicators (CAPCOMs) were Fullerton, Parker, Young, Duke, Mattingly, Roosa, Alan Shepard and Joseph P. Allen.

==Mission insignia and call signs==
The insignia&#x27;s most prominent feature is an image of the Greek sun god Apollo backdropped by a rendering of an American eagle, the red bars on the eagle mirroring those on the U.S. flag. Three white stars above the red bars represent the three crewmembers of the mission. The background includes the Moon, the planet Saturn, and a galaxy or nebula. The wing of the eagle partially overlays the Moon, suggesting humanity&#x27;s established presence there.
The insignia includes, along with the colors of the U.S. flag (red, white, and blue), the color gold, representative of a &quot;golden age&quot; of spaceflight that was to begin with Apollo 17. The image of Apollo in the mission insignia is a rendering of the &quot;Apollo Belvedere&quot; sculpture in the Vatican Museums. It looks forward into the future, towards the celestial objects shown in the insignia beyond the Moon. These represent humanity&#x27;s goals, and the image symbolizes human intelligence, wisdom and ambition. The insignia was designed by artist Robert McCall, based on ideas from the crew.

In deciding the call signs for the command module (CM) and lunar module (LM), the crew wished to pay tribute to the American public for their support of the Apollo program, and to the mission, and wanted names with a tradition within American history. The CM was given the call sign &quot;America&quot;. According to Cernan, this evoked the 19th century sailing ships which were given that name, and was a thank-you to the people of the United States. The crew selected the name &quot;Challenger&quot; for the LM in lieu of an alternative, &quot;Heritage&quot;. Cernan stated that the selected name &quot;just seemed to describe more of what the future for America really held, and that was a challenge&quot;. After Schmitt stepped onto the Moon from &quot;Challenger&quot;, he stated, &quot;I think the next generation ought to accept this as a challenge. Let&#x27;s see them leave footprints like these.&quot;

== Planning and training ==

=== Scheduling and landing site selection ===
Prior to the cancellation of Apollo 18 through 20, Apollo 17 was slated to launch in September 1971 as part of NASA&#x27;s tentative launch schedule set forth in 1969. The in-flight abort of Apollo 13 and the resulting modifications to the Apollo spacecraft delayed subsequent missions. Following the cancellation of Apollo 20 in early 1970, NASA decided there would be no more than two Apollo missions per year. Part of the reason Apollo 17 was scheduled for December 1972 was to make it fall after the presidential election in November, ensuring that if there was a disaster, it would have no effect on President Richard Nixon&#x27;s re-election campaign. Nixon had been deeply concerned about the Apollo 13 astronauts, and, fearing another mission in crisis as he ran for re-election, initially decided to omit the funds for Apollo 17 from the budget; he was persuaded to accept a December 1972 date for the mission.

Like Apollo 15 and 16, Apollo 17 was slated to be a &quot;J-mission&quot;, an Apollo mission type that featured lunar surface stays of three days, higher scientific capability, and the usage of the Lunar Roving Vehicle. Since Apollo 17 was to be the final lunar landing of the Apollo program, high-priority landing sites that had not been visited previously were given consideration for potential exploration. Some sites were rejected at earlier stages. For instance, a landing in the crater Copernicus was rejected because Apollo 12 had already obtained samples from that impact, and three other Apollo expeditions had already visited the vicinity of Mare Imbrium, near the rim of which Copernicus is located. The lunar highlands near the crater Tycho were rejected because of the rough terrain that the astronauts would encounter there. A site on the lunar far side in the crater Tsiolkovskiy was rejected due to technical considerations and the operational costs of maintaining communication with Earth during surface operations. Lastly, a landing in a region southwest of Mare Crisium was rejected on the grounds that a Soviet spacecraft could easily access the site and retrieve samples; Luna 20 ultimately did so shortly after the Apollo 17 site selection was made. Schmitt advocated for a landing on the far side of the Moon until told by Director of Flight Operations Christopher C. Kraft that it would not happen as NASA lacked the funds for the necessary communications satellites.
The three sites that made the final consideration for Apollo 17 were Alphonsus crater, Gassendi crater, and the Taurus–Littrow valley. In making the final landing site decision, mission planners considered the primary objectives for Apollo 17: obtaining old highlands material a substantial distance from Mare Imbrium, sampling material from young volcanic activity (i.e., less than three billion years), and having minimal ground overlap with the orbital ground tracks of Apollo 15 and Apollo 16 to maximize the amount of new data obtained. A significant reason for the selection of Taurus–Littrow was that Apollo 15&#x27;s CMP, Al Worden, had overflown the site and observed features he described as likely volcanic in nature.

Gassendi was eliminated because NASA felt that its central peak would be difficult to reach due to the roughness of the local terrain, and, though Alphonsus might be easier operationally than Taurus–Littrow, it was of lesser scientific interest. At Taurus–Littrow, it was believed that the crew would be able to obtain samples of old highland material from the remnants of a landslide event that occurred on the south wall of the valley and the possibility of relatively young, explosive volcanic activity in the area. Although the valley is similar to the landing site of Apollo 15 in that it is on the border of a lunar mare, the advantages of Taurus–Littrow were believed to outweigh the drawbacks. The Apollo Site Selection Board, a committee of NASA personnel and scientists charged with setting out scientific objectives of the Apollo landing missions and selecting landing sites for them, unanimously recommended Taurus–Littrow at its final meeting in February 1972. Upon that recommendation, NASA selected Taurus–Littrow as the landing site for Apollo 17.

=== Training ===
As with previous lunar landings, the Apollo 17 astronauts undertook an extensive training program that included learning to collect samples on the surface, usage of the spacesuits, navigation in the Lunar Roving Vehicle, field geology training, survival training, splashdown and recovery training, and equipment training. The geology field trips were conducted as much as possible as if the astronauts were on the Moon: they would be provided with aerial images and maps, and briefed on features of the site and a suggested routing. The following day, they would follow the route, and have tasks and observations to be done at each of the stops.

The geology field trips began with one to Big Bend National Park in Texas in October 1971. The early ones were not specifically tailored to prepare the astronauts for Taurus–Littrow, which was not selected until February 1972, but by June, the astronauts were going on field trips to sites specifically selected to prepare for Apollo 17&#x27;s landing site. Both Cernan and Schmitt had served on backup crews for Apollo landing missions, and were familiar with many of the procedures. Their trainers, such as Gordon Swann, feared that Cernan would defer to Schmitt as a professional geologist on matters within his field. Cernan also had to adjust for the loss of Engle, with whom he had trained for Apollo 14. In spite of these issues, Cernan and Schmitt worked well together as a team, and Cernan became adept at describing what he was seeing on geology field trips, and working independently of Schmitt when necessary.

The landing crew aimed for a division of labor so that, when they arrived in a new area, Cernan would perform tasks such as adjusting the antenna on the Lunar Roving Vehicle so as to transmit to Earth while Schmitt gave a report on the geological aspects of the site. The scientists in the geology &quot;backroom&quot; relied on Schmitt&#x27;s reports to adjust the tasks planned for that site, which would be transmitted to the CapCom and then to Cernan and Schmitt. According to William R. Muehlberger, one of the scientists who trained the astronauts, &quot;In effect [Schmitt] was running the mission from the Moon. But we set it up this way. All of those within the geological world certainly knew it, and I had a sneaking hunch that the top brass knew it too, but this is a practical way out, and they didn&#x27;t object.&quot;

Also participating in some of the geology field trips were the commander and lunar module pilot of the backup crew. The initial field trips took place before the Apollo 15 astronauts were assigned as the backup crew for Apollo 17 in February 1972. Either one or both of Scott and Irwin of Apollo 15 took part in four field trips, though both were present together for only two of them. After they were removed from the backup crew, the new backup commander and LMP, Young and Duke, took part in the final four field trips. On field trips, the backup crew would follow half an hour after the prime crew, performing identical tasks, and have their own simulated CapCom and Mission Control guiding them. The Apollo 17 astronauts had fourteen field trips—the Apollo 11 crew had only one.

Evans did not go on the geology field trips, having his own set of trainers—by this time, geology training for the CMP was well-established. He would fly with a NASA geologist/pilot, Dick Laidley, over geologic features, with part of the exercise conducted at , and part at to . The higher altitude was equivalent to what could be seen from the planned lunar orbit of about 60 nmi with binoculars. Evans would be briefed for several hours before each exercise, and given study guides; afterwards, there would be debriefing and evaluation. Evans was trained in lunar geology by Farouk El-Baz late in the training cycle; this continued until close to launch. The CMP was given information regarding the lunar features he would overfly in the CSM and which he was expected to photograph.

== Mission hardware and experiments ==
=== Spacecraft and launch vehicle ===
The Apollo 17 spacecraft comprised CSM-114 (consisting of Command Module 114 (CM-114) and Service Module 114 (SM-114)); Lunar Module 12 (LM-12); a Spacecraft-Lunar Module Adapter (SLA) numbered SLA-21; and a Launch Escape System (LES). The LES contained a rocket motor that would propel the CM to safety in the event of an aborted mission in the moments after launch, while the SLA housed the LM during the launch and early part of the flight. The LES was jettisoned after the launch vehicle ascended to the point that it was not needed, while the SLA was left atop the S-IVB third stage of the rocket after the CSM and LM separated from it.

The launch vehicle, SA-512, was one of fifteen Saturn V rockets built, and was the twelfth to fly. With a weight at launch of ( of which was attributable to the spacecraft), Apollo 17&#x27;s vehicle was slightly lighter than Apollo 16, but heavier than every other crewed Apollo mission.

====Preparation and assembly====
The first piece of the launch vehicle to arrive at Kennedy Space Center was the S-II second stage, on October 27, 1970; it was followed by the S-IVB on December 21; the S-IC first stage did not arrive until May 11, 1972, followed by the Instrument Unit on June 7. By then, LM-12 had arrived, the ascent stage on June 16, 1971, and the descent stage the following day; they were not mated until May 18, 1972. CM-114, SM-114 and SLA-21 all arrived on March 24, 1972. The rover reached Kennedy Space Center on June 2, 1972.
The CM and the service module (SM) were mated on March 28, 1972, and the testing of the spacecraft began that month. The CSM was placed in a vacuum chamber at Kennedy Space Center, and the testing was conducted under those conditions. The LM was also placed in a vacuum chamber; both the prime and the backup crews participated in testing the CSM and LM. During the testing, it was discovered that the LM&#x27;s rendezvous radar assembly had received too much voltage during earlier tests; it was replaced by the manufacturer, Grumman. The LM&#x27;s landing radar also malfunctioned intermittently and was also replaced. The front and rear steering motors of the Lunar Roving Vehicle (LRV) also had to be replaced, and it required several modifications. Following the July 1972 removal from the vacuum chamber, the LM&#x27;s landing gear was installed, and it, the CSM and the SLA were mated to each other. The combined craft was moved into the Vehicle Assembly Building in August for further testing, after which it was mounted on the launch vehicle. After completing testing, including a simulated mission, the LRV was placed in the LM on August 13.

Erection of the stages of the launch vehicle began on May 15, 1972, in High Bay 3 of the Vehicle Assembly Building, and was completed on June 27. Since the launch vehicles for Skylab 1 and Skylab 2 were being processed in that building at the same time, this marked the first time NASA had three launch vehicles there since the height of the Apollo program in 1969. After the spacecraft was mounted on the launch vehicle on August 24, it was rolled out to Pad 39-A on August 28. Although this was not the final time a Saturn V would fly (another would lift Skylab to orbit), area residents reacted as though it was, and 5,000 of them watched the rollout, during which the prime crew joined the operating crew from Bendix atop the crawler.

At Pad 39-A, testing continued, and the CSM was electrically mated to the launch vehicle on October 11, 1972. Testing concluded with the countdown demonstration tests, accomplished on November 20 and 21. The countdown to launch began at 7:53 a.m. (12:53 UTC) on December 5, 1972.

===Lunar surface science===

==== ALSEP ====
The Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package was a suite of nuclear-powered experiments, flown on each landing mission after Apollo 11. This equipment was to be emplaced by the astronauts to continue functioning after the astronauts returned to Earth. For Apollo 17, the ALSEP experiments were a Heat Flow Experiment (HFE), to measure the rate of heat flow from the interior of the Moon, a Lunar Surface Gravimeter (LSG), to measure alterations in the lunar gravity field at the site, a Lunar Atmospheric Composition Experiment (LACE), to investigate what the lunar atmosphere is made up of, a Lunar Seismic Profiling Experiment (LSPE), to detect nearby seismic activity, and a Lunar Ejecta and Meteorites Experiment (LEME), to measure the velocity and energy of dust particles. Of these, only the HFE had been flown before; the others were new.

The HFE had been flown on the aborted Apollo 13 mission, as well as on Apollo 15 and 16, but placed successfully only on Apollo 15, and unexpected results from that device made scientists anxious for a second successful emplacement. It was successfully deployed on Apollo 17. The lunar gravimeter was intended to detect wavers in gravity, which would provide support for Albert Einstein&#x27;s general theory of relativity; it ultimately failed to function as intended. The LACE was a surface-deployed module that used a mass spectrometer to analyze the Moon&#x27;s atmosphere. On previous missions, the Code Cathode Gauge experiment had measured the quantity of atmospheric particles, but the LACE determined which gases were present: principally neon, helium and hydrogen. The LSPE was a seismic-detecting device that used geophones, which would detect explosives to be set off by ground command once the astronauts left the Moon. When operating, it could only send useful data to Earth in high bit rate, meaning that no other ALSEP experiment could send data then, and limiting its operating time. It was turned on to detect the liftoff of the ascent stage, as well as use of the explosives packages, and the ascent stage&#x27;s impact, and thereafter about once a week, as well as for some 100 hour periods. The LEME had a set of detectors to measure the characteristics of the dust particles it sought. It was hoped that the LEME would detect dust impacting the Moon from elsewhere, such as from comets or interstellar space, but analysis showed that it primarily detected dust moving at slow speeds across the lunar surface.

All powered ALSEP experiments that remained active were deactivated on September 30, 1977, principally because of budgetary constraints.

==== Other lunar-surface science ====
Like Apollo 15 and 16, Apollo 17 carried a Lunar Roving Vehicle. In addition to being used by the astronauts for transport from station to station on the mission&#x27;s three moonwalks, the LRV was used to transport the astronauts&#x27; tools, communications equipment, and the lunar samples they gathered. The Apollo 17 LRV was also used to carry some of the scientific instruments, such as the Traverse Gravimeter Experiment (TGE) and Surface Electrical Properties (SEP) experiment. The Apollo 17 LRV traveled a cumulative distance of approximately in a total drive time of about four hours and twenty-six minutes; the greatest distance Cernan and Schmitt traveled from the lunar module was about .

This was the only mission to carry the TGE, which was built by Draper Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. As gravimeters had been useful in studying the Earth&#x27;s internal structure, the objective of this experiment was to do the same on the Moon. The gravimeter was used to obtain relative gravity measurements at the landing site in the immediate vicinity of the lunar module, as well as various locations on the mission&#x27;s traverse routes. Scientists would then use this data to help determine the geological substructure of the landing site and the surrounding vicinity. Measurements were taken while the TGE was mounted on the LRV, and also while the device was placed on the lunar surface. A total of 26 measurements were taken with the TGE during the mission&#x27;s three moonwalks, with productive results.

The SEP was also unique to Apollo 17, and included two major components: a transmitting antenna deployed near the lunar module and a receiver mounted on the LRV. At different stops during the mission&#x27;s traverses, electrical signals traveled from the transmitting device, through the ground, and were received at the LRV. The electrical properties of the lunar regolith could be determined by comparison of the transmitted and received electrical signals. The results of this experiment, which are consistent with lunar rock composition, show that there is almost no water in the area of the Moon in which Apollo 17 landed, to a depth of .

A long, diameter device, the Lunar Neutron Probe was inserted into one of the holes drilled into the surface to collect core samples. It was designed to measure the quantity of neutrons which penetrated to the detectors it bore along its length. This was intended to measure the rate of the &quot;gardening&quot; process on the lunar surface, whereby the regolith on the surface is slowly mixed or buried due to micrometeorites and other events. Placed during the first EVA, it was retrieved during the third and final EVA. The astronauts brought it with them back to Earth, and the measurements from it were compared with the evidence of neutron flux in the core that had been removed from the hole it had been placed in. Results from the probe and from the cores were instrumental in current theories that the top centimeter of lunar regolith turns over every million years, whereas &quot;gardening&quot; to a depth of one meter takes about a billion years.

===Orbital science===

==== Biological experiments ====
Apollo 17&#x27;s CM carried a biological cosmic ray experiment (BIOCORE), containing five mice that had been implanted with radiation monitors under their scalps to see whether they suffered damage from cosmic rays. These animals were placed in individual metal tubes inside a sealed container that had its own oxygen supply, and flown on the mission. All five were pocket mice (&quot;Perognathus longimembris&quot;); this species was chosen because it was well-documented, small, easy to maintain in an isolated state (not requiring drinking water during the mission and with highly concentrated waste), and for its ability to withstand environmental stress. Officially, the mice—four male and one female—were assigned the identification numbers A3326, A3400, A3305, A3356 and A3352. Unofficially, according to Cernan, the Apollo 17 crew dubbed them Fe, Fi, Fo, Fum, and Phooey.

Four of the five mice survived the flight, though only two of them appeared healthy and active; the cause of death of the fifth mouse was not determined. Of those that survived, the study found lesions in the scalp itself and, in one case, the liver. The scalp lesions and liver lesions appeared to be unrelated to one another; nothing was found that could be attributed to cosmic rays.

The Biostack experiment was similar to one carried on Apollo 16, and was designed to test the effects of the cosmic rays encountered in space travel on microorganisms that were included, on seeds, and on the eggs of simple animals (brine shrimp and beetles), which were carried in a sealed container. After the mission, the microorganisms and seeds showed little effect, but many of the eggs of all species failed to hatch, or to mature normally; many died or displayed abnormalities.

==== Scientific Instrument Module ====
The Apollo 17 SM contained the scientific instrument module (SIM) bay. The SIM bay housed three new experiments for use in lunar orbit: a lunar sounder, an infrared scanning radiometer, and a far-ultraviolet spectrometer. A mapping camera, panoramic camera, and a laser altimeter, which had been carried previously, were also included in the SIM bay.

The lunar sounder was to beam electromagnetic impulses toward the lunar surface, which were designed with the objective of obtaining data to assist in developing a geological model of the interior of the Moon to an approximate depth of . The infrared scanning radiometer was designed with the objective of generating a temperature map of the lunar surface to aid in locating surface features such as rock fields, structural differences in the lunar crust, and volcanic activity. The far-ultraviolet spectrometer was to be used to obtain information on the composition, density, and constituency of the lunar atmosphere. The spectrometer was also designed to detect far-UV radiation emitted by the Sun that had been reflected off the lunar surface. The laser altimeter was designed to measure the altitude of the spacecraft above the lunar surface within approximately , providing altitude information to the panoramic and mapping cameras, which were also in the SIM bay.

==== Light-flash phenomenon and other experiments ====
Beginning with Apollo 11, crew members observed light flashes that penetrated their closed eyelids. These flashes, described by the astronauts as &quot;streaks&quot; or &quot;specks&quot; of light, were usually observed while the spacecraft was darkened during a sleep period. These flashes, while not observed on the lunar surface, would average about two per minute and were observed by the crew members during the trip out to the Moon, back to Earth, and in lunar orbit.

The Apollo 17 crew repeated an experiment, also conducted on Apollo 16, with the objective of linking these light flashes with cosmic rays. Evans wore a device over his eyes that recorded the time, strength, and path of high-energy atomic particles that penetrated the device, while the other two wore blindfolds to keep out light. Investigators concluded that the available evidence supports the hypothesis that these flashes occur when charged particles travel through the retina in the eye.

Apollo 17 carried a sodium-iodide crystal identical to the ones in the gamma-ray spectrometer flown on Apollo 15 and 16. Data from this, once it was examined on Earth, was to be used to help form a baseline, allowing for subtraction of rays from the CM or from cosmic radiation to gain better data from the earlier results. In addition, the S-band transponders in the CSM and LM were pointed at the Moon to gain data on its gravitational field. Results from the Lunar Orbiter probes had revealed that lunar gravity varies slightly due to the presence of mass concentrations, or &quot;mascons&quot;. Data from the missions, and from the lunar subsatellites left by Apollo 15 and 16, were used to map such variations in lunar gravity.

== Mission events ==

=== Launch and outbound trip ===
Originally planned to launch on December 6, 1972, at 9:53 p.m. EST (2:53 a.m. on December 7 UTC), Apollo 17 was the final crewed SaturnV launch, and the only one to occur at night. The launch was delayed by two hours and forty minutes due to an automatic cutoff in the launch sequencer at the T−30 second mark in the countdown. The cause of the problem was quickly determined to be the launch sequencer&#x27;s failure to automatically pressurize the liquid oxygen tank in the third stage of the rocket; although launch control noticed this and manually caused the tank to pressurize, the sequencer did not recognize the fix and therefore paused the countdown. The clock was reset and held at the T−22 minute mark while technicians worked around the malfunction in order to continue with the launch. This pause was the only launch delay in the Apollo program caused by a hardware problem. The countdown then resumed, and the liftoff occurred at 12:33 a.m. EST on December 7, 1972. The launch window, which had begun at the originally planned launch time of 9:53 p.m. on December 6, remained open until 1:31 a.m., the latest time at which a launch could have occurred during the December 6–7 window.

Approximately 500,000 people observed the launch in the immediate vicinity of Kennedy Space Center, despite the early-morning hour. The launch was visible as far away as , and observers in Miami, Florida, reported a &quot;red streak&quot; crossing the northern sky. Among those in attendance at the program&#x27;s final launch were astronauts Neil Armstrong and Dick Gordon, as well as centenarian Charlie Smith, who alleged he was 130 years old at the time of Apollo 17.

The ascent resulted in an orbit with an altitude and velocity almost exactly that which had been planned. In the hours following the launch, Apollo 17 orbited the Earth while the crew spent time monitoring and checking the spacecraft to ensure its readiness to depart Earth orbit. At 3:46 a.m. EST, the S-IVB third stage was reignited for the 351-second trans-lunar injection burn to propel the spacecraft towards the Moon. Ground controllers chose a faster trajectory for Apollo 17 than originally planned to allow the vehicle to reach lunar orbit at the planned time, despite the launch delay. The Command and Service Module separated from the S-IVB approximately half an hour following the S-IVB trans-lunar injection burn, after which Evans turned the spacecraft to face the LM, still attached to the S-IVB. The CSM then docked with the LM and extracted it from the S-IVB. Following the LM extraction, Mission Control programmed the S-IVB, no longer needed to propel the spacecraft, to impact the Moon and trip the seismometers left by prior Apollo crews. It struck the Moon just under 87 hours into the mission, triggering the seismometers from Apollo 12, 14, 15 and 16. Approximately nine hours after launch, the crew concluded the mission&#x27;s first day with a sleep period, until waking up to begin the second day.
Mission Control and the crew decided to shorten the mission&#x27;s second day, the first full day in space, in order to adjust the crew&#x27;s wake-up times for the subsequent days in preparation for an early morning (EST) wake-up time on the day of the lunar landing, then scheduled for early afternoon (EST). This was done since the first day of the mission had been extended because of the launch delay. Following the second rest period, and on the third day of the mission, the crew executed the first mid-course correction, a two-second burn of the CSM&#x27;s service propulsion engine to adjust the spacecraft&#x27;s Moon-bound trajectory. Following the burn, the crew opened the hatch separating the CSM and LM in order to check the LM&#x27;s systems and concluded that they were nominal. So that events would take place at the time indicated in the flight plan, the mission clocks were moved ahead by 2 hours and 40 minutes, the amount of the launch delay, with one hour of it at 45:00:00 into the mission and the remainder at 65:00:00.

Among their other activities during the outbound trip, the crew photographed the Earth from the spacecraft as it travelled towards the Moon. One of these photographs is now known as &quot;The Blue Marble&quot;. The crew found that one of the latches holding the CSM and LM together was unlatched. While Schmitt and Cernan were engaged in a second period of LM housekeeping beginning just before sixty hours into the Mission, Evans worked on the balky latch. He was successful, and left it in the position it would need to be in for the CSM-LM docking that would occur upon return from the lunar surface.

Also during the outward journey, the crew performed a heat flow and convection demonstration, as well as the Apollo light-flash experiment. A few hours before entry into lunar orbit, the SIM door on the SM was jettisoned. At approximately 2:47 p.m. EST on December 10, the service propulsion system engine on the CSM ignited to slow down the CSM/LM stack into lunar orbit. Following orbit insertion and orbital stabilization, the crew began preparations for the landing at Taurus–Littrow.

=== Lunar landing ===

The day of the landing began with a checkout of the Lunar Module&#x27;s systems, which revealed no problems preventing continuation of the mission. Cernan, Evans, and Schmitt each donned their spacesuits, and Cernan and Schmitt entered the LM in preparation for separating from the CSM and landing. The LM undocked from the CSM, and the two spacecraft orbited close together for about an hour and a half while the astronauts made visual inspections and conducted their final pre-landing checks. After finally separating from the CSM, the LM &quot;Challenger&quot; and its crew of two adjusted their orbit, such that its lowest point would pass about above the landing site, and began preparations for the descent to Taurus–Littrow. While Cernan and Schmitt prepared for landing, Evans remained in orbit to take observations, perform experiments and await the return of his crewmates a few days later.

Soon after completing their preparations for landing and just over two hours following the LM&#x27;s undocking from the CSM, Cernan and Schmitt began their descent to the Taurus–Littrow valley on the lunar surface with the ignition of the Lunar Module&#x27;s descent propulsion system (DPS) engine. Approximately ten minutes later, as planned, the LM pitched over, giving Cernan and Schmitt their first look at the landing site during the descent phase and allowing Cernan to guide the spacecraft to a desirable landing target while Schmitt provided data from the flight computer essential for landing. The LM touched down on the lunar surface at 2:55 p.m. EST on December 11, just over twelve minutes after DPS ignition. &quot;Challenger&quot; landed about east of the planned landing point. Shortly thereafter, the two astronauts began re-configuring the LM for their stay on the surface and began preparations for the first moonwalk of the mission, or EVA-1.

=== Lunar surface ===

====First EVA====
During their approximately 75-hour stay on the lunar surface, Cernan and Schmitt performed three moonwalks (EVAs). The astronauts deployed the LRV, then emplaced the ALSEP and the seismic explosive charges. They drove the rover to nine planned geological-survey stations to collect samples and make observations. Additionally, twelve short sampling stops were made at Schmitt&#x27;s discretion while riding the rover, during which the astronauts used a handled scoop to get a sample, without dismounting. During lunar-surface operations, Commander Cernan always drove the rover, while Lunar Module Pilot Schmitt was a passenger who assisted with navigation. This division of responsibilities between the two crew positions was used consistently throughout Apollo&#x27;s J-missions.

The first lunar excursion began four hours after landing, at 6:54 p.m. EST on December 11. After exiting through the hatch of the LM and descending the ladder to the footpad, Cernan took the first step on the lunar surface of the mission. Just before doing so, Cernan remarked, &quot;I&#x27;m on the footpad. And, Houston, as I step off at the surface at Taurus–Littrow, we&#x27;d like to dedicate the first step of Apollo 17 to all those who made it possible.&quot; After Cernan surveyed the exterior of the LM and commented on the immediate landing site, Schmitt joined Cernan on the surface. The first task was to offload the rover and other equipment from the LM. While working near the rover, Cernan caught his hammer under the right-rear fender extension, accidentally breaking it off. A similar incident occurred on Apollo 16 as John Young maneuvered around the rover. Although this was not a mission-critical issue, the loss of the part caused Cernan and Schmitt to be covered with dust stirred up when the rover was in motion. The crew made a short-lived fix using duct tape at the beginning of the second EVA, attaching a paper map to the damaged fender. Lunar dust stuck to the tape&#x27;s surface, however, preventing it from adhering properly. Following deployment and testing the maneuverability of the rover, the crew deployed the ALSEP just west of the landing site. The ALSEP deployment took longer than had been planned, with the drilling of core holes presenting some difficulty, meaning the geological portion of the first EVA would need to be shortened, cancelling a planned visit to Emory crater. Instead, following the deployment of the ALSEP, Cernan and Schmitt drove to Steno crater, to the south of the landing site. The objective at Steno was to sample the subsurface material excavated by the impact that formed the crater. The astronauts gathered of samples, took seven gravimeter measurements, and deployed two explosive packages. The explosive packages were later detonated remotely; the resulting explosions detected by geophones placed by the astronauts and also by seismometers left during previous missions. The first EVA ended after seven hours and twelve minutes. and the astronauts remained in the pressurized LM for the next 17 hours.

====Second EVA====

On December 12, awakened by a recording of &quot;Ride of the Valkyries&quot; played from Mission Control, Cernan and Schmitt began their second lunar excursion. The first order of business was to provide the rover&#x27;s fender a better fix. Overnight, the flight controllers devised a procedure communicated by John Young: taping together four stiff paper maps to form a &quot;replacement fender extension&quot; and then clamping it onto the fender. The astronauts carried out the new fix which did its job without failing until near the end of the third excursion. Cernan and Schmitt then departed for station 2—Nansen Crater, at the foot of the South Massif. When they arrived, their range from the &quot;Challenger&quot; was 7.6 kilometers (4.7 miles, 25,029 feet). This remains the furthest distance any spacefarers have ever traveled away from the safety of a pressurizable spacecraft while on a planetary body, and also during an EVA of any type. The astronauts were at the extremity of their &quot;walkback limit&quot;, a safety constraint meant to ensure that they could walk back to the LM if the rover failed. They began a return trip, traveling northeast in the rover.

At station 3, Schmitt fell to the ground while working, looking so awkward that Parker jokingly told him that NASA&#x27;s switchboard had lit up seeking Schmitt&#x27;s services for Houston&#x27;s ballet group, and the site of station 3 was in 2019 renamed Ballet Crater. Cernan took a sample at Station 3 that was to be maintained in vacuum until better analytical techniques became available, joking with the CAPCOM, Parker, about placing a note inside. The container remained unopened until 2022.

Stopping at station 4—Shorty crater—the astronauts discovered orange soil, which proved to be very small beads of volcanic glass formed over 3.5 billion years ago. This discovery caused great excitement among the scientists at Mission Control, who felt that the astronauts may have discovered a volcanic vent. However, post-mission sample analysis revealed that Shorty is not a volcanic vent, but rather an impact crater. Analysis also found the orange soil to be a remnant of a lava fountain. This lava fountain sprayed molten lava high into the lunar sky in the Moon&#x27;s early days, some 3.5 billion years ago and long before Shorty&#x27;s creation. The orange volcanic beads were droplets of molten lava from the fountain that solidified and were buried by lava deposits until exposed by the impact that formed Shorty, less than 20 million years ago.

The final stop before returning to the LM was Camelot crater; throughout the sojourn, the astronauts collected of samples, took another seven gravimeter measurements, and deployed three more explosive packages. Concluding the EVA at seven hours and thirty-seven minutes, Cernan and Schmitt had completed the longest-duration EVA in history to-date, traveling further away from a spacecraft and covering more ground on a planetary body during a single EVA than any other spacefarers. The improvised fender had remained intact throughout, causing the president of the &quot;Auto Body Association of America&quot; to award them honorary lifetime membership.

====Third EVA==== 

The third moonwalk, the last of the Apollo program, began at 5:25 p.m. EST on December 13. Cernan and Schmitt rode the rover northeast of the landing site, exploring the base of the North Massif and the Sculptured Hills. Stopping at station 6, they examined a house-sized split boulder dubbed Tracy&#x27;s Rock (or Split Rock), after Cernan&#x27;s daughter. The ninth and final planned station was conducted at Van Serg crater. The crew collected of lunar samples and took another nine gravimeter measurements. Schmitt had seen a fine-grained rock, unusual for that vicinity, earlier in the mission and had stood it on its edge; before closing out the EVA, he went and got it. Subsequently, designated Sample 70215, it was, at , the largest rock brought back by Apollo 17. A small piece of it is on exhibit at the Smithsonian Institution, one of the few rocks from the Moon that the public may touch. Schmitt also collected a sample, designated as Sample 76535, at geology station 6 near the base of the North Massif; the sample, a troctolite, was later identified as the oldest known &quot;unshocked&quot; lunar rock, meaning it has not been damaged by high-impact geological events. Scientists have therefore used Sample 76535 in thermochronological studies to determine if the Moon formed a metallic core or, as study results suggest, a core dynamo.

Before concluding the moonwalk, the crew collected a breccia rock, dedicating it to the nations of Earth, 70 of which were represented by students touring the U.S. and present in Mission Control Center in Houston, Texas, at the time. Portions of this sample, known as the Friendship Rock, were subsequently distributed to the nations represented by the students. A plaque located on the LM, commemorating the achievements made during the Apollo program, was then unveiled. Before reentering the LM for the final time, Cernan remarked,

Cernan then followed Schmitt into the LM; the final lunar excursion had a duration of seven hours and fifteen minutes. Following closing of the LM hatch and repressurization of the LM cabin, Cernan and Schmitt removed their spacesuits and reconfigured the cabin for a final rest period on the lunar surface. As they did following each of the previous two EVAs, Cernan and Schmitt discussed their geological observations from the day&#x27;s excursion with mission control while preparing to rest.

=== Solo activities ===
While Cernan and Schmitt were on the lunar surface, Evans remained alone in the CSM in lunar orbit and was assigned a number of observational and scientific tasks to perform while awaiting the return of his crewmates. In addition to the operation of the various orbital science equipment contained in the CSM&#x27;s SIM bay, Evans conducted both visual and photographic observation of surface features from his aerial vantage point. The orbit of the CSM having been modified to an elliptical orbit in preparation for the LM&#x27;s departure and eventual descent, one of Evans&#x27; solo tasks in the CSM was to circularize its orbit such that the CSM would remain at approximately the same distance above the surface throughout its orbit. Evans observed geological features visible to him and used handheld cameras to record certain visual targets. Evans also observed and sketched the solar corona at &quot;sunrise,&quot; or the period of time during which the CSM would pass from the darkened portion of the Moon to the illuminated portion when the Moon itself mostly obscured the sun. To photograph portions of the surface that were not illuminated by the sun while Evans passed over them, Evans relied in conjunction on exposure and Earthlight. Evans photographed such features as the craters Eratosthenes and Copernicus, as well as the vicinity of Mare Orientale, using this technique. According to the Apollo 17 Mission Report, Evans was able to capture all scientific photographic targets, as well as some other targets of interest.
Similarly to the crew of Apollo 16, Evans (as well as Schmitt, while in lunar orbit) reported seeing light &quot;flashes&quot; apparently originating from the lunar surface, known as transient lunar phenomena (TLP); Evans reported seeing these &quot;flashes&quot; in the vicinity of Grimaldi crater and Mare Orientale. The causes of TLP are not well-understood and, though inconclusive as an explanation, both of the sites in which Evans reported seeing TLP are the general locations of outgassing from the Moon&#x27;s interior. Meteorite impacts are another possible explanation.

The flight plan kept Evans busy, making him so tired he overslept one morning by an hour, despite the efforts of Mission Control to awaken him. Before the LM departed for the lunar surface, Evans had discovered that he had misplaced his pair of scissors, necessary to open food packets. Cernan and Schmitt lent him one of theirs. The instruments in the SIM bay functioned without significant hindrance during the orbital portion of the mission, though the lunar sounder and the mapping camera encountered minor problems. Evans spent approximately 148 total hours in lunar orbit, including solo time and time spent together with Cernan and Schmitt, which is more time than any other individual has spent orbiting the Moon.

Evans was also responsible for piloting the CSM during the orbital phase of the mission, maneuvering the spacecraft to alter and maintain its orbital trajectory. In addition to the initial orbital recircularization maneuver shortly after the LM&#x27;s departure, one of the solo activities Evans performed in the CSM in preparation for the return of his crewmates from the lunar surface was the plane change maneuver. This maneuver was meant to align the CSM&#x27;s trajectory to the eventual trajectory of the LM to facilitate rendezvous in orbit. Evans fired the SPS engine of the CSM for about 20 seconds in successfully adjusting the CSM&#x27;s orbital plane.

=== Return to Earth ===
Cernan and Schmitt lifted off from the lunar surface in the ascent stage of the LM on December14, at 5:54 p.m. EST. The return to lunar orbit took just over seven minutes. The LM, piloted by Cernan, and the CSM, piloted by Evans, maneuvered, and redocked about two hours after liftoff from the surface. After docking, the crew transferred equipment and lunar samples from the LM to the CSM for return to Earth. The crew sealed the hatches between the CSM and the LM ascent stage following completion of the transfer and the LM was jettisoned at 11:51 p.m. EST on December14. The unoccupied ascent stage was then remotely deorbited, crashing it into the Moon with an impact recorded by the seismometers left by Apollo 17 and previous missions. At 6:35 p.m. EST on December16, the CSM&#x27;s SPS engine was ignited once more to propel the spacecraft away from the Moon on a trajectory back towards Earth. The trans-Earth injection SPS burn lasted just over two minutes.

During the return to Earth, Evans performed a 65-minute EVA to retrieve film cassettes from the service module&#x27;s SIM bay, with assistance from Schmitt who remained at the command module&#x27;s hatch. At approximately 160,000 nautical miles (184,000 mi; 296,000 km) from Earth, it was the third &quot;deep space&quot; EVA in history, performed at great distance from any planetary body. As of , it remains one of only three such EVAs, all performed during Apollo&#x27;s J-missions under similar circumstances. It was the last EVA of the Apollo program.

During the trip back to Earth, the crew operated the infrared radiometer in the SM, as well as the ultraviolet spectrometer. One midcourse correction was performed, lasting 9 seconds. On December 19, the crew jettisoned the no-longer-needed SM, leaving only the CM for return to Earth. The Apollo 17 spacecraft reentered Earth&#x27;s atmosphere and splashed down safely in the Pacific Ocean at 2:25 p.m. EST, from the recovery ship, . Cernan, Evans, and Schmitt were then retrieved by a recovery helicopter piloted by Commander Edward E. Dahill, III and were safe aboard the recovery ship 52 minutes after splashdown. As the final Apollo mission concluded successfully, Mission Control in Houston was filled with many former flight controllers and astronauts, who applauded as &quot;America&quot; returned to Earth.

== Aftermath and spacecraft locations ==

Following their mission, the crew undertook both domestic and international tours, visiting 29 states and 11 countries. The tour kicked off at Super Bowl VII, with the crew leading the crowd in the Pledge of Allegiance; the CM &quot;America&quot; was also displayed during the pregame activities.

None of the Apollo 17 astronauts flew in space again. Cernan retired from NASA and the Navy in 1976. He died in 2017. Evans retired from the Navy in 1976 and from NASA in 1977, entering the private sector. He died in 1990. Schmitt resigned from NASA in 1975 prior to his successful run for a United States Senate seat from New Mexico in 1976. There, he served one six-year term.

The Command Module &quot;America&quot; is currently on display at Space Center Houston at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The ascent stage of Lunar Module &quot;Challenger&quot; impacted the Moon on December 15, 1972, at 06:50:20.8 UTC (1:50 a.m. EST), at . The descent stage remains on the Moon at the landing site, . In 2023, a study of Apollo-era data from the Lunar Seismic Profiling Experiment showed that the descent stage was causing very slight tremors each lunar morning as components expanded in the heat.

Eugene Cernan&#x27;s flown Apollo 17 spacesuit is in the collection of the Smithsonian&#x27;s National Air and Space Museum (NASM), where it was transferred in 1974, and Harrison Schmitt&#x27;s is in storage at NASM&#x27;s Paul E. Garber Facility. Amanda Young of NASM indicated in 2004 that Schmitt&#x27;s suit is in the best condition of the flown Apollo lunar spacesuits, and therefore is not on public display. Ron Evans&#x27; spacesuit was also transferred from NASA in 1974 to the collection of the NASM; it remains in storage.

Since Apollo 17&#x27;s return, there have been attempts to photograph the landing site, where the LM&#x27;s descent stage, LRV and some other mission hardware, remain. In 2009 and again in 2011, the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter photographed the landing site from increasingly low orbits. At least one group has indicated an intention to visit the site as well; in 2018, the German space company PTScientists said that it planned to land two lunar rovers nearby.

==Gallery==
== See also ==

* List of Apollo missions
* List of missions to the Moon
* List of astronauts by year of selection
* List of human spaceflights
* List of human spaceflight programs
* List of landings on extraterrestrial bodies
* List of crewed spacecraft
* List of NASA missions
* List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999
* Moon landing
* &quot;The Case of the Missing Moon Rocks&quot;
* Apollo in Real Time

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Apollo 17 Traverses, 43D1S2(25), Lunar Photomap at Lunar and Planetary Institute
* &quot;Apollo 17&quot; – Detailed mission information by David R. Williams, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
* &quot;Table 2-45. Apollo 17 Characteristics&quot; from &quot;NASA Historical Data Book: Volume III: Programs and Projects 1969–1978&quot; by Linda Neuman Ezell, NASA SP-4012, NASA History Series (1988)
* Apollo 17 Lunar Surface Journal 
* &quot;Apollo 17 Real-Time Mission Experience&quot; – All mission audio, film, video, and photography presented in real-time.
* Apollo 17 Mission Experiments Overview at the Lunar and Planetary Institute
* &quot;Apollo 17 Voice Transcript Pertaining to the Geology of the Landing Site&quot; (PDF) by N. G. Bailey and G. E. Ulrich, United States Geological Survey, 1975
* &quot;Apollo Program Summary Report&quot; (PDF), NASA, JSC-09423, April 1975
* &quot;The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology&quot; NASA, NASA SP-4009
* &quot;The Final Flight&quot; – Excerpt from the September 1973 issue of &quot;National Geographic&quot; magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="0" end="9" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="70" end="74" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="82" end="96" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="157" end="161" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q158486" start="173" end="184" title="Gene Cernan" label="Gene Cernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="208" end="224" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Harrison Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q313543" start="272" end="284" title="Ronald Evans (astronaut)" label="Ronald Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q374034" start="393" end="402" title="Joe Engle" label="Joe Engle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792971" start="578" end="620" title="Fe, Fi, Fo, Fum, and Phooey" label="biological experiment containing five mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648514" start="744" end="758" title="Lunar highlands" label="lunar highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="787" end="799" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="856" end="873" title="Volcano" label="volcanic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516188" start="899" end="913" title="Taurus–Littrow" label="Taurus–Littrow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1365" end="1391" title="List of Apollo missions#Alphabetical mission types" label="&amp;quot;J-type&amp;quot; mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="1496" end="1516" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="1596" end="1605" title="extravehicular activity" label="moonwalks"/>
<link wikidata="Q318438" start="1612" end="1625" title="Moon rock" label="lunar samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q14965" start="1639" end="1661" title="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package" label="scientific instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502288" start="1693" end="1706" title="Shorty crater" label="Shorty crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q210448" start="1810" end="1821" title="lunar orbit" label="lunar orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="1829" end="1855" title="Apollo command and service module" label="command and service module"/>
<link wikidata="Q473485" start="1987" end="1994" title="List of spaceflight records" label="records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="2006" end="2017" title="spaceflight" label="spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="2137" end="2160" title="extravehicular activity" label="extravehicular activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178871" start="2584" end="2593" title="Apollo 14" label="Apollo 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q221269" start="2641" end="2645" title="North American X-15" label="X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q374034" start="2652" end="2661" title="Joe Engle" label="Joe Engle"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="2958" end="2967" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q13227060" start="3087" end="3129" title="Canceled Apollo missions" label="the plan to launch Apollo 18 was cancelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="3412" end="3424" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q502963" start="3541" end="3552" title="Richard F. Gordon Jr." label="Dick Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q463833" start="3557" end="3568" title="Vance D. Brand" label="Vance Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q312540" start="3743" end="3762" title="Bell 47" label="Bell 47G helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141324" start="3772" end="3784" title="Indian River (Florida)" label="Indian River"/>
<link wikidata="Q193401" start="3790" end="3802" title="Cape Canaveral" label="Cape Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q364476" start="3966" end="3978" title="James McDivitt" label="Jim McDivitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4501" end="4519" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408073" start="4549" end="4574" title="NASA Astronaut Group 3" label="third group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q519533" start="4606" end="4615" title="Gemini 9A" label="Gemini 9A"/>
<link wikidata="Q191746" start="4653" end="4662" title="Apollo 10" label="Apollo 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q579376" start="4802" end="4827" title="NASA Astronaut Group 5" label="fifth group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="4995" end="5013" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q848758" start="5044" end="5070" title="NASA Astronaut Group 4" label="fourth group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q278656" start="5547" end="5558" title="David Scott" label="David Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q539385" start="5573" end="5586" title="Alfred Worden" label="Alfred Worden"/>
<link wikidata="Q297801" start="5598" end="5609" title="James Irwin" label="James Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q914838" start="5703" end="5735" title="Apollo 15 postal covers incident" label="Apollo 15 postal covers incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q107667" start="5792" end="5805" title="John Young (astronaut)" label="John W. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q112284" start="5832" end="5844" title="Charles Duke" label="Charles Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q375065" start="5879" end="5891" title="Stuart Roosa" label="Stuart Roosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q318513" start="5927" end="5940" title="Ken Mattingly" label="Ken Mattingly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="6117" end="6130" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q545034" start="6920" end="6931" title="flight plan" label="flight plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q519149" start="6996" end="7014" title="Robert F. Overmyer" label="Robert F. Overmyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q534597" start="7016" end="7032" title="Robert A. Parker" label="Robert A. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q519268" start="7037" end="7056" title="C. Gordon Fullerton" label="C. Gordon Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7059" end="7075" title="Flight controller#Flight director" label="Flight directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549046" start="7081" end="7094" title="Gerry Griffin" label="Gerry Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q711493" start="7109" end="7119" title="Gene Kranz" label="Gene Kranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q94579995" start="7162" end="7172" title="Pete Frank" label="Pete Frank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7407" end="7428" title="Flight controller#Spacecraft communicator (CAPCOM)" label="Capsule communicators"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="7494" end="7506" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q443994" start="7511" end="7526" title="Joseph P. Allen" label="Joseph P. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="7641" end="7647" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="7681" end="7695" title="Bald eagle" label="American eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="7746" end="7755" title="U.S. flag" label="U.S. flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="7887" end="7893" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q619135" start="8291" end="8307" title="Apollo Belvedere" label="Apollo Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q182955" start="8331" end="8346" title="Vatican Museums" label="Vatican Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748493" start="8592" end="8605" title="Robert McCall (artist)" label="Robert McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="8697" end="8709" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="lunar module"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="9817" end="9826" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="10126" end="10151" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="the presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="10241" end="10254" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10605" end="10614" title="List of Apollo missions#Alphabetical mission types" label="J-mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131154" start="11039" end="11049" title="Copernicus (lunar crater)" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188433" start="11071" end="11080" title="Apollo 12" label="Apollo 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="11199" end="11211" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q631696" start="11294" end="11299" title="Tycho (lunar crater)" label="Tycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="11400" end="11414" title="Far side of the Moon" label="lunar far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q630405" start="11429" end="11441" title="Tsiolkovskiy (crater)" label="Tsiolkovskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168416" start="11623" end="11635" title="Mare Crisium" label="Mare Crisium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="11671" end="11677" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q761733" start="11740" end="11747" title="Luna 20" label="Luna 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q735104" start="11923" end="11943" title="Christopher C. Kraft" label="Christopher C. Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339467" start="12108" end="12124" title="Alphonsus (crater)" label="Alphonsus crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q631753" start="12126" end="12141" title="Gassendi (crater)" label="Gassendi crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516188" start="12151" end="12165" title="Taurus–Littrow" label="Taurus–Littrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156574" start="12820" end="12832" title="central-peak basin" label="central peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637998" start="13326" end="13351" title="Hadley–Apennine (Moon)" label="landing site of Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="13385" end="13395" title="lunar mare" label="lunar mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q286518" start="14020" end="14030" title="Apollo/Skylab A7L" label="spacesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642255" start="14115" end="14125" title="splashdown" label="splashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427197" start="14540" end="14562" title="Big Bend National Park" label="Big Bend National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855425" start="15007" end="15019" title="Gordon Swann" label="Gordon Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019161" start="15902" end="15924" title="William R. Muehlberger" label="William R. Muehlberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="17011" end="17020" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750619" start="17618" end="17631" title="Farouk El-Baz" label="Farouk El-Baz"/>
<link wikidata="Q257161" start="18474" end="18479" title="S-IVB" label="S-IVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="18594" end="18602" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="18920" end="18940" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093699" start="18949" end="18953" title="S-II" label="S-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029937" start="19038" end="19042" title="S-IC" label="S-IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q463261" start="19917" end="19924" title="Grumman" label="Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="20053" end="20073" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q901058" start="20335" end="20360" title="Vehicle Assembly Building" label="Vehicle Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="20719" end="20727" title="Skylab 1" label="Skylab 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q684467" start="20732" end="20740" title="Skylab 2" label="Skylab 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="21100" end="21106" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887137" start="21257" end="21263" title="Bendix Corporation" label="Bendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14965" start="21613" end="21653" title="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package" label="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q106563970" start="21905" end="21925" title="Heat Flow Experiment" label="Heat Flow Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q124151510" start="21999" end="22023" title="Lunar Surface Gravimeter" label="Lunar Surface Gravimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q106518614" start="22096" end="22136" title="Lunar Atmospheric Composition Experiment" label="Lunar Atmospheric Composition Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106512290" start="22203" end="22237" title="Lunar Seismic Profiling Experiment" label="Lunar Seismic Profiling Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106511373" start="22287" end="22325" title="Lunar Ejecta and Meteorites Experiment" label="Lunar Ejecta and Meteorites Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="22827" end="22842" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="22850" end="22878" title="general theory of relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="22977" end="22994" title="mass spectrometer" label="mass spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q106511559" start="23060" end="23078" title="Cold Cathode Gauge Experiment" label="Code Cathode Gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q361564" start="23281" end="23289" title="geophone" label="geophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q106511909" start="24660" end="24696" title="Lunar Traverse Gravimeter" label="Traverse Gravimeter Experiment (TGE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876029" start="25029" end="25046" title="Draper Laboratory" label="Draper Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="25054" end="25091" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037499" start="26169" end="26183" title="lunar regolith" label="lunar regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q318438" start="26328" end="26338" title="Moon rock" label="lunar rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764601" start="27857" end="27881" title="Perognathus longimembris" label="Perognathus longimembris"/>
<link wikidata="Q827023" start="28547" end="28553" title="lesion" label="lesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134772" start="28973" end="28985" title="brine shrimp" label="brine shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="29422" end="29430" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q850281" start="29440" end="29450" title="radiometer" label="radiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="29458" end="29473" title="Ultraviolet" label="far-ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="29530" end="29545" title="Lidar" label="laser altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="29648" end="29663" title="Electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358214" start="30061" end="30072" title="Internal structure of the Moon" label="lunar crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q115507" start="30220" end="30236" title="Atmosphere of the Moon" label="lunar atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="31247" end="31257" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="31595" end="31601" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="31876" end="31892" title="cosmic radiation" label="cosmic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q583625" start="32077" end="32090" title="Lunar Orbiter" label="Lunar Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q220717" start="32169" end="32188" title="Mass concentration (astronomy)" label="mass concentrations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32271" end="32288" title="Apollo 15#Particles and Fields Subsatellite" label="left by Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32293" end="32295" title="Apollo 16#Particles and Fields Subsatellite" label="16"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="32467" end="32470" title="Eastern Standard Time (North America)" label="EST"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="33792" end="33806" title="Miami" label="Miami, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="33946" end="33960" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085531" start="34001" end="34014" title="Charlie Smith (centenarian)" label="Charlie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q863248" start="34430" end="34451" title="trans-lunar injection" label="trans-lunar injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q202014" start="36635" end="36650" title="The Blue Marble" label="The Blue Marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="37325" end="37350" title="service propulsion system" label="service propulsion system"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="39579" end="39583" title="Extra-vehicular activity" label="EVAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030313" start="41328" end="41337" title="duct tape" label="duct tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717319" start="41859" end="41871" title="Emory (crater)" label="Emory crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712735" start="41949" end="41961" title="Steno-Apollo" label="Steno crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464243" start="42598" end="42619" title="Ride of the Valkyries" label="Ride of the Valkyries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563791" start="42806" end="42823" title="flight controller" label="flight controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712728" start="43163" end="43176" title="Nansen-Apollo (crater)" label="Nansen Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502288" start="44253" end="44266" title="Shorty (crater)" label="Shorty crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="44710" end="44723" title="lava fountain" label="lava fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717305" start="45135" end="45149" title="Camelot (crater)" label="Camelot crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831662" start="46058" end="46075" title="Tracy&amp;#x27;s Rock" label="Tracy&amp;#x27;s Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712738" start="46176" end="46191" title="Van Serg (crater)" label="Van Serg crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="46579" end="46602" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143141" start="46713" end="46725" title="Troctolite 76535" label="Sample 76535"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095256" start="46797" end="46807" title="troctolite" label="troctolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661541" start="46997" end="47016" title="Thermochronology" label="thermochronological"/>
<link wikidata="Q742129" start="47068" end="47072" title="Planetary core" label="core"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269129" start="47105" end="47116" title="Dynamo theory" label="core dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="47172" end="47179" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47298" end="47320" title="Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center#Houston (1965–present)" label="Mission Control Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="47324" end="47338" title="Houston" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="49062" end="49074" title="solar corona" label="solar corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q271960" start="49400" end="49408" title="Exposure (photography)" label="exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327221" start="49413" end="49423" title="Earthlight (astronomy)" label="Earthlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345034" start="49473" end="49485" title="Eratosthenes (crater)" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q488143" start="49529" end="49543" title="Mare Orientale" label="Mare Orientale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754615" start="49899" end="49924" title="Transient lunar phenomenon" label="transient lunar phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408928" start="49999" end="50014" title="Grimaldi (crater)" label="Grimaldi crater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50203" end="50213" title="Outgassing#From rock" label="outgassing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="50245" end="50254" title="Meteorite" label="Meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q800358" start="51416" end="51428" title="Orbital plane (astronomy)" label="plane change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833514" start="52617" end="52638" title="trans-Earth injection" label="trans-Earth injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="53548" end="53581" title="Atmospheric entry" label="reentered Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="53614" end="53627" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q378744" start="54239" end="54253" title="Super Bowl VII" label="Super Bowl VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q875611" start="54294" end="54314" title="Pledge of Allegiance" label="Pledge of Allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891759" start="54661" end="54679" title="1976 United States Senate election in New Mexico" label="his successful run"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="54686" end="54706" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749172" start="54840" end="54860" title="Space Center Houston" label="Space Center Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="54868" end="54898" title="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center" label="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="55407" end="55436" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q331778" start="56047" end="56075" title="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054208" start="56243" end="56255" title="PTScientists" label="PTScientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708098" start="56341" end="56364" title="List of Apollo missions" label="List of Apollo missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530844" start="56367" end="56395" title="List of missions to the Moon" label="List of missions to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850611" start="56398" end="56437" title="List of astronauts by year of selection" label="List of astronauts by year of selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129350" start="56440" end="56466" title="List of human spaceflights" label="List of human spaceflights"/>
<link wikidata="Q13226541" start="56469" end="56503" title="List of human spaceflight programs" label="List of human spaceflight programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254629" start="56506" end="56549" title="List of landings on extraterrestrial bodies" label="List of landings on extraterrestrial bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413181" start="56552" end="56577" title="List of crewed spacecraft" label="List of crewed spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590980" start="56580" end="56601" title="List of NASA missions" label="List of NASA missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644755" start="56604" end="56646" title="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999" label="List of spacewalks and moonwalks 1965–1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="56649" end="56661" title="Moon landing" label="Moon landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721524" start="56670" end="56704" title="The Case of the Missing Moon Rocks" label="The Case of the Missing Moon Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372253" start="56713" end="56732" title="Apollo in Real Time" label="Apollo in Real Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152" start="56996" end="57028" title="NASA Goddard Space Flight Center" label="NASA Goddard Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q239221" start="57443" end="57472" title="Lunar and Planetary Institute" label="Lunar and Planetary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="57600" end="57631" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="57866" end="57885" title="National Geographic (magazine)" label="National Geographic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1973" wikidata="Q192769" url="?curid=1973" title="American Revolution">
<text>The American Revolution (1765–1783) was an ideological and political movement in the Thirteen Colonies in what was then British America. The revolution ultimately culminated in the American Revolutionary War, which began with the Battles of Lexington and Concord, on April 19, 1775. The war between the colonies and the Kingdom of Great Britain continued for eight years. Leaders of the American Revolution were colonial separatist leaders who, as British subjects, initially sought incremental levels of autonomy. But later, assembled in present-day Independence Hall in the revolutionary capital of Philadelphia, they embraced and joined the cause of full independence and the Revolutionary War, forming the Continental Army and appointing George Washington as its commander-in-chief in 1775 and unanimously adopting and issuing the Declaration of Independence the following year, which served to inspire, formalize, and escalate the war, which ultimately ended British colonial rule over the colonies, permitting their independence and the establishment of the United States of America.

Discontent with colonial rule began shortly after the defeat of France in the French and Indian War in 1763. Although the colonies had fought and supported the war, the British Parliament imposed new taxes to compensate for wartime costs and turned control of the colonies&#x27; western lands over to the British officials in Montreal. Representatives from several colonies convened the Stamp Act Congress; its &quot;Declaration of Rights and Grievances&quot; argued that taxation without representation violated their rights as Englishmen. In 1767, tensions flared again following the British Parliament&#x27;s passage of the Townshend Acts. In an effort to quell the mounting rebellion, King George III deployed troops to Boston. A local confrontation resulted in the troops killing protesters in the Boston Massacre on March 5, 1770. In 1772, anti-tax demonstrators in Rhode Island destroyed the Royal Navy customs schooner &quot;Gaspee&quot;. On December 16, 1773, activists disguised as Indians instigated the Boston Tea Party and dumped chests of tea owned by the British East India Company into Boston Harbor. London closed Boston Harbor and enacted a series of punitive laws, which effectively ended self-government in Massachusetts.

In late 1774, 12 of the Thirteen Colonies (Georgia joined in 1775) sent delegates to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia. It began coordinating Patriot resistance through underground networks of committees. In April 1775, British forces attempted to disarm local militias around Boston and engaged them. On June 14, 1775, the Second Continental Congress responded by authorizing formation of the Continental Army and appointing George Washington as its commander-in-chief. In August, King George III proclaimed Massachusetts to be in a state of open defiance and rebellion. The Continental Army surrounded Boston, and the British withdrew by sea in March 1776, leaving the Patriots in control in every colony. In July 1776, the Second Continental Congress began to take on the role of governing a new nation. It passed the Lee Resolution for national independence on July 2, and on July 4, 1776, unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence, which embodied the political philosophies of liberalism and republicanism, rejected monarchy and aristocracy, and famously proclaimed that &quot;all men are created equal&quot;.

The Revolutionary War continued for another five years during which the Kingdom of France ultimately entered the war as an ally of the colonies and their pursuit of independence. On September 28, 1781, in the Continental Army&#x27;s most decisive victory, combined American and French armies captured an entire British army during the Siege of Yorktown, leading to the collapse of King George&#x27;s control of Parliament and consensus in Parliament that the war should be ended on American terms. 

On September 3, 1783, the British signed the Treaty of Paris, granting the United States nearly all the territory east of the Mississippi River and south of the Great Lakes. About 60,000 Loyalists migrated to other British territories in Canada and elsewhere, but the great majority remained in the United States. With its victory in the American Revolution, the United States became the first constitutional republic in world history founded on the consent of the governed and the rule of law.

==Origins==

===1651–1763: Early seeds===
The Thirteen Colonies were established in the 17th century as part of the English Empire, and they formed part of the British Empire after the union of England and Scotland in 1707. The development of a unique American identity can be traced to the English Civil War (1642–1651) and its aftermath. The Puritan colonies of New England supported the Commonwealth government responsible for the execution of King Charles I. After the Stuart Restoration of 1660, Massachusetts did not recognize Charles II as the legitimate king for more than a year after his coronation. In King Philip&#x27;s War (1675–1678), the New England colonies fought a handful of Native American tribes without military assistance from England, thereby contributing to the development of a uniquely American identity separate from that of the British people.

In the 1680s, Charles and his brother, James II, attempted to bring New England under direct English control. The colonists fiercely opposed this, and the Crown nullified their colonial charters in response. In 1686, James finalized these efforts by consolidating the separate New England colonies along with New York and New Jersey into the Dominion of New England. Edmund Andros was appointed royal governor and tasked with governing the new Dominion under his direct rule. Colonial assemblies and town meetings were restricted, new taxes were levied, and rights were abridged. Dominion rule triggered bitter resentment throughout New England. When James tried to rule without Parliament, the English aristocracy removed him from power in the Glorious Revolution of 1688. This was followed by the 1689 Boston revolt, which overthrew Dominion rule. Colonial governments reasserted their control after the revolt. The new monarchs, William and Mary, granted new charters to the individual New England colonies, and local democratic self-government was restored.

After the Glorious Revolution, the British Empire was a constitutional monarchy with sovereignty in the King-in-Parliament. Aristocrats inherited seats in the House of Lords, while the gentry and merchants controlled the elected House of Commons. The king ruled through cabinet ministers who depended on majority support in the Commons to govern effectively. British subjects on both sides of the Atlantic proudly claimed the unwritten British constitution, with its guarantees of the rights of Englishmen, protected personal liberty better than any other government. It served as the model for colonial governments. The Crown appointed a royal governor to exercise executive power. Property owners elected a colonial assembly with powers to legislate and levy taxes, but the British government reserved the right to veto colonial legislation. Radical Whig ideology profoundly influenced American political philosophy with its love of liberty and opposition to tyrannical government.

With little industry except shipbuilding, the colonies exported agricultural products to Britain in return for manufactured goods. They also imported molasses, rum, and sugar from the British West Indies. The British government pursued a policy of mercantilism in order to grow its economic and political power. According to mercantilism, the colonies existed for the mother country&#x27;s economic benefit, and the colonists&#x27; economic needs took second place. In 1651, Parliament passed the first in a series of Navigation Acts, which restricted colonial trade with foreign countries. The Thirteen Colonies could trade with the rest of the empire but only ship certain commodities like tobacco to Britain. Any European imports bound for British America had to first pass through an English port and pay customs duties. Other laws regulated colonial industries, such as the Wool Act 1698, the Hat Act 1731, and the Iron Act 1750.

Colonial reactions to these policies were mixed. The Molasses Act 1733 placed a duty of six pence per gallon upon foreign molasses imported into the colonies. This act was particularly egregious to the New England colonists, who protested it as taxation without representation. The act increased the smuggling of foreign molasses, and the British government ceased enforcement efforts after the 1740s. On the other hand, certain merchants and local industries benefitted from the restrictions on foreign competition. The limits on foreign-built ships greatly benefitted the colonial shipbuilding industry, particularly in New England. Some argue that the economic impact was minimal on the colonists, but the political friction that the acts triggered was more serious, as the merchants most directly affected were also the most politically active.

The British government lacked the resources and information needed to control the colonies. Instead, British officials negotiated and compromised with colonial leaders to gain compliance with imperial policies. The colonies defended themselves with colonial militias, and the British government rarely sent military forces to America before 1755. According to historian Robert Middlekauff, &quot;Americans had become almost completely self-governing&quot; before the American Revolution .

During the French and Indian War (1754–1763), the British government fielded 45,000 soldiers, half British Regulars and half colonial volunteers. The colonies also contributed money to the war effort; however, two-fifths of this spending was reimbursed by the British government. Great Britain defeated France and acquired that nation&#x27;s territory east of the Mississippi River. 

In early 1763, the Bute ministry decided to permanently garrison 10,000 soldiers in North America. This would allow approximately 1,500 politically well-connected British Army officers to remain on active duty with full pay (stationing a standing army in Great Britain during peacetime was politically unacceptable). A standing army would provide defense against Native Americans in the west and foreign populations in newly acquired territories (the French in Canada and the Spanish in Florida). In addition, British soldiers could prevent white colonists from instigating conflict with Native Americans and help collect customs duties. 

Migration beyond the Appalachian Mountains increased after the French threat was removed, and Native Americans launched Pontiac&#x27;s War (1763–1766) in response. The Grenville ministry issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, designating the territory between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River as an Indian Reserve closed to white settlement. The Proclamation failed to stop westward migration while angering settlers, fur traders, and land speculators in the Thirteen Colonies.

===1764–1766: Taxes imposed and withdrawn===


George Grenville became prime minister in 1763, and &quot;the need for money played a part in every important decision made by Grenville regarding the colonies—and for that matter by the ministries that followed up to 1776.&quot; The national debt had grown to £133 million with annual debt payments of £5 million (out of an £8 million annual budget). Stationing troops in North America on a permanent basis would cost another £360,000 a year. On a per capita basis, Americans only paid 1 shilling in taxes to the empire compared to 26 shillings paid by the English. Grenville believed that the colonies should help pay the troop costs. 

In 1764 Parliament passed the Sugar Act, decreasing the existing customs duties on sugar and molasses but providing stricter measures of enforcement and collection. That same year, Grenville proposed direct taxes on the colonies to raise revenue, but he delayed action to see whether the colonies would propose some way to raise the revenue themselves.

Parliament passed the Stamp Act in March 1765, which imposed direct taxes on the colonies for the first time. All official documents, newspapers, almanacs, and pamphlets were required to have the stamps—even decks of playing cards. The colonists did not object that the taxes were high; they were actually low. They objected to their lack of representation in the Parliament, which gave them no voice concerning legislation that affected them, such as the tax, violating the unwritten English constitution. This grievance was summarized in the slogan &quot;No taxation without representation&quot;. Shortly following adoption of the Stamp Act, the Sons of Liberty formed, and began using public demonstrations, boycotts, and threats of violence to ensure that the British tax laws became unenforceable. In Boston, the Sons of Liberty burned the records of the vice admiralty court and looted the home of chief justice Thomas Hutchinson. Several legislatures called for united action, and nine colonies sent delegates to the Stamp Act Congress in New York City in October. Moderates led by John Dickinson drew up a Declaration of Rights and Grievances stating that the colonists were equal to all other British citizens and that taxes passed without representation violated their rights as Englishmen, and Congress emphasized their determination by organizing a boycott on imports of all British merchandise. American spokesmen such as Samuel Adams, James Otis, John Hancock, John Dickinson, Thomas Paine, and many others, rejected aristocracy and propounded &quot;republicanism&quot; as the political philosophy that was best suited to American conditions.

The Parliament at Westminster saw itself as the supreme lawmaking authority throughout the Empire and thus entitled to levy any tax without colonial approval or even consultation. They argued that the colonies were legally British corporations subordinate to the British Parliament. Parliament insisted that the colonists effectively enjoyed a &quot;virtual representation&quot;, as most British people did, since only a small minority of the British population were eligible to elect representatives to Parliament. However, Americans such as James Otis maintained that there was no one in Parliament responsible specifically to any colonial constituency, so they were not &quot;virtually represented&quot; by anyone in Parliament.

The Rockingham government came to power in July 1765, and Parliament debated whether to repeal the stamp tax or to send an army to enforce it. Benjamin Franklin appeared before them to make the case for repeal, explaining that the colonies had spent heavily in manpower, money, and blood defending the empire, and that further taxes to pay for those wars were unjust and might bring about a rebellion. Parliament agreed and repealed the tax on February 21, 1766, but they insisted in the Declaratory Act of March 1766 that they retained full power to make laws for the colonies &quot;in all cases whatsoever&quot;. The repeal nonetheless caused widespread celebrations in the colonies.

===1767–1773: Townshend Acts and the Tea Act===

In 1767, the British Parliament passed the Townshend Acts, which placed duties on several staple goods, including paper, glass, and tea, and established a Board of Customs in Boston to more rigorously execute trade regulations. Parliament&#x27;s goal was not so much to collect revenue but to assert its authority over the colonies. The new taxes were enacted on the belief that Americans only objected to internal taxes and not to external taxes such as custom duties. However, in his widely read pamphlet, &quot;Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania&quot;, John Dickinson argued against the constitutionality of the acts because their purpose was to raise revenue and not to regulate trade. Colonists responded to the taxes by organizing new boycotts of British goods. These boycotts were less effective, however, as the goods taxed by the Townshend Acts were widely used.

In February 1768, the Assembly of Massachusetts Bay Colony issued a circular letter to the other colonies urging them to coordinate resistance. The governor dissolved the assembly when it refused to rescind the letter. Meanwhile, a riot broke out in Boston in June 1768 over the seizure of the sloop &quot;Liberty&quot;, owned by John Hancock, for alleged smuggling. Customs officials were forced to flee, prompting the British to deploy troops to Boston. A Boston town meeting declared that no obedience was due to parliamentary laws and called for the convening of a convention. A convention assembled but only issued a mild protest before dissolving itself. In January 1769, Parliament responded to the unrest by reactivating the Treason Act 1543 which called for subjects outside the realm to face trials for treason in England. The governor of Massachusetts was instructed to collect evidence of said treason, and the threat caused widespread outrage, though it was not carried out.

On March 5, 1770, a large crowd gathered around a group of British soldiers on a Boston street. The crowd grew threatening, throwing snowballs, rocks, and debris at them. One soldier was clubbed and fell. There was no order to fire, but the soldiers panicked and fired into the crowd. They hit 11 people; three civilians died of wounds at the scene of the shooting, and two died shortly after. The event quickly came to be called the Boston Massacre. The soldiers were tried and acquitted (defended by John Adams), but the widespread descriptions soon began to turn colonial sentiment against the British. This accelerated the downward spiral in the relationship between Britain and the province of Massachusetts.

A new ministry under Lord North came to power in 1770, and Parliament repealed most of the Townshend duties, except the tax on tea. This temporarily resolved the crisis, and the boycott of British goods largely ceased, with only the more radical patriots such as Samuel Adams continuing to agitate.

In June 1772, American patriots, including John Brown, burned a British warship that had been vigorously enforcing unpopular trade regulations, in what became known as the &quot;Gaspee&quot; Affair. The affair was investigated for possible treason, but no action was taken.

In 1773, private letters were published in which Massachusetts Governor Thomas Hutchinson claimed that the colonists could not enjoy all English liberties, and in which Lieutenant Governor Andrew Oliver called for the direct payment of colonial officials, which had been paid by local authorities. This would have reduced the influence of colonial representatives over their government. The letters&#x27; contents were used as evidence of a systematic plot against American rights, and discredited Hutchinson in the eyes of the people; the colonial Assembly petitioned for his recall. Benjamin Franklin, postmaster general for the colonies, acknowledged that he leaked the letters, which led to him being removed from his position.

In Boston, Samuel Adams set about creating new Committees of Correspondence, which linked Patriots in all 13 colonies and eventually provided the framework for a rebel government. Virginia, the largest colony, set up its Committee of Correspondence in early 1773, on which Patrick Henry and Thomas Jefferson served. A total of about 7,000 to 8,000 Patriots served on these Committees; Loyalists were excluded. The committees became the leaders of the American resistance to British actions, and later largely determined the war effort at the state and local level. When the &quot;First Continental Congress&quot; decided to boycott British products, the colonial and local Committees took charge, examining merchant records and publishing the names of merchants who attempted to defy the boycott by importing British goods.

Meanwhile, Parliament passed the Tea Act lowering the price of taxed tea exported to the colonies, to help the British East India Company undersell smuggled untaxed Dutch tea. Special consignees were appointed to sell the tea to bypass colonial merchants. The act was opposed by those who resisted the taxes and also by smugglers who stood to lose business. In every colony demonstrators warned merchants not to bring in tea that included the hated new tax. In most instances, the consignees were forced by the Americans to resign and the tea was turned back, but Massachusetts governor Hutchinson refused to allow Boston merchants to give in to pressure. A town meeting in Boston determined that the tea would not be landed, and ignored a demand from the governor to disperse. On December 16, 1773, a group of men, led by Samuel Adams and dressed to evoke the appearance of Indigenous people, boarded the ships of the East India Company and dumped £10,000 worth of tea from their holds (approximately £636,000 in 2008) into Boston Harbor. Decades later, this event became known as the Boston Tea Party and remains a significant part of American patriotic lore.

===1774–1775: Intolerable Acts===

The British government responded by passing four laws that came to be known as the Intolerable Acts, further darkening colonial opinion towards England. The first was the Massachusetts Government Act which altered the Massachusetts charter and restricted town meetings. The second was the Administration of Justice Act which ordered that all British soldiers to be tried were to be arraigned in Britain, not in the colonies. The third was the Boston Port Act, which closed the port of Boston until the British had been compensated for the tea lost in the Boston Tea Party. The fourth was the Quartering Act of 1774, which allowed royal governors to house British troops in the homes of citizens without permission of the owner.

In response, Massachusetts patriots issued the Suffolk Resolves and formed an alternative shadow government known as the Provincial Congress, which began training militia outside British-occupied Boston. In September 1774, the First Continental Congress convened, consisting of representatives from each colony, to serve as a vehicle for deliberation and collective action. During secret debates, conservative Joseph Galloway proposed the creation of a colonial Parliament that would be able to approve or disapprove acts of the British Parliament, but his idea was tabled in a vote of 6 to 5 and was subsequently removed from the record. Congress called for a boycott beginning on December 1, 1774, of all British goods; it was enforced by new local committees authorized by the Congress.
It also began coordinating Patriot resistance by militias which existed in every colony and which had gained military experience in the French and Indian War. For the first time, the Patriots were armed and unified against Parliament.

==Military hostilities begin==

King George declared Massachusetts to be in a state of rebellion in February 1775 and the British garrison received orders to seize the rebels&#x27; weapons and arrest their leaders, leading to the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775. The Patriots assembled a militia 15,000 strong and laid siege to Boston, occupied by 6500 British soldiers. The Second Continental Congress convened in Philadelphia on June 14, 1775. The congress was divided on the best course of action. They authorized formation of the Continental Army and appointed George Washington as its commander-in-chief, and produced the Olive Branch Petition in which they attempted to come to an accord with King George. The king, however, issued a Proclamation of Rebellion which declared that the states were &quot;in rebellion&quot; and the members of Congress were traitors. The Battle of Bunker Hill followed on June 17, 1775. It was a British victory—but at a great cost: about 1,000 British casualties from a garrison of about 6,000, as compared to 500 American casualties from a much larger force.

As Benjamin Franklin wrote to Joseph Priestley in October 1775: 

In the winter of 1775, the Americans invaded northeastern Quebec under generals Benedict Arnold and Richard Montgomery, expecting to rally sympathetic colonists there. The attack was a failure; many Americans were killed, captured, or died of smallpox.

In March 1776, aided by the fortification of Dorchester Heights with cannons recently captured at Fort Ticonderoga, the Continental Army led by George Washington forced the British to evacuate Boston. The revolutionaries now fully controlled all thirteen colonies and were ready to declare independence. There still were many Loyalists, but they were no longer in control anywhere by July 1776, and all of the Royal officials had fled.

==Creating new state constitutions==

Following the Battle of Bunker Hill in June 1775, the Patriots had control of Massachusetts outside Boston&#x27;s city limits, and the Loyalists suddenly found themselves on the defensive with no protection from the British army. In each of the Thirteen Colonies, American patriots overthrew their existing governments, closed courts, and drove out British colonial officials. They held elected conventions and established their own legislatures, which existed outside any legal parameters established by the British. New constitutions were drawn up in each state to supersede royal charters. They proclaimed that they were now &quot;states&quot;, no longer &quot;colonies&quot;.

On January 5, 1776, New Hampshire ratified the first state constitution. In May 1776, Congress voted to suppress all forms of crown authority, to be replaced by locally created authority. New Jersey, South Carolina, and Virginia created their constitutions before July 4. Rhode Island and Connecticut simply took their existing royal charters and deleted all references to the crown. The new states were all committed to republicanism, with no inherited offices. On May 26, 1776, John Adams wrote James Sullivan from Philadelphia warning against extending the franchise too far:

The resulting constitutions in states, including those of Delaware, Maryland, Massachusetts, New York, and Virginia featured:
* Property qualifications for voting and even more substantial requirements for elected positions (though New York and Maryland lowered property qualifications)
* Bicameral legislatures, with the upper house as a check on the lower
* Strong governors with veto power over the legislature and substantial appointment authority
* Few or no restraints on individuals holding multiple positions in government
* The continuation of state-established religion

In Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New Hampshire, the resulting constitutions embodied:
* universal manhood suffrage, or minimal property requirements for voting or holding office (New Jersey enfranchised some property-owning widows, a step that it retracted 25 years later)
* strong, unicameral legislatures
* relatively weak governors without veto powers, and with little appointing authority
* prohibition against individuals holding multiple government posts

The radical provisions of Pennsylvania&#x27;s constitution lasted 14 years. In 1790, conservatives gained power in the state legislature, called a new constitutional convention, and rewrote the constitution. The new constitution substantially reduced universal male suffrage, gave the governor veto power and patronage appointment authority, and added an upper house with substantial wealth qualifications to the unicameral legislature. Thomas Paine called it a constitution unworthy of America.

==Independence and union==


In April 1776, the North Carolina Provincial Congress issued the Halifax Resolves explicitly authorizing its delegates to vote for independence. By June, nine Provincial Congresses were ready for independence; Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, and New York followed. Richard Henry Lee was instructed by the Virginia legislature to propose independence, and he did so on June 7, 1776. On June 11, a committee was created by the Second Continental Congress to draft a document explaining the justifications for separation from Britain. After securing enough votes for passage, independence was voted for on July 2.

Gathered at Pennsylvania State House in Philadelphia, 56 of the nation&#x27;s Founding Fathers, representing America&#x27;s Thirteen Colonies, unanimously adopted and issued to King George III the Declaration of Independence, which was drafted largely by Thomas Jefferson and presented by the Committee of Five, which had been charged with its development. The Congress struck several provisions of Jefferson&#x27;s draft, and then adopted it unanimously on July 4. The Declaration embodied the political philosophies of liberalism and republicanism, rejected monarchy and aristocracy, and famously proclaimed that &quot;all men are created equal&quot;. With the issuance of the Declaration of Independence, each colony began operating as independent and sovereign states. The next step was to form a union to facilitate international relations and alliances.

On November 5, 1777, the Congress approved the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union and sent it to each state for ratification. The Congress immediately began operating under the Articles&#x27; terms, providing a structure of shared sovereignty during prosecution of the Revolutionary War and facilitating international relations and alliances. The Articles were fully ratified on March 1, 1781. At that point, the Continental Congress was dissolved and a new government of the United States in Congress Assembled took its place the following day, on March 2, 1782, with Samuel Huntington leading the Congress as presiding officer.

==Defending the revolution==
===British return: 1776–1777===

According to British historian Jeremy Black, the British had significant advantages, including a highly trained army, the world&#x27;s largest navy, and an efficient system of public finance that could easily fund the war. However, they seriously misunderstood the depth of support for the American Patriot position, misinterpreting the situation as merely a large-scale riot. The British government believed that they could overawe the Americans by sending a large military and naval force:

Washington forced the British out of Boston in the spring of 1776, and neither the British nor the Loyalists controlled any significant areas. The British, however, were amassing forces at their naval base at Halifax, Nova Scotia. They returned in force in July 1776, landing in New York and defeating Washington&#x27;s Continental Army in August at the Battle of Brooklyn. This gave the British control of New York City and its strategic harbor. Following that victory, they requested a meeting with representatives from Congress to negotiate an end to hostilities.

A delegation including John Adams and Benjamin Franklin met British admiral Richard Howe on Staten Island in New York Harbor on September 11 in what became known as the Staten Island Peace Conference. Howe demanded that the Americans retract the Declaration of Independence, which they refused to do, and negotiations ended. The British then seized New York City and nearly captured Washington&#x27;s army. They made the city their main political and military base of operations, holding it until November 1783. The city became the destination for Loyalist refugees and a focal point of Washington&#x27;s intelligence network.
The British also took New Jersey, pushing the Continental Army into Pennsylvania. Washington crossed the Delaware River back into New Jersey in a surprise attack in late December 1776 and defeated the Hessian and British armies at Trenton and Princeton, thereby regaining control of most of New Jersey. The victories gave an important boost to Patriots at a time when morale was flagging, and they have become iconic events of the war.

In September 1777, in anticipation of a coordinated attack by the British Army on the revolutionary capital of Philadelphia, the Continental Congress was forced to depart Philadelphia temporarily for Baltimore, where they continued deliberations.

In 1777, the British sent Burgoyne&#x27;s invasion force from Canada south to New York to seal off New England. Their aim was to isolate New England, which the British perceived as the primary source of agitation. Rather than move north to support Burgoyne, the British army in New York City went to Philadelphia in a major case of mis-coordination, capturing it from Washington. The invasion army under Burgoyne was much too slow and became trapped in northern New York state. It surrendered after the Battles of Saratoga in October 1777. From early October 1777 until November 15, a siege distracted British troops at Fort Mifflin, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and allowed Washington time to preserve the Continental Army by safely leading his troops to harsh winter quarters at Valley Forge.

===Prisoners===

On August 23, 1775, George III declared Americans to be traitors to the Crown if they took up arms against royal authority. There were thousands of British and Hessian soldiers in American hands following their surrender at the Battles of Saratoga. Lord Germain took a hard line, but the British generals on American soil never held treason trials, and instead treated captured American soldiers as prisoners of war. The dilemma was that tens of thousands of Loyalists were under American control and American retaliation would have been easy. The British built much of their strategy around using these Loyalists. The British maltreated the prisoners whom they held, resulting in more deaths to American prisoners of war than from combat operations. At the end of the war, both sides released their surviving prisoners.

===American alliances after 1778===


The capture of a British army at Saratoga encouraged the French to formally enter the war in support of Congress, and Benjamin Franklin negotiated a permanent military alliance in early 1778; France thus became the first foreign nation to officially recognize the Declaration of Independence. On February 6, 1778, the United States and France signed the Treaty of Amity and Commerce and the Treaty of Alliance. William Pitt spoke out in Parliament urging Britain to make peace in America and to unite with America against France, while British politicians who had sympathized with colonial grievances now turned against the Americans for allying with Britain&#x27;s rival and enemy.

The Spanish and the Dutch became allies of the French in 1779 and 1780 respectively, forcing the British to fight a global war without major allies, and requiring it to slip through a combined blockade of the Atlantic. Britain began to view the American war for independence as merely one front in a wider war, and the British chose to withdraw troops from America to reinforce the British colonies in the Caribbean, which were under threat of Spanish or French invasion. British commander Sir Henry Clinton evacuated Philadelphia and returned to New York City. General Washington intercepted him in the Battle of Monmouth Court House, the last major battle fought in the north. After an inconclusive engagement, the British retreated to New York City. The northern war subsequently became a stalemate, as the focus of attention shifted to the smaller southern theater.

===1778–1783: the British move south===

The British Royal Navy blockaded ports and held New York City for the duration of the war, and other cities for brief periods, but failed in their effort to destroy Washington&#x27;s forces. The British strategy now concentrated on a campaign in the southern states. With fewer regular troops at their disposal, the British commanders saw the &quot;southern strategy&quot; as a more viable plan, as they perceived the south as strongly Loyalist with a large population of recent immigrants and large numbers of slaves who might be tempted to run away from their masters to join the British and gain their freedom.

Beginning in late December 1778, the British captured Savannah and controlled the Georgia coastline. In 1780, they launched a fresh invasion and took Charleston. A significant victory at the Battle of Camden meant that royal forces soon controlled most of Georgia and South Carolina. The British set up a network of forts inland, hoping that the Loyalists would rally to the flag. Not enough Loyalists turned out, however, and the British had to fight their way north into North Carolina and Virginia with a severely weakened army. Behind them, much of the territory that they had already captured dissolved into a chaotic guerrilla war, fought predominantly between bands of Loyalists and American militia, which negated many of the gains that the British had previously made.

====Surrender at Yorktown (1781)====
The British army under Cornwallis marched to Yorktown, Virginia, where they expected to be rescued by a British fleet. The fleet did arrive, but so did a larger French fleet. The French were victorious in the Battle of the Chesapeake, and the British fleet returned to New York for reinforcements, leaving Cornwallis trapped. In October 1781, the British surrendered their second invading army of the war under a siege by the combined French and Continental armies commanded by Washington.

===End of the war===
Washington did not know if or when the British might reopen hostilities after Yorktown. They still had 26,000 troops occupying New York City, Charleston, and Savannah, together with a powerful fleet. The French army and navy departed, so the Americans were on their own in 1782–83. The American treasury was empty, and the unpaid soldiers were growing restive, almost to the point of mutiny or possible coup d&#x27;etat. Washington dispelled the unrest among officers of the Newburgh Conspiracy in 1783, and Congress subsequently created the promise of a five years bonus for all officers.

Historians continue to debate whether the odds were long or short for American victory. John E. Ferling says that the odds were so long that the American victory was &quot;almost a miracle&quot;. On the other hand, Joseph Ellis says that the odds favored the Americans, and asks whether there ever was any realistic chance for the British to win. He argues that this opportunity came only once, in the summer of 1776, and Admiral Howe and his brother General Howe &quot;missed several opportunities to destroy the Continental Army ... Chance, luck, and even the vagaries of the weather played crucial roles.&quot; Ellis&#x27;s point is that the strategic and tactical decisions of the Howes were fatally flawed because they underestimated the challenges posed by the Patriots. Ellis concludes that, once the Howe brothers failed, the opportunity &quot;would never come again&quot; for a British victory.

Support for the conflict had never been strong in Britain, where many sympathized with the Americans, but now it reached a new low. King George wanted to fight on, but his supporters lost control of Parliament and they launched no further offensives in America on the eastern seaboard.

==Paris peace treaty==
During negotiations in Paris, the American delegation discovered that France supported American independence but no territorial gains, hoping to confine the new nation to the area east of the Appalachian Mountains. The Americans opened direct secret negotiations with London, cutting out the French. British Prime Minister Lord Shelburne was in charge of the British negotiations, and he saw a chance to make the United States a valuable economic partner, facilitating trade and investment opportunities. The US obtained all the land east of the Mississippi River, including southern Canada, but Spain took control of Florida from the British. It gained fishing rights off Canadian coasts, and agreed to allow British merchants and Loyalists to recover their property. Prime Minister Shelburne foresaw highly profitable two-way trade between Britain and the rapidly growing United States, which did come to pass. The blockade was lifted and American merchants were free to trade with any nation anywhere in the world.

The British largely abandoned their Indigenous allies, who were not a party to this treaty and did not recognize it until they were defeated militarily by the United States. However, the British did sell them munitions and maintain forts in American territory until the Jay Treaty of 1795.

Losing the war and the Thirteen Colonies was a shock to Britain. The war revealed the limitations of Britain&#x27;s fiscal-military state when they discovered that they suddenly faced powerful enemies with no allies, and they were dependent on extended and vulnerable transatlantic lines of communication. The defeat heightened dissension and escalated political antagonism to the King&#x27;s ministers. The King went so far as to draft letters of abdication, although they were never delivered. Inside Parliament, the primary concern changed from fears of an over-mighty monarch to the issues of representation, parliamentary reform, and government retrenchment. Reformers sought to destroy what they saw as widespread institutional corruption, and the result was a crisis from 1776 to 1783. The crisis ended after 1784 confidence in the British constitution was restored during the administration of Prime Minister William Pitt.

==Finance==

Britain&#x27;s war against the Americans, the French, and the Spanish cost about £100 million. The Treasury borrowed 40 percent of the money that it needed. Britain had a sophisticated financial system based on the wealth of thousands of landowners who supported the government, together with banks and financiers in London. In London the British had relatively little difficulty financing their war, keeping their suppliers and soldiers paid, and hiring tens of thousands of German soldiers.

In sharp contrast, Congress and the American states had no end of difficulty financing the war. In 1775, there was at most 12 million dollars in gold in the colonies, not nearly enough to cover current transactions, let alone finance a major war. The British made the situation much worse by imposing a tight blockade on every American port, which cut off almost all trade. One partial solution was to rely on volunteer support from militiamen and donations from patriotic citizens. Another was to delay actual payments, pay soldiers and suppliers in depreciated currency, and promise that it would be made good after the war. Indeed, the soldiers and officers were given land grants in 1783 to cover the wages that they had earned but had not been paid during the war. The national government did not have a strong leader in financial matters until 1781, when Robert Morris was named Superintendent of Finance of the United States. Morris used a French loan in 1782 to set up the private Bank of North America to finance the war. He reduced the civil list, saved money by using competitive bidding for contracts, tightened accounting procedures, and demanded the national government&#x27;s full share of money and supplies from the individual states.

Congress used four main methods to cover the cost of the war, which cost about 66 million dollars in specie (gold and silver). Congress made issues of paper money, known colloquially as &quot;Continental Dollars&quot;, in 1775–1780 and in 1780–1781. The first issue amounted to 242 million dollars. This paper money would supposedly be redeemed for state taxes, but the holders were eventually paid off in 1791 at the rate of one cent on the dollar. By 1780, the paper money was so devalued that the phrase &quot;not worth a Continental&quot; became synonymous with worthlessness. The skyrocketing inflation was a hardship on the few people who had fixed incomes, but 90 percent of the people were farmers and were not directly affected by it. Debtors benefited by paying off their debts with depreciated paper. The greatest burden was borne by the soldiers of the Continental Army whose wages were usually paid late and declined in value every month, weakening their morale and adding to the hardships of their families.

Beginning in 1777, Congress repeatedly asked the states to provide money, but the states had no system of taxation and were of little help. By 1780, Congress was making requisitions for specific supplies of corn, beef, pork, and other necessities, an inefficient system which barely kept the army alive. Starting in 1776, the Congress sought to raise money by loans from wealthy individuals, promising to redeem the bonds after the war. The bonds were redeemed in 1791 at face value, but the scheme raised little money because Americans had little specie, and many of the rich merchants were supporters of the Crown. The French secretly supplied the Americans with money, gunpowder, and munitions to weaken Great Britain; the subsidies continued when France entered the war in 1778, and the French government and Paris bankers lent large sums to the American war effort. The Americans struggled to pay off the loans; they ceased making interest payments to France in 1785 and defaulted on installments due in 1787. In 1790, however, they resumed regular payments on their debts to the French, and settled their accounts with the French government in 1795 when James Swan, an American banker, assumed responsibility for the balance of the debt in exchange for the right to refinance it at a profit.

==Concluding the revolution==


The war ended in 1783 and was followed by a period of prosperity. The national government was still operating under the Articles of Confederation and settled the issue of the western territories, which the states ceded to Congress. American settlers moved rapidly into those areas, with Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee becoming states in the 1790s.

However, the national government had no money either to pay the war debts owed to European nations and the private banks, or to pay Americans who had been given millions of dollars of promissory notes for supplies during the war. Nationalists led by Washington, Alexander Hamilton, and other veterans feared that the new nation was too fragile to withstand an international war, or even the repetition of internal revolts such as the Shays&#x27; Rebellion of 1786 in Massachusetts. They convinced Congress to call the Philadelphia Convention in 1787. The Convention adopted a new Constitution which provided for a republic with a much stronger national government in a federal framework, including an effective executive in a check-and-balance system with the judiciary and legislature. The Constitution was ratified in 1788, after a fierce debate in the states over the proposed new government. The new administration under President George Washington took office in New York in March 1789. James Madison spearheaded Congressional legislation proposing amendments to the Constitution as assurances to those cautious about federal power, guaranteeing many of the inalienable rights that formed a foundation for the revolution. Rhode Island was the final state to ratify the Constitution in 1790, the first ten amendments were ratified in 1791 and became known as the United States Bill of Rights.

===National debt===
The national debt fell into three categories after the American Revolution. The first was the $12 million owed to foreigners, mostly money borrowed from France. There was general agreement to pay the foreign debts at full value. The national government owed $40 million and state governments owed $25 million to Americans who had sold food, horses, and supplies to the Patriot forces. There were also other debts which consisted of promissory notes issued during the war to soldiers, merchants, and farmers who accepted these payments on the premise that the new Constitution would create a government that would pay these debts eventually.

The war expenses of the individual states added up to $114 million, compared to $37 million by the central government. In 1790, Congress combined the remaining state debts with the foreign and domestic debts into one national debt totaling $80 million at the recommendation of first Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton. Everyone received face value for wartime certificates, so that the national honor would be sustained and the national credit established.

==Ideology and factions==
The population of the Thirteen States was not homogeneous in political views and attitudes. Loyalties and allegiances varied widely within regions and communities and even within families, and sometimes shifted during the Revolution.

===Ideology behind the revolution===

The American Enlightenment was a critical precursor of the American Revolution. Chief among the ideas of the American Enlightenment were the concepts of natural law, natural rights, consent of the governed, individualism, property rights, self-ownership, self-determination, liberalism, republicanism, and defense against corruption. A growing number of American colonists embraced these views and fostered an intellectual environment which led to a new sense of political and social identity.

====Liberalism====


John Locke is often referred to as &quot;the philosopher of the American Revolution&quot; due to his work in the Social Contract and Natural Rights theories that underpinned the Revolution&#x27;s political ideology. Locke&#x27;s &quot;Two Treatises of Government&quot; published in 1689 was especially influential. He argued that all humans were created equally free, and governments therefore needed the &quot;consent of the governed&quot;. In late eighteenth-century America, belief was still widespread in &quot;equality by creation&quot; and &quot;rights by creation&quot;. Locke&#x27;s ideas on liberty influenced the political thinking of English writers such as John Trenchard, Thomas Gordon, and Benjamin Hoadly, whose political ideas in turn also had a strong influence on the American Patriots. His work also inspired symbols used in the American Revolution such as the &quot;Appeal to Heaven&quot; found on the Pine Tree Flag, which alludes to Locke&#x27;s concept of the right of revolution.

The theory of the social contract influenced the belief among many of the Founders that the right of the people to overthrow their leaders, should those leaders betray the historic rights of Englishmen, was one of the &quot;natural rights&quot; of man. The Americans heavily relied on Montesquieu&#x27;s analysis of the wisdom of the &quot;balanced&quot; British Constitution (mixed government) in writing the state and national constitutions.

====Republicanism====
The American interpretation of republicanism was inspired by the Whig party in Great Britain which openly criticized the corruption within the British government. Americans were increasingly embracing republican values, seeing Britain as corrupt and hostile to American interests. The colonists associated political corruption with ostentatious luxury and inherited aristocracy.

The Founding Fathers were strong advocates of republican values, particularly Samuel Adams, Patrick Henry, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Paine, George Washington, James Madison, and Alexander Hamilton, which required men to put civic duty ahead of their personal desires. Men were honor bound by civic obligation to be prepared and willing to fight for the rights and liberties of their countrymen. John Adams wrote to Mercy Otis Warren in 1776, agreeing with some classical Greek and Roman thinkers: &quot;Public Virtue cannot exist without private, and public Virtue is the only Foundation of Republics.&quot; He continued:
====Protestant dissenters and the Great Awakening====
Protestant churches that had separated from the Church of England, called &quot;dissenters&quot;, were the &quot;school of democracy&quot;, in the words of historian Patricia Bonomi. Before the Revolution, the Southern Colonies and three of the New England Colonies had official established churches: Congregational in Massachusetts Bay, Connecticut, and New Hampshire, and the Church of England in Maryland, Virginia, North-Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. The New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations had no officially established churches. Church membership statistics from the period are unreliable and scarce, but what little data exists indicates that the Church of England was not in the majority, not even in the colonies where it was the established church, and they probably did not comprise even 30 percent of the population in most localities (with the possible exception of Virginia).
John Witherspoon, who was considered a &quot;new light&quot; Presbyterian, wrote widely circulated sermons linking the American Revolution to the teachings of the Bible. Throughout the colonies, dissenting Protestant ministers from the Congregational, Baptist, and Presbyterian churches preached Revolutionary themes in their sermons while most Church of England clergymen preached loyalty to the king, the titular head of the English state church. Religious motivation for fighting tyranny transcended socioeconomic lines. The Declaration of Independence also referred to the &quot;Laws of Nature and of Nature&#x27;s God&quot; as justification for the Americans&#x27; separation from the British monarchy: the signers of the Declaration professed their &quot;firm reliance on the Protection of divine Providence&quot;, and they appealed to &quot;the Supreme Judge for the rectitude of our intentions&quot;.

Historian Bernard Bailyn argues that the evangelicalism of the era challenged traditional notions of natural hierarchy by preaching that the Bible teaches that all men are equal, so that the true value of a man lies in his moral behavior, not in his class. Kidd argues that religious disestablishment, belief in God as the source of human rights, and shared convictions about sin, virtue, and divine providence worked together to unite rationalists and evangelicals and thus encouraged a large proportion of Americans to fight for independence from the Empire. Bailyn, on the other hand, denies that religion played such a critical role. Alan Heimert argues that New Light anti-authoritarianism was essential to furthering democracy in colonial American society, and set the stage for a confrontation with British monarchical and aristocratic rule.

===Class and psychology of the factions===

John Adams concluded in 1818:

In the mid-20th century, historian Leonard Woods Labaree identified eight characteristics of the Loyalists that made them essentially conservative, opposite to the characteristics of the Patriots. Loyalists tended to feel that resistance to the Crown was morally wrong, while the Patriots thought that morality was on their side. Loyalists were alienated when the Patriots resorted to violence, such as burning houses and tarring and feathering. Loyalists wanted to take a centrist position and resisted the Patriots&#x27; demand to declare their opposition to the Crown. Many Loyalists had maintained strong and long-standing relations with Britain, especially merchants in port cities such as New York and Boston. Many Loyalists felt that independence was bound to come eventually, but they were fearful that revolution might lead to anarchy, tyranny, or mob rule. In contrast, the prevailing attitude among Patriots was a desire to seize the initiative. Labaree also wrote that Loyalists were pessimists who lacked the confidence in the future displayed by the Patriots.

Historians in the early 20th century such as J. Franklin Jameson examined the class composition of the Patriot cause, looking for evidence of a class war inside the revolution. More recent historians have largely abandoned that interpretation, emphasizing instead the high level of ideological unity. Both Loyalists and Patriots were a &quot;mixed lot&quot;, but ideological demands always came first. The Patriots viewed independence as a means to gain freedom from British oppression and to reassert their basic rights. Most yeomen farmers, craftsmen, and small merchants joined the Patriot cause to demand more political equality. They were especially successful in Pennsylvania but less so in New England, where John Adams attacked Thomas Paine&#x27;s &quot;Common Sense&quot; for the &quot;absurd democratical notions&quot; that it proposed.

====King George III====

The revolution became a personal issue for the king, fueled by his growing belief that British leniency would be taken as weakness by the Americans. He also sincerely believed that he was defending Britain&#x27;s constitution against usurpers, rather than opposing patriots fighting for their natural rights.
King George III is often accused of obstinately trying to keep Great Britain at war with the revolutionaries in America, despite the opinions of his own ministers. In the words of the British historian George Otto Trevelyan, the King was determined &quot;never to acknowledge the independence of the Americans, and to punish their contumacy by the indefinite prolongation of a war which promised to be eternal.&quot; The king wanted to &quot;keep the rebels harassed, anxious, and poor, until the day when, by a natural and inevitable process, discontent and disappointment were converted into penitence and remorse&quot;. Later historians defend George by saying in the context of the times no king would willingly surrender such a large territory, and his conduct was far less ruthless than contemporary monarchs in Europe. After the surrender of a British army at Saratoga, both Parliament and the British people were largely in favor of the war; recruitment ran at high levels and although political opponents were vocal, they remained a small minority.

With the setbacks in America, Lord North asked to transfer power to Lord Chatham, whom he thought more capable, but George refused to do so; he suggested instead that Chatham serve as a subordinate minister in North&#x27;s administration, but Chatham refused. He died later in the same year. Lord North was allied to the &quot;King&#x27;s Friends&quot; in Parliament and believed George III had the right to exercise powers. In early 1778, Britain&#x27;s chief rival France signed a treaty of alliance with the United States, and the confrontation soon escalated from a &quot;rebellion&quot; to something that has been characterized as &quot;world war&quot;. The French fleet was able to outrun the British naval blockade of the Mediterranean and sailed to North America. The conflict now affected North America, Europe and India. The United States and France were joined by Spain in 1779 and the Dutch Republic, while Britain had no major allies of its own, except for the Loyalist minority in America and German auxiliaries (i.e. &quot;Hessians&quot;). Lord Gower and Lord Weymouth both resigned from the government. Lord North again requested that he also be allowed to resign, but he stayed in office at George III&#x27;s insistence. Opposition to the costly war was increasing, and in June 1780 contributed to disturbances in London known as the Gordon riots.

As late as the Siege of Charleston in 1780, Loyalists could still believe in their eventual victory, as British troops inflicted defeats on the Continental forces at the Battle of Camden and the Battle of Guilford Court House. In late 1781, the news of Cornwallis&#x27;s surrender at the siege of Yorktown reached London; Lord North&#x27;s parliamentary support ebbed away and he resigned the following year. The king drafted an abdication notice, which was never delivered, finally accepted the defeat in North America, and authorized peace negotiations. The Treaties of Paris, by which Britain recognized the independence of the United States and returned Florida to Spain, were signed in 1782 and 1783 respectively. In early 1783, George III privately conceded &quot;America is lost!&quot; He reflected that the Northern colonies had developed into Britain&#x27;s &quot;successful rivals&quot; in commercial trade and fishing.

When John Adams was appointed American Minister to London in 1785, George had become resigned to the new relationship between his country and the former colonies. He told Adams, &quot;I was the last to consent to the separation; but the separation having been made and having become inevitable, I have always said, as I say now, that I would be the first to meet the friendship of the United States as an independent power.&quot;

====Patriots====
Those who fought for independence were called &quot;Revolutionaries&quot;, &quot;Continentals&quot;, &quot;Rebels&quot;, &quot;Patriots&quot;, &quot;Whigs&quot;, &quot;Congress-men&quot;, or &quot;Americans&quot; during and after the war. They included a full range of social and economic classes but were unanimous regarding the need to defend the rights of Americans and uphold the principles of republicanism in rejecting monarchy and aristocracy, while emphasizing civic virtue by citizens. The signers of the Declaration of Independence were mostly—with definite exceptions—well-educated, of British stock, and of the Protestant faith. Newspapers were strongholds of patriotism (although there were a few Loyalist papers) and printed many pamphlets, announcements, patriotic letters, and pronouncements.

According to historian Robert Calhoon, 40 to 45 percent of the white population in the Thirteen Colonies supported the Patriots&#x27; cause, 15 to 20 percent supported the Loyalists, and the remainder were neutral or kept a low profile. Mark Lender concludes that ordinary people became insurgents against the British because they held a sense of rights which the British were violating, rights that stressed local autonomy, fair dealing, and government by consent. They were highly sensitive to the issue of tyranny, which they saw manifested in the British response to the Boston Tea Party. The arrival in Boston of the British Army heightened their sense of violated rights, leading to rage and demands for revenge. They had faith that God was on their side.

Thomas Paine published his pamphlet &quot;Common Sense&quot; in January 1776, after the Revolution had started. It was widely distributed and often read aloud in taverns, contributing significantly to concurrently spreading the ideas of republicanism and liberalism, bolstering enthusiasm for separation from Great Britain and encouraging recruitment for the Continental Army. Paine presented the Revolution as the solution for Americans alarmed by the threat of tyranny.

====Loyalists====
The consensus of scholars is that about 15 to 20 percent of the white population remained loyal to the British Crown. Those who actively supported the king were known at the time as &quot;Loyalists&quot;, &quot;Tories&quot;, or &quot;King&#x27;s men&quot;. The Loyalists never controlled territory unless the British Army occupied it. They were typically older, less willing to break with old loyalties, and often connected to the Church of England; they included many established merchants with strong business connections throughout the Empire, as well as royal officials such as Thomas Hutchinson of Boston.

There were 500 to 1,000 Black Loyalists, enslaved African Americans who escaped to British lines and supported Britain&#x27;s cause via several means. Many of them died from disease, but the survivors were evacuated by the British to their remaining colonies in North America.

The revolution could divide families, such as William Franklin, son of Benjamin Franklin and royal governor of the Province of New Jersey who remained loyal to the Crown throughout the war. He and his father never spoke again. Recent immigrants who had not been fully Americanized were also inclined to support the King.

After the war, the great majority of the half-million Loyalists remained in America and resumed normal lives. Some became prominent American leaders, such as Samuel Seabury. Approximately 46,000 Loyalists relocated to Canada; others moved to Britain (7,000), Florida, or the West Indies (9,000). The exiles represented approximately two percent of the total population of the colonies. Nearly all Black Loyalists left for Nova Scotia, Florida, or England, where they could remain free. Loyalists who left the South in 1783 took thousands of their slaves with them as they fled to the British West Indies.

====Neutrals====
A minority of uncertain size tried to stay neutral in the war. Most kept a low profile, but the Quakers were the most important group to speak out for neutrality, especially in Pennsylvania. The Quakers continued to do business with the British even after the war began, and they were accused of supporting British rule, &quot;contrivers and authors of seditious publications&quot; critical of the revolutionary cause. Most Quakers remained neutral, although a sizeable number participated to some degree.

====Role of women====

Women contributed to the American Revolution in many ways and were involved on both sides. Formal politics did not include women, but ordinary domestic behaviors became charged with political significance as Patriot women confronted a war which permeated all aspects of political, civil, and domestic life. They participated by boycotting British goods, spying on the British, following armies as they marched, washing, cooking, and mending for soldiers, delivering secret messages, and even fighting disguised as men in a few cases, such as Deborah Samson. Mercy Otis Warren held meetings in her house and cleverly attacked Loyalists with her creative plays and histories. Many women also acted as nurses and helpers, tending to the soldiers&#x27; wounds and buying and selling goods for them. Some of these camp followers even participated in combat, such as Madam John Turchin who led her husband&#x27;s regiment into battle. Above all, women continued the agricultural work at home to feed their families and the armies. They maintained their families during their husbands&#x27; absences and sometimes after their deaths.

American women were integral to the success of the boycott of British goods, as the boycotted items were largely household articles such as tea and cloth. Women had to return to knitting goods and to spinning and weaving their own cloth—skills that had fallen into disuse. In 1769, the women of Boston produced 40,000 skeins of yarn, and 180 women in Middletown, Massachusetts wove of cloth. Many women gathered food, money, clothes, and other supplies during the war to help the soldiers. A woman&#x27;s loyalty to her husband could become an open political act, especially for women in America committed to men who remained loyal to the King. Legal divorce, usually rare, was granted to Patriot women whose husbands supported the King.

===Other participants===
====France and Spain====
In early 1776, France set up a major program of aid to the Americans, and the Spanish secretly added funds. Each country spent one million &quot;livres tournaises&quot; to buy munitions. A dummy corporation run by Pierre Beaumarchais concealed their activities. American Patriots obtained some munitions from the Dutch Republic as well, through the French and Spanish ports in the West Indies. Heavy expenditures and a weak taxation system pushed France toward bankruptcy.

In 1777, Charles François Adrien le Paulmier, Chevalier d&#x27;Annemours, acting as a secret agent for France, made sure General George Washington was privy to his mission. He followed Congress around for the next two years, reporting what he observed back to France. The Treaty of Alliance between the French and the Americans followed in 1778, which led to more French money, matériel and troops being sent to the United States.

Spain did not officially recognize the United States, but it was a French ally and it separately declared war on Britain on June 21, 1779. Bernardo de Gálvez, general of the Spanish forces in New Spain, also served as governor of Louisiana. He led an expedition of colonial troops to capture Florida from the British and to keep open a vital conduit for supplies going to the Americans.

====Germans====

Ethnic Germans served on both sides of the American Revolutionary War. As George III was also the Elector of Hanover, many supported the Loyalist cause and served as allies of the Kingdom of Great Britain; most notably rented auxiliary troops from German states such as the Landgraviate of Hessen-Kassel.

American Patriots tended to represent such troops as mercenaries in propaganda against the British Crown. Even American historians followed suit, in spite of Colonial-era jurists drawing a distinction between auxiliaries and mercenaries, with auxiliaries serving their prince when sent to the aid of another prince, and mercenaries serving a foreign prince as individuals. By this distinction the troops which served in the American Revolution were auxiliaries.

Other German individuals came to assist the American revolutionaries, most notably Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben, who served as a general in the Continental Army and is credited with professionalizing that force, but most Germans who served were already colonists. Von Steuben&#x27;s native Prussia joined the League of Armed Neutrality, and King Frederick II of Prussia was well appreciated in the United States for his support early in the war. He expressed interest in opening trade with the United States and bypassing English ports, and allowed an American agent to buy arms in Prussia. Frederick predicted American success, and promised to recognize the United States and American diplomats once France did the same. Prussia also interfered in the recruiting efforts of Russia and neighboring German states when they raised armies to send to the Americas, and Frederick II forbade enlistment for the American war within Prussia. All Prussian roads were denied to troops from Anhalt-Zerbst, which delayed reinforcements that Howe had hoped to receive during the winter of 1777–1778.

However, when the War of the Bavarian Succession (1778–1779) erupted, Frederick II became much more cautious with Prussian/British relations. U.S. ships were denied access to Prussian ports, and Frederick refused to officially recognize the United States until they had signed the Treaty of Paris. Even after the war, Frederick II predicted that the United States was too large to operate as a republic, and that it would soon rejoin the British Empire with representatives in Parliament.

====Native Americans====

Most Indigenous people rejected pleas that they remain neutral and instead supported the British Crown. The great majority of the 200,000 Indigenous people east of the Mississippi distrusted the Americans and supported the British cause, hoping to forestall continued expansion of settlement into their territories. Those tribes closely involved in trade tended to side with the Patriots, although political factors were important as well. Some tried to remain neutral, seeing little value in joining what they perceived to be a &quot;white man&#x27;s war&quot;, and fearing reprisals from whichever side they opposed.

The great majority of Indigenous people did not participate directly in the war, with the notable exceptions of warriors and bands associated with four of the Iroquois tribes in New York and Pennsylvania which allied with the British, and the Oneida and Tuscarora tribes among the Iroquois of central and western New York who supported the American cause. The British did have other allies, particularly in the regions of southwest Quebec on the Patriot&#x27;s frontier. The British provided arms to Indigenous people who were led by Loyalists in war parties to raid frontier settlements from the Carolinas to New York. These war parties managed to kill many settlers on the frontier, especially in Pennsylvania and New York&#x27;s Mohawk Valley.

In 1776, Cherokee war parties attacked American Colonists all along the southern Quebec frontier of the uplands throughout the Washington District, North Carolina (now Tennessee) and the Kentucky wilderness area. The Chickamauga Cherokee under Dragging Canoe allied themselves closely with the British, and fought on for an additional decade after the Treaty of Paris was signed. They launched raids with roughly 200 warriors, as seen in the Cherokee–American wars; they could not mobilize enough forces to invade settler areas without the help of allies, most often the Creek.

Joseph Brant (&quot;also&quot; Thayendanegea) of the powerful Mohawk tribe in New York was the most prominent Indigenous leader against the Patriot forces. In 1778 and 1780, he led 300 Iroquois warriors and 100 white Loyalists in multiple attacks on small frontier settlements in New York and Pennsylvania, killing many settlers and destroying villages, crops, and stores.

In 1779, the Continental Army forced the hostile Indigenous people out of upstate New York when Washington sent an army under John Sullivan which destroyed 40 evacuated Iroquois villages in central and western New York. The Battle of Newtown proved decisive, as the Patriots had an advantage of three-to-one, and it ended significant resistance; there was little combat otherwise. Facing starvation and homeless for the winter, the Iroquois fled to Canada.

At the peace conference following the war, the British ceded lands which they did not really control, without consultation with their Indigenous allies. They transferred control to the United States of all the land south of the Great Lakes east of the Mississippi and north of Florida. Calloway concludes:

====Black Americans====


Free Blacks in the New England Colonies and Middle Colonies in the North as well as Southern Colonies fought on both sides of the War, but the majority fought for the Patriots. Gary Nash reports that there were about 9,000 Black veteran Patriots, counting the Continental Army and Navy, state militia units, privateers, wagoneers in the Army, servants to officers, and spies. Ray Raphael notes that thousands did join the Loyalist cause, but &quot;a far larger number, free as well as slave, tried to further their interests by siding with the patriots.&quot; Crispus Attucks was one of the five people killed in the Boston Massacre in 1770 and is considered the first American casualty for the cause of independence.

The effects of the war were more dramatic in the South. Tens of thousands of slaves escaped to British lines throughout the South, causing dramatic losses to slaveholders and disrupting cultivation and harvesting of crops. For instance, South Carolina was estimated to have lost about 25,000 slaves to flight, migration, or death which amounted to a third of its slave population.

During the war, the British commanders attempted to weaken the Patriots by issuing proclamations of freedom to their slaves. In the November 1775 document known as Dunmore&#x27;s Proclamation Virginia royal governor, Lord Dunmore recruited Black men into the British forces with the promise of freedom, protection for their families, and land grants. Some men responded and briefly formed the British Ethiopian Regiment. Historian David Brion Davis explains the difficulties with a policy of wholesale arming of the slaves:

Davis underscores the British dilemma: &quot;Britain, when confronted by the rebellious American colonists, hoped to exploit their fear of slave revolts while also reassuring the large number of slave-holding Loyalists and wealthy Caribbean planters and merchants that their slave property would be secure&quot;. The Americans, however, accused the British of encouraging slave revolts, with the issue becoming one of the 27 colonial grievances.

The existence of slavery in the American colonies had attracted criticism from both sides of the Atlantic as many could not reconcile the existence of the institution with the egalitarian ideals espoused by leaders of the Revolution. British writer Samuel Johnson wrote &quot;how is it we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of the Negroes?&quot; in a text opposing the grievances of the colonists. Referring to this contradiction, English abolitionist Thomas Day wrote in a 1776 letter that Thomas Jefferson unsuccessfully attempted to include a section in the Declaration of Independence which asserted that King George III had &quot;forced&quot; the slave trade onto the colonies. Despite the turmoil of the period, African-Americans contributed to the foundation of an American national identity during the Revolution. Phyllis Wheatley, an African-American poet, popularized the image of Columbia to represent America.

The 1779 Philipsburg Proclamation expanded the promise of freedom for Black men who enlisted in the British military to all the colonies in rebellion. British forces gave transportation to 10,000 slaves when they evacuated Savannah and Charleston, carrying through on their promise. They evacuated and resettled more than 3,000 Black Loyalists from New York to Nova Scotia, Upper Canada, and Lower Canada. Others sailed with the British to England or were resettled as freedmen in the West Indies of the Caribbean. But slaves carried to the Caribbean under control of Loyalist masters generally remained slaves until British abolition of slavery in its colonies in 1833–1838. More than 1,200 of the Black Loyalists of Nova Scotia later resettled in the British colony of Sierra Leone, where they became leaders of the Krio ethnic group of Freetown and the later national government. Many of their descendants still live in Sierra Leone, as well as other African countries.

==Effects of the revolution==

After the Revolution, genuinely democratic politics became possible in the former American colonies. The rights of the people were incorporated into state constitutions. Concepts of liberty, individual rights, equality among men and hostility toward corruption became incorporated as core values of liberal republicanism. The greatest challenge to the old order in Europe was the challenge to inherited political power and the democratic idea that government rests on the consent of the governed. The example of the first successful revolution against a European empire, and the first successful establishment of a republican form of democratically elected government, provided a model for many other colonial peoples who realized that they too could break away and become self-governing nations with directly elected representative government.
===Interpretations===
Interpretations vary concerning the effect of the Revolution. Historians such as Bernard Bailyn, Gordon Wood, and Edmund Morgan view it as a unique and radical event which produced deep changes and had a profound effect on world affairs, such as an increasing belief in the principles of the Enlightenment. These were demonstrated by a leadership and government that espoused protection of natural rights, and a system of laws chosen by the people. John Murrin, by contrast, argues that the definition of &quot;the people&quot; at that time was mostly restricted to free men who passed a property qualification.

Gordon Wood states:
:The American Revolution was integral to the changes occurring in American society, politics and culture ... These changes were radical, and they were extensive ... The Revolution not only radically changed the personal and social relationships of people, including the position of women, but also destroyed aristocracy as it&#x27;d been understood in the Western world for at least two millennia.

Edmund Morgan has argued that, in terms of long-term impact on American society and values:
:The Revolution did revolutionize social relations. It did displace the deference, the patronage, the social divisions that had determined the way people viewed one another for centuries and still view one another in much of the world. It did give to ordinary people a pride and power, not to say an arrogance, that have continued to shock visitors from less favored lands. It may have left standing a host of inequalities that have troubled us ever since. But it generated the egalitarian view of human society that makes them troubling and makes our world so different from the one in which the revolutionists had grown up.

===Inspiring other independence movements and revolutions===

The first shot of the American Revolution at the Battle of Lexington and Concord is referred to as the &quot;shot heard &#x27;round the world&quot;. The Revolutionary War victory not only established the United States as the first modern constitutional republic, but marked the transition from an age of monarchy to a new age of freedom by inspiring similar movements worldwide. The American Revolution was the first of the &quot;Atlantic Revolutions&quot;: followed most notably by the French Revolution, the Haitian Revolution, and the Latin American wars of independence. Aftershocks contributed to rebellions in Ireland, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, and the Netherlands.

The U.S. Constitution, drafted shortly after independence, remains the world&#x27;s oldest written constitution, and has been emulated by other countries, in some cases verbatim. Some historians and scholars argue that the subsequent wave of independence and revolutionary movements has contributed to the continued expansion of democratic government; 144 countries, representing two-third of the world&#x27;s population, are full or partially democracies of same form.

The Dutch Republic, also at war with Britain, was the next country after France to sign a treaty with the United States, on October 8, 1782. On April 3, 1783, Ambassador Extraordinary Gustaf Philip Creutz, representing King Gustav III of Sweden, and Benjamin Franklin, signed a Treaty of Amity and Commerce with the U.S.

The Revolution had a strong, immediate influence in Great Britain, Ireland, the Netherlands, and France. Many British and Irish Whigs in Parliament spoke glowingly in favor of the American cause. In Ireland, the Protestant minority who controlled Ireland demanded self-rule. Under the leadership of Henry Grattan, the Irish Patriot Party forced the reversal of mercantilist prohibitions against trade with other British colonies. The King and his cabinet in London could not risk another rebellion, and so made a series of concessions to the Patriot faction in Dublin. Armed volunteer units of the &quot;Protestant Ascendancy&quot; were set up ostensibly to protect against an invasion from France. As had been in colonial America, so too in Ireland now the King no longer had a monopoly of lethal force.

For many Europeans, such as the Marquis de Lafayette, who later were active during the era of the French Revolution, the American case along with the Dutch Revolt (end of the 16th century) and the 17th century English Civil War, was among the examples of overthrowing an old regime. The American Declaration of Independence influenced the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789. The spirit of the Declaration of Independence led to laws ending slavery in all the Northern states and the Northwest Territory, with New Jersey the last in 1804. States such as New Jersey and New York adopted gradual emancipation, which kept some people as slaves for more than two decades longer.

===Status of African Americans===

During the revolution, the contradiction between the Patriots&#x27; professed ideals of liberty and the institution of slavery generated increased scrutiny of the latter. As early as 1764, the Boston Patriot leader James Otis, Jr. declared that all men, &quot;white or black&quot;, were &quot;by the law of nature&quot; born free. Anti-slavery calls became more common in the early 1770s. In 1773, Benjamin Rush, the future signer of the Declaration of Independence, called on &quot;advocates for American liberty&quot; to oppose slavery. Slavery became an issue that had to be addressed. As historian Christopher L. Brown put it, slavery &quot;had never been on the agenda in a serious way before,&quot; but the Revolution &quot;forced it to be a public question from there forward.&quot;

In the late 1760s and early 1770s, several colonies, including Massachusetts and Virginia, attempted to restrict the slave trade, but were prevented from doing so by royally appointed governors. In 1774, as part of a broader non-importation movement aimed at Britain, the Continental Congress called on all the colonies to ban the importation of slaves, and the colonies passed acts doing so.

In the first two decades after the American Revolution, state legislatures and individuals took actions to free slaves, in part based on revolutionary ideals. Northern states passed new constitutions that contained language about equal rights or specifically abolished slavery; some states, such as New York and New Jersey, where slavery was more widespread, passed laws by the end of the 18th century to abolish slavery by a gradual method. By 1804, all the northern states had passed laws outlawing slavery, either immediately or over time. Indentured servitude (temporary slavery), which had been widespread in the colonies, dropped dramatically, and disappeared by 1800.

No southern state abolished slavery, but for a period individual owners could free their slaves by personal decision. Numerous slaveholders who freed their slaves cited revolutionary ideals in their documents; others freed slaves as a reward for service. Records also suggest that some slaveholders were freeing their own mixed-race children, born into slavery to slave mothers. The number of free Blacks as a proportion of the Black population in the upper South increased from less than 1 percent to nearly 10 percent between 1790 and 1810 as a result of these actions. Nevertheless, slavery continued in the South, where it became a &quot;peculiar institution&quot;, setting the stage for future sectional conflict between North and South over the issue.

Thousands of free Blacks in the northern states fought in the state militias and Continental Army. In the south, both sides offered freedom to slaves who would perform military service. Roughly 20,000 slaves fought in the American Revolution.

===Status of American women===

The democratic ideals of the Revolution inspired changes in the roles of women. Patriot women married to Loyalists who left the state could get a divorce and obtain control of the ex-husband&#x27;s property. Abigail Adams expressed to her husband, the president, the desire of women to have a place in the new republic: 

The Revolution sparked a discussion on the rights of woman and an environment favorable to women&#x27;s participation in politics. Briefly the possibilities for women&#x27;s rights were highly favorable, but a backlash led to a greater rigidity that excluded women from politics.

For more than thirty years, however, the 1776 New Jersey State Constitution gave the vote to &quot;all inhabitants&quot; who had a certain level of wealth, including unmarried women and blacks (not married women because they could not own property separately from their husbands), until in 1807, when that state legislature passed a bill interpreting the constitution to mean universal &quot;white male&quot; suffrage, excluding paupers.

===Loyalist expatriation===

Tens of thousands of Loyalists left the United States following the war; Philip Ranlet estimates 20,000, while Maya Jasanoff estimates as many as 70,000. Some migrated to Britain, but the great majority received land and subsidies for resettlement in British colonies in North America, especially Quebec (concentrating in the Eastern Townships), Prince Edward Island, and Nova Scotia. Britain created the colonies of Upper Canada (Ontario) and New Brunswick expressly for their benefit, and the Crown awarded land to Loyalists as compensation for losses in the United States. Nevertheless, approximately eighty-five percent of the Loyalists stayed in the United States as American citizens, and some of the exiles later returned to the U.S. Patrick Henry spoke of the issue of allowing Loyalists to return as such: &quot;Shall we, who have laid the proud British lion at our feet, be frightened of its whelps?&quot; His actions helped secure return of the Loyalists to American soil.

===Commemorations===

The American Revolution has a central place in the American memory as the story of the nation&#x27;s founding. It is covered in the schools, memorialized by two national holidays, Washington&#x27;s Birthday in February and Independence Day in July, and commemorated in innumerable monuments. George Washington&#x27;s estate at Mount Vernon was one of the first national pilgrimages for tourists and attracted 10,000 visitors a year by the 1850s.

The Revolution became a matter of contention in the 1850s in the debates leading to the American Civil War (1861–1865), as spokesmen of both the Northern United States and the Southern United States claimed that their region was the true custodian of the legacy of 1776. The United States Bicentennial in 1976 came a year after the American withdrawal from the Vietnam War, and speakers stressed the themes of renewal and rebirth based on a restoration of traditional values.

Today, more than 100 battlefields and historic sites of the American Revolution are protected and maintained by the government. The National Park Service alone manages and maintains more than 50 battlefield parks and many other sites such as Independence Hall that are related to the Revolution. The private American Battlefield Trust uses government grants and other funds to preserve almost 700 acres of battlefield land in six states, and the ambitious private recreation/restoration/preservation/interpretation of over 300 acres of pre-1790 Colonial Williamsburg was created in the first half of the 20th century for public visitation.
== See also ==
* International relations (1648–1814)
* List of films about the American Revolution
* List of George Washington articles
* List of television series and miniseries about the American Revolution
* Museum of the American Revolution

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

===Reference works===

* Barnes, Ian, and Charles Royster. &quot;The Historical Atlas of the American Revolution&quot; (2000), maps and commentary excerpt and text search
* 
* 
* 
* Herrera, Ricardo A. &quot;American War of Independence&quot; &quot;Oxford Bibliographies&quot; (2017) annotated guide to major scholarly books and articles online
* Kennedy, Frances H. &quot;The American Revolution: A Historical Guidebook&quot; (2014) A guide to 150 famous historical sites.
* Purcell, L. Edward. &quot;Who Was Who in the American Revolution&quot; (1993); 1500 short biographies
* 


===Surveys of the era===

* Alden, John R. &quot;A history of the American Revolution&quot; (1966) 644 pp online, A scholarly general survey
* Allison, Robert. &quot;The American Revolution: A Concise History&quot; (2011) 128 pp excerpt and text search
* Atkinson, Rick. &quot;The British Are Coming: The War for America, Lexington to Princeton, 1775–1777&quot; (2019) (vol 1 of his &#x27;The Revolution Trilogy&#x27;); called, &quot;one of the best books written on the American War for Independence,&quot; [&quot;Journal of Military History&quot; Jan 2020 p. 268]; the maps are online here
* , British perspective
* Brown, Richard D., and Thomas Paterson, eds. &quot;Major Problems in the Era of the American Revolution, 1760–1791: Documents and Essays&quot; (2nd ed. 1999)
*Bunker, Nick. &quot;An Empire on the Edge: How Britain Came to Fight America&quot;. New York 2014.
* , British perspective&#x27;
* Cogliano, Francis D. &quot;Revolutionary America, 1763–1815; A Political History&quot; (2nd ed. 2008), British textbook
* Ellis, Joseph J. &quot;American Creation: Triumphs and Tragedies in the Founding of the Republic&quot; (2008) excerpt and text search
* Higginbotham, Don. &quot;The War of American Independence: Military Attitudes, Policies, and Practice, 1763–1789&quot; (1983) Online in ACLS Humanities E-book Project; comprehensive coverage of military and domestic aspects of the war.
* 
* Mackesy, Piers. &quot;The War for America: 1775–1783&quot; (1992), British military study 
* Rakove, Jack N. &quot;Revolutionaries: A New History of the Invention of America&quot; (2010) interpretation by leading scholar excerpt and text search
* Taylor, Alan. &quot;American Revolutions: A Continental History, 1750–1804&quot; (2016) 704 pp; recent survey by leading scholar
* Weintraub, Stanley. &quot;Iron Tears: Rebellion in America 1775–83&quot; (2005) excerpt and text search, popular


===Specialized studies===

* Baer, Friederike. &quot;Hessians: German Soldiers in the American Revolutionary War&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2022). Publisher&#x27;s website.
* Bailyn, Bernard. &quot;The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution&quot;. (Harvard University Press, 1967). 
* Becker, Frank: The American Revolution as a European Media Event, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: October 25, 2011.
* 
* 
* Carté, Katerine. &quot;Religion and the American Revolution: An Imperial History&quot;. Chapel Hill: Omohondro Institute of Early American History and Culture and the University of North Carolina Press 2021. 
* 
* Fischer, David Hackett. &quot;Washington&#x27;s Crossing&quot; (2004). 1776 campaigns; Pulitzer prize. 
* Gilbert, Alan. &quot;Black Patriots and Loyalists: Fighting for Emancipstuob in the War for Independence&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 2012. 
* Horne, Gerald. &quot;The Counter-Revolution of 1776: Slave Resistance and the Origins of the United States of America&quot;. (New York University Press, 2014). 
* 
* Langley, Lester D. &quot;The Long American Revolution and Its Legacy&quot;(U of Georgia Press, 2019) online review emphasis on long-term global impact.
* McCullough, David. 1776 (2005). ; popular narrative of the year 1776
* Maier, Pauline. &quot;American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence&quot; (1998) excerpt and text search
* Nash, Gary B. &quot;The Unknown American Revolution: The Unruly Birth of Democracy and the Struggle to Create America&quot;. (2005). 
* Nevins, Allan; &quot;The American States during and after the Revolution, 1775–1789&quot; 1927. online edition
* Norton, Mary Beth. &quot;1774: The Long Year of Revolution&quot; (2020) online review by Gordon S. Wood
* Palmer, Robert R. &quot;The Age of the Democratic Revolution: A Political History of Europe and America, 1760–1800&quot;. vol 1 (1959)
* Rothbard, Murray, &quot;Conceived in Liberty&quot; (2011), &quot;Volume III: Advance to Revolution, 1760–1775&quot; and &quot;Volume IV: The Revolutionary War, 1775–1784&quot;. , libertarian perspective
* Van Tyne, Claude Halstead. &quot;American Loyalists: The Loyalists in the American Revolution&quot; (1902) online edition
* Volo, James M. and Dorothy Denneen Volo. &quot;Daily Life during the American Revolution&quot; (2003)
* Wahlke, John C. ed. &quot;The Causes of the American Revolution&quot; (1967) primary and secondary readings online
* Wood, Gordon S. &quot;American Revolution&quot; (2005) [excerpt and text search] 208 pp excerpt and text search


===Historiography===

* Allison, David, and Larrie D. Ferreiro, eds. &quot;The American Revolution: A World War&quot; (Smithsonian, 2018) excerpt 
* Breen, Timothy H. &quot;Ideology and nationalism on the eve of the American Revolution: Revisions once more in need of revising.&quot; &quot;Journal of American History&quot; (1997): 13–39. in JSTOR
* Burnard, Trevor. &quot;Writing Early America: From Empire to Revolution&quot;. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press 2023. Analysis of 400 scholarly journal articles. 
* Countrymen, Edward. &quot;Historiography&quot; in Harold E. Selesky, ed., &quot;Encyclopedia of the American Revolution&quot; (Gale, 2006) pp. 501–508. 
* Gibson, Alan. &quot;Interpreting the Founding: Guide to the Enduring Debates over the Origins and Foundations of the American Republic&quot; (2006).
* Hattem, Michael D. &quot;The Historiography of the American Revolution&quot; &quot;Journal of the American Revolution&quot; (2013) online outlines ten different scholarly approaches
* Morgan, Gwenda. &quot;The Debate on the American Revolution&quot; (2007). Manchester University Press. 
* Schocket, Andrew M. &quot;Fighting over the Founders: How We Remember the American Revolution&quot; (2014). . How politicians, screenwriters, activists, biographers, museum professionals, and re-enactors portray the American Revolution. excerpt
* Shalhope, Robert E. &quot;Toward a republican synthesis: the emergence of an understanding of republicanism in American historiography.&quot; &quot;William and Mary Quarterly&quot; (1972): 49–80. in JSTOR
* Waldstreicher, David. &quot;The Revolutions of Revolution Historiography: Cold War Contradance, Neo-Imperial Waltz, or Jazz Standard?&quot; &quot;Reviews in American History&quot; 42.1 (2014): 23–35. online
* Wood, Gordon S. &quot;Rhetoric and Reality in the American Revolution.&quot; &quot;William and Mary Quarterly&quot; (1966): 4–32. in JSTOR
* Young, Alfred F. and Gregory H. Nobles. &quot;Whose American Revolution Was It? Historians Interpret the Founding&quot; (2011). NYU Press. 
===Primary sources===

* &quot;The American Revolution: Writings from the War of Independence&quot; (2001), Library of America 
* Dann, John C., ed. &quot;The Revolution Remembered: Eyewitness Accounts of the War for Independence&quot; (1999). . excerpt and text search, recollections by ordinary soldiers
* Humphrey, Carol Sue, ed. &quot;The Revolutionary Era: Primary Documents on Events from 1776 to 1800&quot; (2003), Greenwood Press. , Newspaper accounts excerpt and text search
* Jensen, Merill, ed. &quot;Tracts of the American Revolution, 1763–1776&quot; (1967). American pamphlets 
* Jensen, Merill, ed. &quot;English Historical Documents: American Colonial Documents to 1776: Volume 9&quot; (1955), 890 pp; major collection of important documents 
* Morison, Samuel E. ed. &quot;Sources and Documents Illustrating the American Revolution, 1764–1788, and the Formation of the Federal Constitution&quot; (1923). . 
* Murdoch, David H. ed. &quot;Rebellion in America: A Contemporary British Viewpoint, 1769–1783&quot; (1979), 900+ pp of annotated excerpts from &quot;Annual Register&quot;online
* Martin Kallich and Andrew MacLeish, eds. &quot;The American Revolution through British eyes&quot; (1962) primary documents


==External links==
* &quot;American Revolution&quot;, US National Park Service website portal
* &quot;American Independence&quot; Teaching with Historic Places uses historic places in National Parks and the National Park Service&#x27;s National Register of Historic Places to enliven history, social studies, geography, civics, and other subjects
*&quot;Ben Franklin&#x27;s World&quot;, podcast on early America, sponsored by the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation. &lt;www.benfranklinsworld.com&gt; 
* Library of Congress Guide to the American Revolution
* &quot;Hessians:&quot; German Soldiers in the American Revolutionary War. Academic blog with original German sources, English translations, and commentary.
* Museum of the American Revolution
* Revolution! The Atlantic World Reborn, explores the transformations in the world&#x27;s politics from 1763 to 1815, with particular attention to three revolutions in America, France, and Haiti. Linking the attack on monarchism and aristocracy to the struggle against slavery, it at how freedom, equality, and sovereignty of the people became universal goals. New-York Historical Society
* 132 historic photographs dealing with the personalities, monuments, weapons and locations of the American Revolution; these are pre-1923 and out of copyright.
* &quot;Pictures of the Revolutionary War: Select Audiovisual Records&quot;, National Archives and Records Administration images, including non-military events and portraits
* The Democratic Revolution of the Enlightenment. Legacy of the struggle for independence and democracy.
* PBS Television Series &quot;Liberty&quot; 
* Chickasaws Conflicted by the American Revolution – Chickasaw.TV
* Smithsonian study unit on Revolutionary Money
* Black Loyalist Heritage Society
* Spanish and Latin American contribution to the American Revolution
* American Archives: Documents of the American Revolution at Northern Illinois University Libraries
* &quot;Counter-Revolution of 1776&quot;: Was U.S. Independence War a Conservative Revolt in Favor of Slavery? Democracy Now! June 27, 2014.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="4" end="23" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="85" end="102" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="120" end="135" title="British America" label="British America"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="181" end="207" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="230" end="262" title="Battles of Lexington and Concord" label="Battles of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="320" end="344" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="412" end="439" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="colonial separatist leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676888" start="476" end="513" title="Olive Branch Petition" label="sought incremental levels of autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q390028" start="551" end="568" title="Independence Hall" label="Independence Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="601" end="613" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="710" end="726" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="742" end="759" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="835" end="862" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="964" end="985" title="British colonization of the Americas" label="British colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1064" end="1088" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="1155" end="1161" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="1169" end="1190" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="1260" end="1278" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1417" end="1425" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915080" start="1478" end="1496" title="Stamp Act Congress" label="Stamp Act Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115885" start="1563" end="1594" title="taxation without representation" label="taxation without representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333767" start="1610" end="1630" title="Rights of Englishmen" label="rights as Englishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093092" start="1718" end="1732" title="Townshend Acts" label="Townshend Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="1780" end="1795" title="George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824430" start="1805" end="1811" title="British Army during the American Revolutionary War" label="troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1815" end="1821" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q215687" start="1894" end="1909" title="Boston Massacre" label="Boston Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495317" start="1976" end="2036" title="Gaspee affair" label="destroyed the Royal Navy customs schooner &amp;quot;Gaspee&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="2106" end="2122" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="2169" end="2187" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q894564" start="2193" end="2206" title="Boston Harbor" label="Boston Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="2250" end="2273" title="Intolerable Acts" label="series of punitive laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="2423" end="2449" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="2489" end="2496" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986806" start="2540" end="2550" title="Committees of Correspondence" label="committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="2635" end="2647" title="Battles of Lexington and Concord" label="engaged them"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="2671" end="2698" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="2741" end="2757" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="2773" end="2790" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247433" start="2845" end="2917" title="Proclamation of Rebellion" label="proclaimed Massachusetts to be in a state of open defiance and rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="3101" end="3152" title="Articles of Confederation" label="began to take on the role of governing a new nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611280" start="3168" end="3182" title="Lee Resolution" label="Lee Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="3265" end="3292" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="3339" end="3349" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="3354" end="3367" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="3378" end="3386" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="3391" end="3402" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q266449" start="3439" end="3464" title="all men are created equal" label="all men are created equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3477" end="3494" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781638" start="3545" end="3562" title="France in the American Revolutionary War" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="3808" end="3825" title="Siege of Yorktown" label="Siege of Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="4018" end="4033" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="4099" end="4116" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="4134" end="4145" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829231" start="4160" end="4207" title="United Empire Loyalists" label="Loyalists migrated to other British territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="4423" end="4446" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="4455" end="4466" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="4515" end="4532" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q617219" start="4585" end="4599" title="English Empire" label="English Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="4629" end="4643" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="4654" end="4683" title="union of England and Scotland" label="union of England and Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378359" start="4760" end="4777" title="English overseas possessions in the Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870262" start="4813" end="4829" title="History of the Puritans in North America" label="Puritan colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007213" start="4833" end="4844" title="New England Colonies" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="4859" end="4871" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088700" start="4903" end="4930" title="execution of King Charles I" label="execution of King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="4942" end="4960" title="Stuart Restoration" label="Stuart Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="4970" end="4983" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="5002" end="5012" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q464122" start="5067" end="5077" title="Coronation of the British monarch" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="5082" end="5104" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="5163" end="5178" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="5326" end="5340" title="British people" label="British people"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="5382" end="5390" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="5494" end="5503" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148410" start="5520" end="5537" title="Colonial charters in the Thirteen Colonies" label="colonial charters"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="5652" end="5660" title="Province of New York" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335128" start="5665" end="5675" title="Province of New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748571" start="5685" end="5708" title="Dominion of New England" label="Dominion of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q659069" start="5710" end="5723" title="Edmund Andros" label="Edmund Andros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029385" start="5806" end="5817" title="direct rule" label="direct rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="5843" end="5855" title="town meeting" label="town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="6022" end="6032" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="6088" end="6107" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136592" start="6142" end="6160" title="1689 Boston revolt" label="1689 Boston revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="6275" end="6282" title="William III of England" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="6287" end="6291" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6441" end="6455" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="6462" end="6485" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270153" start="6510" end="6528" title="King-in-Parliament" label="King-in-Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="6565" end="6579" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304279" start="6591" end="6597" title="Landed gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247597" start="6635" end="6651" title="House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="6676" end="6693" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="cabinet ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="6842" end="6862" title="British constitution" label="British constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333767" start="6891" end="6911" title="rights of Englishmen" label="rights of Englishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112521" start="7001" end="7021" title="Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies" label="colonial governments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7045" end="7059" title="Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies#Governor" label="royal governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="7072" end="7081" title="Executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12120462" start="7089" end="7104" title="Property qualification" label="Property owners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7115" end="7132" title="Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies#Assembly" label="colonial assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="7223" end="7227" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280467" start="7250" end="7262" title="Radical Whig" label="Radical Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="7575" end="7594" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="7639" end="7651" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="7909" end="7924" title="Navigation Acts" label="Navigation Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033747" start="8270" end="8283" title="Wool Act 1698" label="Wool Act 1698"/>
<link wikidata="Q11240858" start="8289" end="8301" title="Hat Act 1731" label="Hat Act 1731"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273627" start="8311" end="8324" title="Iron Act 1750" label="Iron Act 1750"/>
<link wikidata="Q939439" start="8380" end="8397" title="Molasses Act 1733" label="Molasses Act 1733"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869168" start="8419" end="8424" title="History of the British penny (1714–1901)" label="pence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9426" end="9443" title="Militia (United States)#Early-mid Colonial era (1607–1754)" label="colonial militias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347667" start="9547" end="9565" title="Robert Middlekauff" label="Robert Middlekauff"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="9678" end="9699" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970968" start="9766" end="9782" title="British Regulars" label="British Regulars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="9990" end="10018" title="New France" label="that nation&amp;#x27;s territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002480" start="10071" end="10084" title="Bute ministry" label="Bute ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516693" start="10215" end="10227" title="History of the British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="10307" end="10320" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029541" start="10513" end="10519" title="History of Canada (1763–1867)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050231" start="10539" end="10546" title="British Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="10812" end="10830" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607530" start="10860" end="10878" title="Grenville ministry" label="Grenville ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="10890" end="10916" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848274" start="11010" end="11024" title="Indian Reserve (1763)" label="Indian Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q244616" start="11237" end="11253" title="George Grenville" label="George Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="11261" end="11275" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="11686" end="11696" title="per capita" label="per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="11726" end="11734" title="Shilling (British coin)" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363379" start="11906" end="11915" title="Sugar Act" label="Sugar Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="12252" end="12261" title="Stamp Act 1765" label="Stamp Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q926871" start="12291" end="12303" title="direct taxes" label="direct taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="12701" end="12735" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="the unwritten English constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q31306" start="12878" end="12893" title="Sons of Liberty" label="Sons of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="13036" end="13042" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892842" start="13148" end="13165" title="Thomas Hutchinson (governor)" label="Thomas Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915080" start="13254" end="13272" title="Stamp Act Congress" label="Stamp Act Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q878687" start="13319" end="13333" title="John Dickinson (delegate)" label="John Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249442" start="13344" end="13380" title="Declaration of Rights and Grievances" label="Declaration of Rights and Grievances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333767" start="13509" end="13529" title="Rights of Englishmen" label="rights as Englishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231641" start="13589" end="13636" title="Continental Association" label="a boycott on imports of all British merchandise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="13794" end="13807" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="13975" end="13985" title="First British Empire" label="the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q162157" start="14111" end="14131" title="Chartered company" label="British corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935160" start="14238" end="14260" title="virtual representation" label="virtual representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q557531" start="14431" end="14441" title="James Otis, Jr." label="James Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453764" start="14625" end="14646" title="First Rockingham ministry" label="Rockingham government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182068" start="15109" end="15124" title="Declaratory Act" label="Declaratory Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="15370" end="15388" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093092" start="15400" end="15414" title="Townshend Acts" label="Townshend Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="15532" end="15538" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533735" start="15871" end="15908" title="Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania" label="Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q878687" start="15916" end="15930" title="John Dickinson" label="John Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="16267" end="16291" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784217" start="16292" end="16316" title="Massachusetts Circular Letter" label="issued a circular letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="16563" end="16575" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836621" start="16966" end="16982" title="Treason Act 1543" label="Treason Act 1543"/>
<link wikidata="Q215687" start="17656" end="17671" title="Boston Massacre" label="Boston Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="17724" end="17734" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="17958" end="17968" title="Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q212963" start="18200" end="18212" title="Samuel Adams" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661398" start="18280" end="18290" title="John Brown (Rhode Island politician)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495317" start="18409" end="18434" title="Gaspee Affair" label="&amp;quot;Gaspee&amp;quot; Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950692" start="18521" end="18551" title="Hutchinson letters affair" label="private letters were published"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846696" start="18701" end="18714" title="Andrew Oliver" label="Andrew Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820583" start="19116" end="19134" title="postmaster general" label="postmaster general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986806" start="19292" end="19320" title="Committees of Correspondence" label="Committees of Correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047538" start="20103" end="20110" title="Tea Act" label="Tea Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="20189" end="20207" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q894564" start="21095" end="21108" title="Boston Harbor" label="Boston Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="21156" end="21172" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="21351" end="21367" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Intolerable Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823565" start="21439" end="21467" title="Massachusetts Government Act" label="Massachusetts Government Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823558" start="21557" end="21586" title="Administration of Justice Act 1774" label="Administration of Justice Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612780" start="21711" end="21726" title="Boston Port Act" label="Boston Port Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049343" start="21860" end="21882" title="Quartering Acts" label="Quartering Act of 1774"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503022" start="22044" end="22060" title="Suffolk Resolves" label="Suffolk Resolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="22224" end="22250" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739097" start="22407" end="22422" title="Joseph Galloway" label="Joseph Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231641" start="22636" end="22665" title="Continental Association" label="Congress called for a boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="22814" end="22821" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="23055" end="23066" title="George III" label="King George"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="23253" end="23285" title="Battles of Lexington and Concord" label="Battles of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="23417" end="23444" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="23576" end="23592" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676888" start="23669" end="23690" title="Olive Branch Petition" label="Olive Branch Petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247433" start="23782" end="23807" title="Proclamation of Rebellion" label="Proclamation of Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="23916" end="23937" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="24143" end="24160" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="24170" end="24186" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q952774" start="24243" end="24270" title="Invasion of Quebec (1775)" label="invaded northeastern Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q298237" start="24286" end="24301" title="Benedict Arnold" label="Benedict Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q444947" start="24306" end="24324" title="Richard Montgomery" label="Richard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078508" start="24488" end="24523" title="fortification of Dorchester Heights" label="fortification of Dorchester Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546173" start="24546" end="24574" title="Capture of Fort Ticonderoga" label="captured at Fort Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186762" start="24644" end="24659" title="Evacuation Day (Massachusetts)" label="evacuate Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="24949" end="24970" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="25013" end="25026" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="25035" end="25041" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947912" start="25358" end="25380" title="Provincial Congress" label="their own legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="25569" end="25575" title="Sovereign state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="25599" end="25607" title="Colony" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617382" start="25636" end="25649" title="Province of New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335128" start="25804" end="25814" title="Province of New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513167" start="25816" end="25830" title="Province of South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="25836" end="25844" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335224" start="25888" end="25900" title="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="25905" end="25916" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="25944" end="25957" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="26096" end="26106" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="26133" end="26145" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="26172" end="26185" title="the franchise" label="the franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164173" start="26254" end="26262" title="Constitution of Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164205" start="26264" end="26272" title="Constitution of Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q196171" start="26274" end="26287" title="Constitution of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013400" start="26289" end="26297" title="Constitution of New York" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995091" start="26303" end="26311" title="Constitution of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="26485" end="26506" title="Bicameral legislature" label="Bicameral legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="26563" end="26571" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="26749" end="26775" title="Established church" label="state-established religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110082" start="26780" end="26792" title="Constitution of Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164214" start="26794" end="26804" title="Constitution of New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164213" start="26810" end="26823" title="Constitution of New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="27060" end="27083" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="27265" end="27277" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="27676" end="27688" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054573" start="27784" end="27818" title="North Carolina Provincial Congress" label="North Carolina Provincial Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642242" start="27830" end="27846" title="Halifax Resolves" label="Halifax Resolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q725907" start="28032" end="28049" title="Richard Henry Lee" label="Richard Henry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q390028" start="28391" end="28415" title="Independence Hall" label="Pennsylvania State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="28419" end="28431" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="28457" end="28473" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="28488" end="28520" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="America&amp;#x27;s Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="28561" end="28571" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="28576" end="28603" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="28634" end="28650" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344665" start="28672" end="28689" title="Committee of Five" label="Committee of Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="28900" end="28910" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="28915" end="28928" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="28939" end="28947" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="28952" end="28963" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q266449" start="29000" end="29025" title="all men are created equal" label="all men are created equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140229" start="29180" end="29185" title="Political union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="29287" end="29332" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="29475" end="29493" title="Confederation" label="shared sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="29520" end="29537" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="29727" end="29762" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="United States in Congress Assembled"/>
<link wikidata="Q887130" start="29820" end="29837" title="Samuel Huntington (statesman)" label="Samuel Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975504" start="29975" end="29987" title="Jeremy Black (historian)" label="Jeremy Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="30646" end="30666" title="Halifax Regional Municipality" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q862751" start="30791" end="30809" title="Battle of Long Island" label="Battle of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="30876" end="30882" title="New York Harbor" label="harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="31028" end="31038" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="31043" end="31060" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332616" start="31081" end="31093" title="Richard Howe, 1st Earl Howe" label="Richard Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="31097" end="31110" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="31114" end="31129" title="New York Harbor" label="New York Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933851" start="31174" end="31204" title="Staten Island Peace Conference" label="Staten Island Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="31251" end="31278" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q692137" start="31347" end="31367" title="Battle of Kip&amp;#x27;s Bay" label="seized New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133590" start="31502" end="31515" title="Evacuation Day (New York)" label="November 1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584076" start="31610" end="31630" title="Intelligence in the American Revolutionary War" label="intelligence network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971587" start="31725" end="31751" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River" label="crossed the Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="31833" end="31840" title="Hessian (soldier)" label="Hessian"/>
<link wikidata="Q653664" start="31863" end="31870" title="Battle of Trenton" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132579" start="31875" end="31884" title="Battle of Princeton" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444930" start="32109" end="32127" title="Philadelphia campaign" label="coordinated attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="32269" end="32278" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="32721" end="32729" title="John Burgoyne" label="Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="32820" end="32839" title="Battles of Saratoga" label="Battles of Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077947" start="32937" end="32949" title="Fort Mifflin" label="Fort Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855211" start="33097" end="33109" title="Valley Forge" label="Valley Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="33989" end="34030" title="Battles of Saratoga" label="The capture of a British army at Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650034" start="34343" end="34371" title="Treaty of Amity and Commerce (USA–France)" label="Treaty of Amity and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788282" start="34380" end="34398" title="Treaty of Alliance (1778)" label="Treaty of Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="34400" end="34412" title="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q450734" start="35167" end="35180" title="Henry Clinton (American War of Independence)" label="Henry Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638488" start="35277" end="35307" title="Battle of Monmouth" label="Battle of Monmouth Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="35589" end="35607" title="British Royal Navy" label="British Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="35633" end="35646" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569779" start="35835" end="35850" title="Southern colonies" label="southern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="36254" end="36262" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="36282" end="36289" title="Province of Georgia" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235083" start="36345" end="36360" title="Siege of Charleston" label="took Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539513" start="36391" end="36407" title="Battle of Camden" label="Battle of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="36823" end="36836" title="guerrilla war" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="37061" end="37079" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419459" start="37225" end="37249" title="Battle of the Chesapeake" label="Battle of the Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="37931" end="37947" title="coup d&amp;#x27;etat" label="coup d&amp;#x27;etat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574076" start="38003" end="38022" title="Newburgh Conspiracy" label="Newburgh Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230730" start="38207" end="38222" title="John E. Ferling" label="John E. Ferling"/>
<link wikidata="Q669468" start="38334" end="38346" title="Joseph Ellis" label="Joseph Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q312573" start="39657" end="39671" title="William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne" label="Lord Shelburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="39909" end="39924" title="Northwest Territory" label="southern Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="40623" end="40633" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454373" start="40760" end="40781" title="fiscal-military state" label="fiscal-military state"/>
<link wikidata="Q108872437" start="41364" end="41388" title="institutional corruption" label="institutional corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="41561" end="41573" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q464876" start="42944" end="42957" title="Robert Morris (financier)" label="Robert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643465" start="42968" end="43014" title="Superintendent of Finance of the United States" label="Superintendent of Finance of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q806690" start="43072" end="43093" title="Bank of North America" label="Bank of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q206874" start="43129" end="43139" title="civil list" label="civil list"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850401" start="43528" end="43547" title="Continental currency banknotes" label="Continental Dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q280537" start="45840" end="45884" title="Northwest Ordinance" label="settled the issue of the western territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q392601" start="46475" end="46496" title="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion" label="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="46559" end="46582" title="Philadelphia Convention" label="Philadelphia Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="46621" end="46633" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="46655" end="46663" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="46710" end="46717" title="Federalism" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="46767" end="46784" title="Separation of powers" label="check-and-balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824580" start="46941" end="46959" title="Presidency of George Washington" label="new administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="47033" end="47046" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="47204" end="47222" title="inalienable rights" label="inalienable rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="47408" end="47436" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q190122" start="47891" end="47906" title="promissory note" label="promissory note"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="48410" end="48428" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="49384" end="49394" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="49497" end="49512" title="Social Contract" label="Social Contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="49517" end="49531" title="Natural Rights" label="Natural Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q231949" start="49619" end="49646" title="Two Treatises of Government" label="Two Treatises of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="49795" end="49818" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182619" start="50053" end="50067" title="John Trenchard (writer)" label="John Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790107" start="50069" end="50082" title="Thomas Gordon (writer)" label="Thomas Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888821" start="50088" end="50103" title="Benjamin Hoadly" label="Benjamin Hoadly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195389" start="50306" end="50320" title="Pine Tree Flag" label="Pine Tree Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q112079417" start="50367" end="50386" title="right of revolution" label="right of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q112079417" start="50481" end="50527" title="Right of revolution" label="right of the people to overthrow their leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333767" start="50570" end="50590" title="rights of Englishmen" label="rights of Englishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="50674" end="50685" title="Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q361916" start="50766" end="50782" title="mixed government" label="mixed government"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="50887" end="50900" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="50921" end="50931" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig party"/>
<link wikidata="Q212963" start="51314" end="51326" title="Samuel Adams" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="51328" end="51341" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="51343" end="51353" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="51355" end="51372" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="51374" end="51390" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="51392" end="51404" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="51406" end="51423" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="51425" end="51438" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="51444" end="51462" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207333" start="51543" end="51554" title="Honour" label="honor bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338545" start="51681" end="51698" title="Mercy Otis Warren" label="Mercy Otis Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="51990" end="52007" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569779" start="52152" end="52169" title="Southern Colonies" label="Southern Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007213" start="52187" end="52207" title="New England Colonies" label="New England Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="52221" end="52239" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18245005" start="52243" end="52257" title="Congregationalism in the United States" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="52261" end="52278" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="52280" end="52291" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617382" start="52297" end="52310" title="Province of New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452027" start="52341" end="52349" title="Province of Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="52351" end="52359" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334526" start="52361" end="52375" title="Province of North-Carolina" label="North-Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513167" start="52377" end="52391" title="Province of South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="52397" end="52404" title="Province of Georgia" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="52410" end="52418" title="Province of New York" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335128" start="52420" end="52430" title="Province of New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475732" start="52432" end="52444" title="Province of Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571194" start="52446" end="52454" title="Delaware Colony" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335224" start="52464" end="52513" title="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations" label="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246390" start="52909" end="52925" title="John Witherspoon" label="John Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="52970" end="52982" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="53072" end="53077" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="53115" end="53125" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="53161" end="53168" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="53254" end="53271" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052674" start="53316" end="53328" title="Supreme Governor of the Church of England" label="titular head"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="53344" end="53356" title="state church" label="state church"/>
<link wikidata="Q822286" start="53829" end="53843" title="Bernard Bailyn" label="Bernard Bailyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282162" start="54103" end="54119" title="Disestablishmentarianism" label="disestablishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="54713" end="54723" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525867" start="54779" end="54800" title="Leonard Woods Labaree" label="Leonard Woods Labaree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163931" start="55166" end="55188" title="tarring and feathering" label="tarring and feathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700116" start="55864" end="55883" title="J. Franklin Jameson" label="J. Franklin Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="56735" end="56743" title="George III" label="the king"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="56890" end="56917" title="British constitution" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q333808" start="57203" end="57224" title="Sir George Trevelyan, 2nd Baronet" label="George Otto Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="58090" end="58100" title="Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q513569" start="58128" end="58140" title="Lord Chatham" label="Lord Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q69461" start="58500" end="58533" title="Early modern France" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s chief rival France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788282" start="58543" end="58561" title="Treaty of Alliance (1778)" label="treaty of alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14637172" start="58884" end="58889" title="Colonial India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322229" start="58935" end="58940" title="Enlightenment in Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="58957" end="58971" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090291" start="59115" end="59125" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Marquess of Stafford" label="Lord Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q38308" start="59130" end="59143" title="Thomas Thynne, 1st Marquess of Bath" label="Lord Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538124" start="59411" end="59423" title="Gordon riots" label="Gordon riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235083" start="59441" end="59460" title="Siege of Charleston" label="Siege of Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539513" start="59596" end="59612" title="Battle of Camden" label="Battle of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q425773" start="59621" end="59651" title="Battle of Guilford Court House" label="Battle of Guilford Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776326" start="59986" end="60003" title="Peace of Paris (1783)" label="Treaties of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="60075" end="60091" title="Spanish Florida" label="returned Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="60362" end="60372" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156830" start="60387" end="60414" title="United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom" label="American Minister to London"/>
<link wikidata="Q108822441" start="61446" end="61487" title="Early American publishers and printers" label="Newspapers were strongholds of patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q843940" start="62414" end="62438" title="Common Sense (pamphlet)" label="&amp;quot;Common Sense&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264431" start="63505" end="63519" title="Black Loyalist" label="Black Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="63715" end="63756" title="British North America" label="their remaining colonies in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020008" start="63805" end="63821" title="William Franklin" label="William Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335128" start="63874" end="63896" title="Province of New Jersey" label="Province of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q327006" start="64239" end="64253" title="Samuel Seabury (1729–1796)" label="Samuel Seabury"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="64665" end="64684" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191877" start="65163" end="65180" title="Quakers in the American Revolution" label="a sizeable number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020894" start="65776" end="65790" title="Deborah Samson" label="Deborah Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338545" start="65792" end="65809" title="Mercy Otis Warren" label="Mercy Otis Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q369456" start="66043" end="66057" title="camp followers" label="camp followers"/>
<link wikidata="Q264512" start="66713" end="66738" title="Middleton, Massachusetts" label="Middletown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484979" start="67340" end="67357" title="dummy corporation" label="dummy corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q70326" start="67365" end="67384" title="Pierre Beaumarchais" label="Pierre Beaumarchais"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="67532" end="67543" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q107001105" start="67634" end="67669" title="Charles François Adrien le Paulmier" label="Charles François Adrien le Paulmier"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="67711" end="67723" title="Espionage" label="secret agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="67754" end="67771" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788282" start="67897" end="67915" title="Treaty of Alliance (1778)" label="Treaty of Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="68003" end="68011" title="matériel" label="matériel"/>
<link wikidata="Q386687" start="68196" end="68214" title="Bernardo de Gálvez" label="Bernardo de Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="68249" end="68258" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="68560" end="68567" title="Prince-elector" label="Elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="68571" end="68578" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="68642" end="68666" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827277" start="68688" end="68704" title="auxiliaries" label="auxiliary troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q168651" start="68736" end="68765" title="Landgraviate of Hessen-Kassel" label="Landgraviate of Hessen-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="68777" end="68785" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="68821" end="68832" title="Mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="69314" end="69343" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben" label="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146014" start="69541" end="69567" title="First League of Armed Neutrality" label="League of Armed Neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="69578" end="69601" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick II of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157548" start="70338" end="70368" title="War of the Bavarian Succession" label="War of the Bavarian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="70601" end="70616" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="70714" end="70722" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="71615" end="71623" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="71699" end="71705" title="Oneida people" label="Oneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="71710" end="71719" title="Tuscarora people" label="Tuscarora"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="71867" end="71894" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="regions of southwest Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044394" start="72053" end="72062" title="Province of Carolina" label="Carolinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="72213" end="72221" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971844" start="72331" end="72366" title="Washington District, North Carolina" label="Washington District, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q472747" start="72421" end="72441" title="Chickamauga Cherokee" label="Chickamauga Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304956" start="72448" end="72462" title="Dragging Canoe" label="Dragging Canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122685" start="72646" end="72668" title="Cherokee–American wars" label="Cherokee–American wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="72775" end="72780" title="Muscogee" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q505146" start="72783" end="72795" title="Joseph Brant" label="Joseph Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="72845" end="72851" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426614" start="73170" end="73247" title="Sullivan Expedition" label="Continental Army forced the hostile Indigenous people out of upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q886420" start="73283" end="73296" title="John Sullivan (general)" label="John Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q528183" start="73381" end="73398" title="Battle of Newtown" label="Battle of Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007213" start="73967" end="73987" title="New England Colonies" label="New England Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841282" start="73992" end="74007" title="Middle Colonies" label="Middle Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569779" start="74032" end="74049" title="Southern Colonies" label="Southern Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q288241" start="74508" end="74523" title="Crispus Attucks" label="Crispus Attucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q215687" start="74565" end="74580" title="Boston Massacre" label="Boston Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="74904" end="74918" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315497" start="75213" end="75240" title="Dunmore&amp;#x27;s Proclamation" label="Dunmore&amp;#x27;s Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q336639" start="75266" end="75278" title="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore" label="Lord Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q257900" start="75450" end="75468" title="Ethiopian Regiment" label="Ethiopian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173832" start="75480" end="75497" title="David Brion Davis" label="David Brion Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119326" start="75996" end="76018" title="27 colonial grievances" label="27 colonial grievances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="76038" end="76070" title="Slavery in the colonial United States" label="slavery in the American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="76270" end="76284" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q722973" start="76491" end="76501" title="Thomas Day (writer)" label="Thomas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="76691" end="76702" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q257911" start="76861" end="76877" title="Phyllis Wheatley" label="Phyllis Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112443" start="76930" end="76938" title="Columbia (name)" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185542" start="76971" end="76995" title="Philipsburg Proclamation" label="Philipsburg Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="77185" end="77193" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="77198" end="77208" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264431" start="77290" end="77304" title="Black Loyalist" label="Black Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="77323" end="77334" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="77336" end="77348" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="77354" end="77366" title="Lower Canada" label="Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="77447" end="77458" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="77733" end="77745" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983498" start="77780" end="77784" title="Sierra Leone Creole people" label="Krio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="77801" end="77809" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="78439" end="78462" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q822286" start="78915" end="78929" title="Bernard Bailyn" label="Bernard Bailyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585778" start="78931" end="78942" title="Gordon S. Wood" label="Gordon Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q365672" start="78948" end="78961" title="Edmund Morgan (historian)" label="Edmund Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q428586" start="80750" end="80794" title="Shot heard round the world" label="&amp;quot;shot heard &amp;#x27;round the world&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108868" start="81077" end="81097" title="Atlantic Revolutions" label="Atlantic Revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="81134" end="81151" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="81157" end="81175" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="81185" end="81220" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="Latin American wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="81249" end="81270" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="rebellions in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="81276" end="81306" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="81334" end="81351" title="Constitution of the United States" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269452" start="81985" end="82005" title="Gustaf Philip Creutz" label="Gustaf Philip Creutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="82025" end="82045" title="Gustav III of Sweden" label="Gustav III of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969082" start="82079" end="82107" title="Treaty of Amity and Commerce (USA–Sweden)" label="Treaty of Amity and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="82251" end="82256" title="British Whig Party" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777934" start="82355" end="82377" title="Protestant Ascendancy" label="who controlled Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="82387" end="82396" title="Irish Home Rule" label="self-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q333041" start="82422" end="82435" title="Henry Grattan" label="Henry Grattan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82441" end="82460" title="Irish Patriot Party#Grattan&amp;#x27;s Patriots" label="Irish Patriot Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508788" start="82902" end="82926" title="Monopoly on violence" label="monopoly of lethal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="82961" end="82981" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="83027" end="83044" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="83079" end="83091" title="Dutch Revolt" label="Dutch Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="83139" end="83156" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="83275" end="83326" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q557531" start="83886" end="83901" title="James Otis, Jr." label="James Otis, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q656478" start="84069" end="84082" title="Benjamin Rush" label="Benjamin Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q206191" start="86775" end="86788" title="Abigail Adams" label="Abigail Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164214" start="87216" end="87245" title="New Jersey State Constitution" label="New Jersey State Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="87579" end="87587" title="suffrage" label="suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="87706" end="87709" title="American Revolutionary War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796702" start="87749" end="87762" title="Maya Jasanoff" label="Maya Jasanoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="87935" end="87941" title="Province of Quebec (1763-1791)" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388366" start="87964" end="87981" title="Eastern Townships" label="Eastern Townships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="87984" end="88004" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="88010" end="88021" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="88069" end="88076" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="88082" end="88095" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q744159" start="88825" end="88851" title="President&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Washington&amp;#x27;s Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="88868" end="88884" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q731635" start="88972" end="88984" title="Mount Vernon" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="89180" end="89198" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="89237" end="89259" title="Northern United States" label="Northern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="89268" end="89290" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="89367" end="89393" title="United States Bicentennial" label="United States Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="89453" end="89464" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="" start="89590" end="89648" title=":Category:American Revolutionary War sites" label="battlefields and historic sites of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="89701" end="89722" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q390028" start="89811" end="89828" title="Independence Hall" label="Independence Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124628" start="89877" end="89903" title="American Battlefield Trust" label="American Battlefield Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="90114" end="90135" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Colonial Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q30716272" start="90226" end="90261" title="International relations (1648–1814)" label="International relations (1648–1814)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243754" start="90264" end="90307" title="List of films about the American Revolution" label="List of films about the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q58175865" start="90310" end="90344" title="List of George Washington articles" label="List of George Washington articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864006" start="90347" end="90417" title="List of television series and miniseries about the American Revolution" label="List of television series and miniseries about the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713548" start="90420" end="90453" title="Museum of the American Revolution" label="Museum of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082205" start="90604" end="90619" title="Charles Royster" label="Charles Royster"/>
<link wikidata="Q59631896" start="91173" end="91187" title="John Richard Alden" label="Alden, John R."/>
<link wikidata="Q669468" start="92175" end="92191" title="Joseph J. Ellis" label="Ellis, Joseph J."/>
<link wikidata="Q5292784" start="92311" end="92328" title="Don Higginbotham" label="Higginbotham, Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114263" start="92645" end="92660" title="Jack Rakove" label="Rakove, Jack N."/>
<link wikidata="" start="92819" end="92873" title="American Revolutions: A Continental History, 1750–1804" label="American Revolutions: A Continental History, 1750–1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600032" start="92930" end="92948" title="Stanley Weintraub" label="Weintraub, Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165207" start="93409" end="93432" title="European History Online" label="European History Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q327772" start="93441" end="93470" title="Institute of European History" label="Institute of European History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549253" start="93993" end="94006" title="Gerald Horne" label="Horne, Gerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014807" start="94119" end="94144" title="New York University Press" label="New York University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q374610" start="94313" end="94330" title="David McCullough" label="McCullough, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553147" start="94332" end="94336" title="1776 (book)" label="1776"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155052" start="94384" end="94398" title="Pauline Maier" label="Maier, Pauline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380712" start="94640" end="94653" title="Allan Nevins" label="Nevins, Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585778" start="94842" end="94856" title="Gordon S. Wood" label="Gordon S. Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="94996" end="95012" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Rothbard, Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158296" start="95020" end="95040" title="Conceived in Liberty" label="Conceived in Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="95175" end="95186" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q982883" start="98488" end="98506" title="Samuel Eliot Morison" label="Morison, Samuel E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1059456" start="100065" end="100092" title="New-York Historical Society" label="New-York Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185824" start="101006" end="101020" title="Democracy Now!" label="Democracy Now!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1974" wikidata="Q2520" url="?curid=1974" title="April 17">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*1080 – Harald III of Denmark dies and is succeeded by Canute IV, who would later be the first Dane to be canonized.
*1349 – The rule of the Bavand dynasty in Mazandaran is brought to an end by the murder of Hasan II.
*1362 – Kaunas Castle falls to the Teutonic Order after a month-long siege.
*1492 – Spain and Christopher Columbus sign the Capitulations of Santa Fe for his voyage to Asia to acquire spices.
*1521 – Trial of Martin Luther over his teachings begins during the assembly of the Diet of Worms. Initially intimidated, he asks for time to reflect before answering and is given a stay of one day.
*1524 – Giovanni da Verrazzano reaches New York harbor.
===1601–1900===
*1797 – Sir Ralph Abercromby attacks San Juan, Puerto Rico, in what would be one of the largest invasions of the Spanish territories in the Americas. 
* 1797 – Citizens of Verona begin an unsuccessful eight-day rebellion against the French occupying forces.
*1861 – The state of Virginia&#x27;s secession convention votes to secede from the United States; Virginia later becomes the eighth state to join the Confederate States of America.
*1863 – American Civil War: Grierson&#x27;s Raid begins: Troops under Union Army Colonel Benjamin Grierson attack central Mississippi.
*1864 – American Civil War: The Battle of Plymouth begins: Confederate forces attack Plymouth, North Carolina.
*1869 – Morelos is admitted as the 27th state of Mexico.
*1876 – Catalpa rescue: The rescue of six Fenian prisoners from Fremantle Prison in Western Australia.
*1895 – The Treaty of Shimonoseki between China and Japan is signed. This marks the end of the First Sino-Japanese War, and the defeated Qing Empire is forced to renounce its claims on Korea and to concede the southern portion of the Fengtian province, Taiwan and the Penghu to Japan.

===1901–present===
*1905 – The Supreme Court of the United States decides &quot;Lochner v. New York&quot;, which holds that the &quot;right to free contract&quot; is implicit in the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
*1907 – The Ellis Island immigration center processes 11,747 people, more than on any other day.
*1912 – Russian troops open fire on striking goldfield workers in northeast Siberia, killing at least 150.
*1931 – After negotiations between Catalan and Spanish provisional governments, the Catalan Republic proclaimed in April 14 becomes the Generalitat de Catalunya, the autonomous government of Catalonia within the Spanish Republic.
*1941 – World War II: The Axis powers invasion of Yugoslavia is completed when it signs an armistice with Germany and Italy.
*1942 – French prisoner of war General Henri Giraud escapes from his castle prison in Königstein Fortress.
*1944 – Forces of the Communist-controlled Greek People&#x27;s Liberation Army attack the smaller National and Social Liberation resistance group, which surrenders. Its leader Dimitrios Psarros is murdered.
*1945 – World War II: Montese, Italy, is liberated from Nazi forces.
* 1945 – Historian Tran Trong Kim is appointed the Prime Minister of the Empire of Vietnam.
*1946 – The last French troops are withdrawn from Syria.
*1951 – The Peak District becomes the United Kingdom&#x27;s first National Park.
*1961 – Bay of Pigs Invasion: A group of Cuban exiles financed and trained by the CIA lands at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba with the aim of ousting Fidel Castro.
*1964 – Jerrie Mock completes the first around-the-world airplane flight by a woman. Her solo flight in the &quot;Spirit of Columbus&quot;, which took 29 1/2 days, took off and landed at the Port Columbus International Airport in Ohio. 
*1969 – Sirhan Sirhan is convicted of assassinating Robert F. Kennedy.
* 1969 – Communist Party of Czechoslovakia chairman Alexander Dubček is deposed.
*1970 – Apollo program: The damaged Apollo 13 spacecraft returns to Earth safely.
*1971 – The Provisional Government of Bangladesh is formed.
*1975 – The Cambodian Civil War ends. The Khmer Rouge captures the capital Phnom Penh and Cambodian government forces surrender.
*1978 – Mir Akbar Khyber is assassinated, provoking the Saur Revolution in Afghanistan.
*1982 – Constitution Act, 1982 Patriation of the Canadian constitution in Ottawa by Proclamation of Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada.
*1986 – An alleged state of war lasting 335 years between the Netherlands and the Isles of Scilly declared peace bringing an end to any hypothetical war that may have been legally considered to exist.
*1992 – The &quot;Katina P&quot; is deliberately run aground off Maputo, Mozambique, and 60,000 tons of crude oil spill into the ocean.
*1998 – Space Shuttle &quot;Columbia&quot; is launched on STS-90, the final Spacelab mission.
*2003 – Anneli Jäätteenmäki takes office as the first female prime minister of Finland.
*2006 – A Palestinian suicide bomber detonates an explosive device in a Tel Aviv restaurant, killing 11 people and injuring 70.
*2013 – An explosion at a fertilizer plant in the city of West, Texas, kills 15 people and injures 160 others.
*2014 – NASA&#x27;s Kepler space telescope confirms the discovery of the first Earth-size planet in the habitable zone of another star.
*2021 – The funeral of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, takes place at St George&#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*1277 – Michael IX Palaiologos, Byzantine emperor (d. 1320)
*1455 – Andrea Gritti, Doge of Venice (d. 1538)
*1497 – Pedro de Valdivia, Spanish conquistador, conquered northern Chile (d. 1553)
*1573 – Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria (d. 1651)
*1586 – John Ford, English poet and playwright (d. 1639)
*1598 – Giovanni Battista Riccioli, Italian priest and astronomer (d. 1671)
===1601–1900===
*1620 – Marguerite Bourgeoys, French-Canadian nun and saint, founded the Congregation of Notre Dame of Montreal (d. 1700)
*1635 – Edward Stillingfleet, British theologian and scholar (d. 1699)
*1683 – Johann David Heinichen, German composer and theorist (d. 1729)
*1710 – Henry Erskine, 10th Earl of Buchan, Scottish politician (d. 1767)
*1734 – Taksin, King of Thailand (d. 1782)
*1741 – Samuel Chase, American lawyer and jurist (d. 1811)
*1750 – François de Neufchâteau, French academic and politician, French Minister of the Interior (d. 1828)
*1756 – Dheeran Chinnamalai, Indian commander (d. 1805)
*1766 – Collin McKinney, American surveyor, merchant, and politician (d. 1861)
*1794 – Carl Friedrich Philipp von Martius, German botanist and explorer (d. 1868)
*1798 – Étienne Bobillier, French mathematician and academic (d. 1840)
*1799 – Eliza Acton, English food writer and poet (d. 1859)
*1814 – Josif Pančić, Serbian botanist and academic (d. 1888)
*1816 – Thomas Hazlehurst, English architect and philanthropist (d. 1876)
*1820 – Alexander Cartwright, American firefighter and (disputed) inventor of baseball (d. 1892)
*1833 – Jean-Baptiste Accolay, Belgian violinist, composer, and conductor (d. 1900)
*1837 – J. P. Morgan, American banker and financier, founded J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. (d. 1913)
*1842 – Maurice Rouvier, French businessman and politician, 53rd Prime Minister of France (d. 1911)
*1849 – William R. Day, American jurist and politician, 36th United States Secretary of State (d. 1923)
*1852 – Cap Anson, American baseball player and manager (d. 1922)
*1863 – Augustus Edward Hough Love, English mathematician and theorist (d. 1940)
*1865 – Ursula Ledóchowska, Polish-Austrian nun and saint, founded the Congregation of the Ursulines of the Agonizing Heart of Jesus (d. 1939)
*1866 – Ernest Starling, English physiologist and academic (d. 1927)
*1875 – Aleksander Tõnisson, Estonian general and politician, 5th Estonian Minister of War (d. 1941)
*1877 – Matsudaira Tsuneo, Japanese diplomat (d. 1949)
*1878 – Emil Fuchs, German-American lawyer and businessman (d. 1961)
* 1878 – Demetrios Petrokokkinos, Greek tennis player (d. 1942)
*1879 – Henri Tauzin, French hurdler (d. 1918)
*1882 – Artur Schnabel, Polish pianist and composer (d. 1951)
*1888 – Herms Niel, German soldier, trombonist, and composer (d. 1954)
*1891 – George Adamski, Polish-American ufologist and author (d. 1965)
*1895 – Robert Dean Frisbie, American soldier and author (d. 1948)
*1896 – Señor Wences, Spanish-American ventriloquist (d. 1999)
*1897 – Nisargadatta Maharaj, Indian philosopher and educator (d. 1981)
* 1897 – Thornton Wilder, American novelist and playwright (d. 1975)
* 1897 – Edouard Wyss-Dunant, Swiss physician and mountaineer (d. 1983)
*1899 – Aleksander Klumberg, Estonian decathlete and coach (d. 1958)
===1901–present===
*1903 – Nicolas Nabokov, Russian-American composer and educator (d. 1978)
* 1903 – Gregor Piatigorsky, Ukrainian-American cellist and educator (d. 1976)
* 1903 – Morgan Taylor, American hurdler and coach (d. 1975)
*1905 – Louis Jean Heydt, American journalist and actor (d. 1960)
* 1905 – Arthur Lake, American actor (d. 1987)
*1906 – Sidney Garfield, American physician, co-founded Kaiser Permanente (d. 1984)
*1909 – Alain Poher, French politician, President of France (d. 1996)
*1910 – Evangelos Averoff, Greek historian and politician, Greek Minister of Defence (d. 1990)
* 1910 – Ivan Goff, Australian screenwriter and producer (d. 1999)
* 1910 – Helenio Herrera, French footballer and manager (d. 1997)
*1911 – Hervé Bazin, French author and poet (d. 1996)
* 1911 – Lester Rodney, American soldier and journalist (d. 2009)
*1912 – Marta Eggerth, Hungarian-American actress and singer (d. 2013)
*1914 – George Davis, American art director (d. 1984)
* 1914 – Mac Raboy, American illustrator (d. 1967)
*1915 – Martin Clemens, Scottish soldier (d. 2009)
* 1915 – Joe Foss, American general and politician, 20th Governor of South Dakota (d. 2003)
* 1915 – Regina Ghazaryan, Armenian painter (d. 1999)
*1916 – Win Maung, 3rd President of Union of Myanmar (d. 1989)
* 1916 – A. Thiagarajah, Sri Lankan educator and politician (d. 1981)
* 1916 – Sirimavo Bandaranaike, Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, world&#x27;s first female prime minister (d. 2000)
*1918 – William Holden, American actor (d. 1981)
*1919 – Gilles Lamontagne, Canadian lieutenant and politician, 24th Lieutenant Governor of Quebec (d. 2016)
* 1919 – Chavela Vargas, Costa Rican-Mexican singer-songwriter and actress (d. 2012)
*1920 – Edmonde Charles-Roux, French journalist and author (d. 2016)
*1923 – Lindsay Anderson, English actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 1994)
* 1923 – Solly Hemus, American baseball player, coach, and manager (d. 2017)
* 1923 – Neville McNamara, Australian air marshal (d. 2014)
* 1923 – Gianni Raimondi, Italian lyric tenor (d. 2008)
* 1923 – Harry Reasoner, American soldier and journalist (d. 1991)
*1924 – Kenneth Norman Jones, Australian public servant (d. 2022)
* 1924 – Donald Richie, American-Japanese author and critic (d. 2013)
*1925 – René Moawad, Lebanese lawyer and politician, 13th President of Lebanon (d. 1989)
*1926 – Joan Lorring, British actress (d. 2014)
* 1926 – Gerry McNeil, Canadian ice hockey player and manager (d. 2004)
*1927 – Margot Honecker, East German politician and First Lady (d. 2016)
*1928 – Victor Lownes, American businessman (d. 2017)
* 1928 – Cynthia Ozick, American short story writer, novelist, and essayist
* 1928 – Heinz Putzl, Austrian fencer
* 1928 – Fabien Roy, Canadian accountant and politician (d. 2023)
*1929 – James Last, German-American bassist, composer, and bandleader (d. 2015)
*1930 – Chris Barber, English trombonist and bandleader (d. 2021)
*1931 – John Barrett, English tennis player and sportscaster
* 1931 – Malcolm Browne, American journalist and photographer (d. 2012)
*1934 – Don Kirshner, American songwriter and producer (d. 2011)
* 1934 – Peter Morris, Australian-English surgeon and academic (d. 2022)
*1935 – Bud Paxson, American broadcaster, founded Home Shopping Network and Pax TV (d. 2015)
*1936 – Urs Wild, Swiss chemist (d. 2022)
*1937 – Ronald Hamowy, Canadian historian and academic (d. 2012)
* 1937 – Ferdinand Piëch, Austrian-German engineer and businessman (d. 2019)
*1938 – Ben Barnes, American businessman and politician, 36th Lieutenant Governor of Texas
* 1938 – Doug Lewis, Canadian lawyer and politician, 41st Canadian Minister of Justice
* 1938 – Ronald H. Miller, American theologian, author, and academic (d. 2011)
* 1938 – Kerry Wendell Thornley, American theorist and author (d. 1988)
*1939 – Robert Miller, American art dealer (d. 2011)
*1940 – Eric Dancer, English businessman and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Devon
* 1940 – Billy Fury, English singer-songwriter (d. 1983)
* 1940 – John McCririck, English journalist (d. 2019)
* 1940 – Chuck Menville, American animator and screenwriter (d. 1992)
* 1940 – Anja Silja, German soprano and actress
* 1940 – Agostino Vallini, Italian cardinal and vicar general of Rome
*1941 – Lagle Parek, Estonian architect and politician, Estonian Minister of the Interior
*1942 – Buster Williams, American jazz bassist 
* 1942 – Dnyaneshwar Agashe, Indian businessman and cricketer (d. 2009)
*1943 – Richard Allen Epstein, American lawyer, author, and academic
*1946 – Clare Francis, English sailor and author
*1947 – Nigel Emslie, Lord Emslie, Scottish lawyer and judge
* 1947 – Richard Field, English lawyer and judge
* 1947 – Sherrie Levine, American photographer
* 1947 – Tsutomu Wakamatsu, Japanese baseball player, coach, and manager
*1948 – Jan Hammer, Czech pianist, composer, and producer
* 1948 – Alice Harden, American educator and politician (d. 2012)
* 1948 – Pekka Vasala, Finnish runner
*1951 – Olivia Hussey, Argentinian-English actress (d. 2024)
* 1951 – Börje Salming, Swedish ice hockey player and businessman (d. 2022)
*1952 – Joe Alaskey, American voice actor (d. 2016)
* 1952 – Pierre Guité, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1952 – John McColl, English general and politician, Lieutenant Governor of Jersey
* 1952 – Željko Ražnatović, Serbian commander &quot;Arkan&quot; (d. 2000)
* 1952 – John Robertson, Scottish businessman and politician
*1954 – Riccardo Patrese, Italian race car driver
* 1954 – Roddy Piper, Canadian professional wrestler and actor (d. 2015)
* 1954 – Michael Sembello, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1955 – Todd Lickliter, American basketball player and coach
* 1955 – Pete Shelley, English singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2018)
* 1955 – Mike Stroud, English physician and explorer
*1956 – Colin Tyre, Lord Tyre, Scottish lawyer and judge
*1957 – Teri Austin, Canadian actress
* 1957 – Afrika Bambaataa, American disc jockey
* 1957 – Dwane Casey, American basketball coach
* 1957 – Nick Hornby, English novelist, essayist, lyricist, and screenwriter
* 1957 – Julia Macur, English lawyer and judge
* 1957 – Frank McDonough, British historian
*1958 – Laslo Babits, Canadian javelin thrower (d. 2013)
*1959 – Sean Bean, English actor
* 1959 – Jimmy Mann, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1959 – Li Meisu, Chinese shot putter
*1960 – Vladimir Polyakov, Russian pole vaulter
* 1961 – Norman Cowans, Jamaican-English cricketer
* 1961 – Boomer Esiason, American football player and sportscaster
* 1961 – Bella Freud, English fashion designer
*1962 – Paul Nicholls, English jockey and trainer
*1964 – Ken Daneyko, Canadian ice hockey player and sportscaster
* 1964 – Maynard James Keenan, American singer-songwriter and producer 
* 1964 – Rachel Notley, Canadian politician
* 1964 – Lela Rochon, American actress
*1966 – Vikram, Indian actor and singer
*1967 – Henry Ian Cusick, Peruvian-Scottish actor
* 1967 – Kimberly Elise, American actress
* 1967 – Marquis Grissom, American baseball player and coach
* 1967 – Ian Jones, New Zealand rugby player
* 1967 – Barnaby Joyce, Australian politician, 17th Deputy Prime Minister of Australia
* 1967 – Liz Phair, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1968 – Julie Fagerholt, Danish fashion designer
* 1968 – Phil Henderson, American basketball player and coach (d. 2013)
* 1968 – Eric Lamaze, Canadian jockey
* 1968 – Roger Twose, New Zealand cricketer
* 1968 – Richie Woodhall, English boxer and trainer
*1970 – Redman, American rapper, producer, and actor 
*1971 – Claire Sweeney, English actress 
*1972 – Gary Bennett, American baseball player
* 1972 – Tony Boselli, American football player and sportscaster
* 1972 – Jennifer Garner, American actress 
* 1972 – Muttiah Muralitharan, Sri Lankan cricketer
* 1972 – Yuichi Nishimura, Japanese footballer and referee
* 1972 – Terran Sandwith, Canadian ice hockey player
*1973 – Katrin Koov, Estonian architect
* 1973 – Brett Maher, Australian basketball player and sportscaster
* 1973 – Theo Ratliff, American basketball player
*1974 – Mikael Åkerfeldt, Swedish singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer 
* 1974 – Victoria Beckham, English singer and fashion designer 
*1975 – Heidi Alexander, English politician
* 1975 – Travis Roy, American ice hockey player (d. 2020)
*1976 – Maurice Wignall, Jamaican hurdler and long jumper
*1977 – Chad Hedrick, American speed skater
* 1977 – Frederik Magle, Danish composer, organist, and pianist
*1978 – Monika Bergmann-Schmuderer, German skier
* 1978 – Lindsay Hartley, American actress
* 1978 – Jason White, Scottish rugby player
*1979 – Eric Brewer, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1979 – Marija Šestak, Serbian-Slovenian triple jumper
*1980 – Fabián Vargas, Colombian footballer
* 1980 – Curtis Woodhouse, English footballer, boxer, and manager
*1981 – Jenny Meadows, English runner
* 1981 – Hanna Pakarinen, Finnish singer-songwriter
* 1981 – Ryan Raburn, American baseball player
* 1981 – Chris Thompson, English runner
* 1981 – Zhang Yaokun, Chinese footballer
*1982 – Brad Boyes, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1982 – Chuck Kobasew, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1982 – Tyron Woodley, American mixed martial artist
*1983 – Stanislav Chistov, Russian ice hockey player
* 1983 – Roberto Jiménez, Peruvian footballer
* 1983 – Andrea Marcato, Italian rugby player
*1984 – Pablo Sebastián Álvarez, Argentinian footballer
* 1984 – Jed Lowrie, American baseball player
* 1984 – Raffaele Palladino, Italian footballer
*1985 – Rooney Mara, American actress
* 1985 – Luke Mitchell, Australian actor and model
* 1985 – Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, French tennis player
*1986 – Romain Grosjean, French race car driver
*1988 – Takahiro Moriuchi, Japanese singer-songwriter 
*1989 – Paraskevi Papachristou, Greek triple jumper
* 1989 – Avi Kaplan, singer and songwriter
*1990 – Jonathan Brown, Welsh footballer
*1992 – Lachlan Maranta, Australian rugby league footballer
*1992 – Jo Jinho, South Korean singer
*1994 – Alanna Goldie, Canadian fencer
*1994 – Yang Hongseok, South Korean singer and actor
*1995 – Jung Wheein, South Korean singer
*1996 – Lorna Fitzgerald, British actress
* 1996 – Caitlin Parker, Australian boxer
* 1996 – Helene Spilling, Norwegian dancer
*1998 – Suppapong Udomkaewkanjana (Saint), Thai actor and singer
*2001 – Shin Ryujin, South Korean rapper, singer and dancer
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 485 – Proclus, Greek mathematician and philosopher (b. 412)
* 617 – Donnán of Eigg, Irish priest and saint
* 648 – Xiao, empress of the Sui dynasty
* 744 – Al-Walid II, Umayyad caliph (b. 706)
* 818 – Bernard of Italy, Frankish king (b. 797)
* 858 – Benedict III, pope of the Catholic Church
*1071 – Manuel Komnenos, Byzantine military commander (b. c. 1045)
*1080 – Harald III of Denmark (b. 1041)
*1111 – Robert of Molesme, Christian saint and abbot (b. 1027)
*1298 – Árni Þorláksson, Icelandic bishop (b. 1237)
*1321 – Infanta Branca of Portugal, daughter of King Afonso III of Portugal (b. 1259)
*1331 – Robert de Vere, 6th Earl of Oxford, English nobleman (b. 1257)
*1344 – Constantine II, King of Armenia
*1355 – Marin Falier, Doge of Venice (b. 1285)
*1427 – John IV, Duke of Brabant (b. 1403)
*1539 – George, Duke of Saxony (b. 1471)
*1574 – Joachim Camerarius, German scholar and translator (b. 1500)
===1601–1900===
*1669 – Antonio Bertali, Italian violinist and composer (b. 1605)
*1680 – Kateri Tekakwitha, Mohawk-born Native American saint (b. 1656)
*1695 – Juana Inés de la Cruz, Mexican poet and scholar (b. 1651)
*1696 – Marie de Rabutin-Chantal, marquise de Sévigné, French author (b. 1626)
*1711 – Joseph I, Holy Roman Emperor (b. 1678)
*1713 – David Hollatz, Polish pastor and theologian (b. 1648)
*1764 – Johann Mattheson, German lexicographer and composer (b. 1681)
*1790 – Benjamin Franklin, American inventor, publisher, and politician, 6th President of Pennsylvania (b. 1706)
*1799 – Richard Jupp, English surveyor and architect (b. 1728)
*1840 – Hannah Webster Foster, American journalist and author (b. 1758)
*1843 – Samuel Morey, American engineer (b. 1762)
*1882 – George Jennings, English engineer and plumber, invented the flush toilet (b. 1810)
*1888 – E. G. Squier, American archaeologist and journalist (b. 1821)
*1892 – Alexander Mackenzie, Scottish-Canadian politician, 2nd Prime Minister of Canada (b. 1822)

===1901–present===
*1919 – Svetozar Ćorović, Serbian novelist (b. 1875)&lt;ref name=&quot;serbianforum.org/knjizevnost&quot;&gt;Svetozar Corovic (in Serbian). Serbian Forum. Retrieved on 2 August 2014.&lt;/ref&gt;
*1921 – Manwel Dimech, Maltese journalist, author, and philosopher (b. 1860)
*1923 – Laurence Ginnell, Irish lawyer and politician (b. 1852)
*1930 – Alexander Golovin, Russian painter and stage designer (b. 1863)
*1933 – Kote Marjanishvili, Georgian director and playwright (b. 1872)
*1936 – Charles Ruijs de Beerenbrouck, Dutch lawyer and politician, 28th Prime Minister of the Netherlands (b. 1873)
*1942 – Jean Baptiste Perrin, French-American physicist and chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1870)
*1944 – J. T. Hearne, English cricketer and coach (b. 1867)
* 1944 – Dimitrios Psarros, Greek lieutenant, founded the National and Social Liberation (b. 1893)
*1946 – Juan Bautista Sacasa, Nicaraguan medical doctor, politician and 20th President of Nicaragua (b. 1874)
*1948 – Kantarō Suzuki, Japanese admiral and politician, 42nd Prime Minister of Japan (b. 1868)
*1954 – Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu, Romanian lawyer and politician, Romanian Minister of Justice (b. 1900)
*1960 – Eddie Cochran, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1938)
* 1961 – Elda Anderson, American physicist and health researcher (b. 1899)
*1967 – Red Allen, American singer and trumpet player (b. 1908)
*1975 – Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, Indian philosopher and politician, 2nd President of India (b. 1888)
*1976 – Henrik Dam, Danish biochemist and physiologist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1895)
*1977 – William Conway, Irish cardinal (b. 1913)
*1983 – Felix Pappalardi, American singer-songwriter, bass player, and producer (b. 1939)
*1984 – Claude Provost, Canadian-American ice hockey player (b. 1933)
*1986 – Marcel Dassault, French businessman, founded Dassault Aviation (b. 1892)
*1987 – Cecil Harmsworth King, English publisher (b. 1901)
* 1987 – Dick Shawn, American actor (b. 1923)
*1988 – Louise Nevelson, Ukrainian-American sculptor and educator (b. 1900)
*1990 – Ralph Abernathy, American minister and activist (b. 1936)
*1993 – Turgut Özal, Turkish engineer and politician, 8th president of Turkey (b. 1927)
* 1993 – Gamal Hamdan, Egyptian scholar and geographer (b. 1928)
*1994 – Roger Wolcott Sperry, American psychologist and biologist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1913)
*1995 – Frank E. Resnik, American sergeant and businessman (b. 1928)
*1996 – Piet Hein, Danish poet and mathematician (b. 1905)
*1997 – Chaim Herzog, Israeli general, lawyer, and politician, 6th President of Israel (b. 1918)
*1998 – Linda McCartney, American photographer, activist, and musician (b. 1941)
*2003 – Robert Atkins, American physician and cardiologist, created the Atkins diet (b. 1930)
* 2003 – H. B. Bailey, American race car driver (b. 1936)
* 2003 – John Paul Getty, Jr., American-English philanthropist (b. 1932)
* 2003 – Earl King, American blues singer, guitarist and songwriter (b. 1934)
* 2003 – Yiannis Latsis, Greek businessman (b. 1910)
*2004 – Edmond Pidoux, Swiss author and poet (b. 1908)
*2006 – Jean Bernard, French physician and haematologist (b. 1907)
* 2006 – Scott Brazil, American director and producer (b. 1955)
* 2006 – Henderson Forsythe, American actor (b. 1917)
*2007 – Kitty Carlisle, American actress, singer, socialite and game show panelist (b. 1910)
*2008 – Aimé Césaire, Caribbean-French poet and politician (b. 1913)
* 2008 – Danny Federici, American organist and accordion player (b. 1950)
*2011 – Eric Gross, Austrian-Australian pianist and composer (b. 1926)
* 2011 – Michael Sarrazin, Canadian actor (b. 1940)
* 2011 – Robert Vickrey, American artist and author (b. 1926)
*2012 – Leila Berg, English journalist and author (b. 1917)
* 2012 – J. Quinn Brisben, American educator and politician (b. 1934)
* 2012 – Dimitris Mitropanos, Greek singer (b. 1948)
* 2012 – Nityananda Mohapatra, Indian journalist, poet, and politician (b. 1912)
* 2012 – Jonathan V. Plaut, American rabbi and author (b. 1942)
* 2012 – Stanley Rogers Resor, American soldier, lawyer, and politician, 9th United States Secretary of the Army (b. 1917)
*2013 – Carlos Graça, São Toméan politician, Prime Minister of São Tomé and Príncipe (b. 1931)
* 2013 – Bi Kidude, Tanzanian Taarab singer (b. ≈1910)
* 2013 – Yngve Moe, Norwegian bass player and songwriter (b. 1957)
* 2013 – V. S. Ramadevi, Indian politician, 13th Governor of Karnataka (b. 1934)
*2014 – Gabriel García Márquez, Colombian journalist and author, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1927)
* 2014 – Bernat Klein, Serbian-Scottish fashion designer and painter (b. 1922)
* 2014 – Wojciech Leśnikowski, Polish–American architect and academic (b. 1938)
* 2014 – Karpal Singh, Malaysian lawyer and politician (b. 1940)
*2015 – Robert P. Griffin, American soldier, lawyer, and politician (b. 1923)
* 2015 – Scotty Probasco, American businessman and philanthropist (b. 1928)
* 2015 – Jeremiah J. Rodell, American general (b. 1921)
* 2015 – A. Alfred Taubman, American businessman and philanthropist (b. 1924)
*2016 – Chyna, American wrestler (b. 1969)
* 2016 – Doris Roberts, American actress (b. 1925)
*2018 – Barbara Bush, American political matriarch and literacy advocate, First Lady of the United States (1989–1993), and Second Lady of the United States (1981–1989) (b. 1925)
* 2018 – Carl Kasell, American radio personality (b. 1934)
*2019 – Alan García, Peruvian lawyer and politician, 61st and 64th President of Peru (b. 1949)
*2022 – Radu Lupu, Romanian pianist (b. 1945)
==Holidays and observances==
*Christian feast day:
**Donnán of Eigg
**Henry Heath
**Kateri Tekakwitha (Canada)
**Robert of Molesme
**Shemon bar Sabbae
**April 17 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Evacuation Day (Syria), celebrates the recognition of the independence of Syria from France in 1946.
*FAO Day (Iraq)
*Flag Day (American Samoa)
*Malbec World Day 
*Women&#x27;s Day (Gabon)
*World Hemophilia Day

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on April 17</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19448" start="27" end="31" title="1080" label="1080"/>
<link wikidata="Q225212" start="34" end="55" title="Harald III of Denmark" label="Harald III of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q212284" start="81" end="90" title="Canute IV of Denmark" label="Canute IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="132" end="141" title="canonization" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090" start="144" end="148" title="1349" label="1349"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472640" start="167" end="181" title="Bavand dynasty" label="Bavand dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q308864" start="185" end="195" title="Mazandaran" label="Mazandaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947637" start="234" end="242" title="Hasan II (Bavandid ruler)" label="Hasan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166" start="245" end="249" title="1362" label="1362"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468497" start="252" end="265" title="Kaunas Castle" label="Kaunas Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="279" end="293" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q12660036" start="302" end="318" title="Siege of Kaunas (1362)" label="month-long siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679" start="321" end="325" title="1492" label="1492"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="338" end="358" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728627" start="368" end="393" title="Capitulations of Santa Fe" label="Capitulations of Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="428" end="433" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288" start="437" end="441" title="1521" label="1521"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="453" end="466" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="476" end="485" title="Lutheranism" label="teachings"/>
<link wikidata="Q536822" start="520" end="533" title="Diet of Worms" label="Diet of Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309" start="636" end="640" title="1524" label="1524"/>
<link wikidata="Q147676" start="643" end="665" title="Giovanni da Verrazzano" label="Giovanni da Verrazzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820" start="708" end="712" title="1797" label="1797"/>
<link wikidata="Q278399" start="719" end="735" title="Ralph Abercromby" label="Ralph Abercromby"/>
<link wikidata="Q656046" start="736" end="743" title="Battle of San Juan (1797)" label="attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="744" end="765" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="879" end="885" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545288" start="908" end="927" title="Veronese Easter" label="eight-day rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="940" end="946" title="French First Republic" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693" start="966" end="970" title="1861" label="1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="986" end="994" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1002" end="1022" title="Virginia in the American Civil War#Secession convention" label="secession convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1115" end="1144" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="1147" end="1151" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1154" end="1172" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608706" start="1174" end="1194" title="Grierson&amp;#x27;s Raid" label="Grierson&amp;#x27;s Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="1216" end="1226" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888732" start="1235" end="1252" title="Benjamin Grierson" label="Benjamin Grierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="1268" end="1279" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="1282" end="1286" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438180" start="1313" end="1331" title="Battle of Plymouth (1864)" label="Battle of Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1340" end="1351" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028307" start="1366" end="1390" title="Plymouth, North Carolina" label="Plymouth, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720" start="1393" end="1397" title="1869" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="1400" end="1407" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1441" end="1447" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766" start="1450" end="1454" title="1876" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051355" start="1457" end="1471" title="Catalpa rescue" label="Catalpa rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089169" start="1513" end="1529" title="Fremantle Prison" label="Fremantle Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="1553" end="1557" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="1564" end="1585" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="Treaty of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="1647" end="1670" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1689" end="1700" title="Qing Empire" label="Qing Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="1786" end="1794" title="Liaoning" label="Fengtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1805" end="1811" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="1820" end="1826" title="Penghu" label="Penghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="1858" end="1862" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="1869" end="1903" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257729" start="1918" end="1937" title="Lochner v. New York" label="Lochner v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q119184" start="1972" end="1994" title="Freedom of contract" label="right to free contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="2020" end="2038" title="Due process" label="due process clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="2046" end="2100" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="2103" end="2107" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q202175" start="2114" end="2126" title="Ellis Island" label="Ellis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="2200" end="2204" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2207" end="2214" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q578858" start="2222" end="2231" title="Lena massacre" label="open fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="2275" end="2282" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="2307" end="2311" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q42346198" start="2390" end="2406" title="Catalan Republic (1931)" label="Catalan Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022" start="2442" end="2466" title="Generalitat de Catalunya" label="Generalitat de Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="2497" end="2506" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="2518" end="2534" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="2537" end="2541" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2544" end="2556" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="2574" end="2596" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="2662" end="2666" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="2676" end="2691" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q318122" start="2700" end="2712" title="Henri Giraud" label="Henri Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q700562" start="2747" end="2766" title="Königstein Fortress" label="Königstein Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="2769" end="2773" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="2811" end="2846" title="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q562101" start="2866" end="2896" title="National and Social Liberation" label="National and Social Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028215" start="2944" end="2961" title="Dimitrios Psarros" label="Dimitrios Psarros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="2976" end="2980" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q100072" start="2997" end="3004" title="Montese" label="Montese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="3031" end="3035" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q665382" start="3063" end="3077" title="Tran Trong Kim" label="Tran Trong Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q701337" start="3117" end="3134" title="Empire of Vietnam" label="Empire of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="3137" end="3141" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118788" start="3148" end="3180" title="Evacuation Day (Syria)" label="last French troops are withdrawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26234937" start="3186" end="3191" title="Mandatory Syrian Republic" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="3194" end="3198" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="3205" end="3218" title="Peak District" label="Peak District"/>
<link wikidata="Q354009" start="3259" end="3272" title="National parks of England and Wales" label="National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="3275" end="3279" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q191721" start="3282" end="3302" title="Bay of Pigs Invasion" label="Bay of Pigs Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562253" start="3315" end="3326" title="Cuban exile" label="Cuban exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="3356" end="3359" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q208508" start="3373" end="3384" title="Bay of Pigs" label="Bay of Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="3417" end="3429" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="3432" end="3436" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q468295" start="3439" end="3450" title="Jerrie Mock" label="Jerrie Mock"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804632" start="3545" end="3563" title="Spirit of Columbus" label="Spirit of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432440" start="3622" end="3657" title="Port Columbus International Airport" label="Port Columbus International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="3669" end="3673" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q297112" start="3676" end="3689" title="Sirhan Sirhan" label="Sirhan Sirhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="3720" end="3737" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="3748" end="3781" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150543" start="3791" end="3807" title="Alexander Dubček" label="Alexander Dubček"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="3821" end="3825" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="3828" end="3842" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="3856" end="3865" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="3888" end="3893" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="3903" end="3907" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349507" start="3914" end="3950" title="Provisional Government of Bangladesh" label="Provisional Government of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="3963" end="3967" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q817206" start="3974" end="3993" title="Cambodian Civil War" label="Cambodian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="4004" end="4015" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760415" start="4016" end="4024" title="Fall of Phnom Penh" label="captures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="4037" end="4047" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401875" start="4052" end="4079" title="Khmer National Armed Forces" label="Cambodian government forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="4092" end="4096" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134733" start="4099" end="4115" title="Mir Akbar Khyber" label="Mir Akbar Khyber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="4147" end="4162" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="4166" end="4177" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="4180" end="4184" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q868875" start="4187" end="4209" title="Constitution Act, 1982" label="Constitution Act, 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230986" start="4210" end="4220" title="Patriation" label="Patriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="4228" end="4249" title="Canadian constitution" label="Canadian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="4253" end="4259" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572600" start="4263" end="4275" title="Proclamation" label="Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="4279" end="4291" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="4293" end="4308" title="Queen of Canada" label="Queen of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="4311" end="4315" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054482" start="4338" end="4359" title="Three Hundred and Thirty Five Years&amp;#x27; War" label="war lasting 335 years"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4372" end="4383" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="4392" end="4407" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="4512" end="4516" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736589" start="4529" end="4537" title="Katina P" label="Katina P"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="4576" end="4582" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="4584" end="4594" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="4648" end="4652" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q54383" start="4655" end="4689" title="Space Shuttle Columbia" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q262787" start="4705" end="4711" title="STS-90" label="STS-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q166008" start="4723" end="4731" title="Spacelab" label="Spacelab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="4742" end="4746" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q229517" start="4749" end="4768" title="Anneli Jäätteenmäki" label="Anneli Jäätteenmäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q738695" start="4802" end="4827" title="prime minister of Finland" label="prime minister of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="4830" end="4834" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="4839" end="4850" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438915" start="4866" end="4920" title="2nd Rosh Ha&amp;#x27;ir restaurant bombing" label="detonates an explosive device in a Tel Aviv restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="4958" end="4962" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q11333034" start="4965" end="4977" title="West Fertilizer Company explosion" label="An explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q982230" start="5015" end="5026" title="West, Texas" label="West, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="5069" end="5073" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="5076" end="5080" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q47272" start="5088" end="5110" title="Kepler space telescope" label="Kepler space telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q16389397" start="5137" end="5164" title="Kepler-186f" label="the first Earth-size planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q215913" start="5172" end="5186" title="Circumstellar habitable zone" label="habitable zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="5205" end="5209" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q106434434" start="5216" end="5259" title="Death and funeral of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="funeral of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449634" start="5276" end="5315" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531" start="5345" end="5349" title="1277" label="1277"/>
<link wikidata="Q37098" start="5352" end="5374" title="Michael IX Palaiologos" label="Michael IX Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480" start="5405" end="5409" title="1455" label="1455"/>
<link wikidata="Q345506" start="5412" end="5425" title="Andrea Gritti" label="Andrea Gritti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702" start="5453" end="5457" title="1497" label="1497"/>
<link wikidata="Q203534" start="5460" end="5477" title="Pedro de Valdivia" label="Pedro de Valdivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678" start="5537" end="5541" title="1573" label="1573"/>
<link wikidata="Q57206" start="5544" end="5576" title="Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria" label="Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739" start="5588" end="5592" title="1586" label="1586"/>
<link wikidata="Q503798" start="5595" end="5604" title="John Ford (dramatist)" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800" start="5645" end="5649" title="1598" label="1598"/>
<link wikidata="Q196472" start="5652" end="5678" title="Giovanni Battista Riccioli" label="Giovanni Battista Riccioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810" start="5737" end="5741" title="1620" label="1620"/>
<link wikidata="Q263327" start="5744" end="5764" title="Marguerite Bourgeoys" label="Marguerite Bourgeoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343484" start="5809" end="5847" title="Congregation of Notre Dame of Montreal" label="Congregation of Notre Dame of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879" start="5859" end="5863" title="1635" label="1635"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216692" start="5866" end="5886" title="Edward Stillingfleet" label="Edward Stillingfleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651" start="5930" end="5934" title="1683" label="1683"/>
<link wikidata="Q506627" start="5937" end="5959" title="Johann David Heinichen" label="Johann David Heinichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861" start="6001" end="6005" title="1710" label="1710"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616081" start="6008" end="6042" title="Henry Erskine, 10th Earl of Buchan" label="Henry Erskine, 10th Earl of Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977" start="6075" end="6079" title="1734" label="1734"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="6082" end="6088" title="Taksin" label="Taksin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573" start="6118" end="6122" title="1741" label="1741"/>
<link wikidata="Q285521" start="6125" end="6137" title="Samuel Chase" label="Samuel Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611" start="6177" end="6181" title="1750" label="1750"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397972" start="6184" end="6207" title="François de Neufchâteau" label="François de Neufchâteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412062" start="6241" end="6272" title="List of Interior Ministers of France" label="French Minister of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632" start="6284" end="6288" title="1756" label="1756"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310862" start="6291" end="6310" title="Dheeran Chinnamalai" label="Dheeran Chinnamalai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669" start="6340" end="6344" title="1766" label="1766"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147239" start="6347" end="6362" title="Collin McKinney" label="Collin McKinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811" start="6419" end="6423" title="1794" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q77131" start="6426" end="6460" title="Carl Friedrich Philipp von Martius" label="Carl Friedrich Philipp von Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823" start="6502" end="6506" title="1798" label="1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750550" start="6509" end="6526" title="Étienne Bobillier" label="Étienne Bobillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827" start="6573" end="6577" title="1799" label="1799"/>
<link wikidata="Q542825" start="6580" end="6591" title="Eliza Acton" label="Eliza Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943" start="6633" end="6637" title="1814" label="1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q543250" start="6640" end="6652" title="Josif Pančić" label="Josif Pančić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953" start="6695" end="6699" title="1816" label="1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790540" start="6702" end="6719" title="Thomas Hazlehurst (chapel builder)" label="Thomas Hazlehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973" start="6769" end="6773" title="1820" label="1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q28976" start="6776" end="6796" title="Alexander Cartwright" label="Alexander Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="6846" end="6854" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587" start="6866" end="6870" title="1833" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q496039" start="6873" end="6894" title="Jean-Baptiste Accolay" label="Jean-Baptiste Accolay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608" start="6950" end="6954" title="1837" label="1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="6957" end="6969" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="7010" end="7031" title="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7625" start="7043" end="7047" title="1842" label="1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q471293" start="7050" end="7065" title="Maurice Rouvier" label="Maurice Rouvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11134906" start="7107" end="7131" title="List of Prime Ministers of France" label="Prime Minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650" start="7143" end="7147" title="1849" label="1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q707528" start="7150" end="7164" title="William R. Day" label="William R. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="7203" end="7235" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="7247" end="7251" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028466" start="7254" end="7263" title="Cap Anson" label="Cap Anson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="7313" end="7317" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q770329" start="7320" end="7346" title="Augustus Edward Hough Love" label="Augustus Edward Hough Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="7394" end="7398" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q78649" start="7401" end="7419" title="Ursula Ledóchowska" label="Ursula Ledóchowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129095" start="7464" end="7525" title="Congregation of the Ursulines of the Agonizing Heart of Jesus" label="Congregation of the Ursulines of the Agonizing Heart of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712" start="7537" end="7541" title="1866" label="1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q739275" start="7544" end="7559" title="Ernest Starling" label="Ernest Starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="7606" end="7610" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978440" start="7613" end="7632" title="Aleksander Tõnisson" label="Aleksander Tõnisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741249" start="7671" end="7695" title="Estonian Minister of War" label="Estonian Minister of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="7707" end="7711" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121055" start="7714" end="7731" title="Matsudaira Tsuneo" label="Matsudaira Tsuneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="7762" end="7766" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371244" start="7769" end="7779" title="Emil Fuchs (baseball)" label="Emil Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q456341" start="7839" end="7862" title="Demetrios Petrokokkinos" label="Demetrios Petrokokkinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783" start="7895" end="7899" title="1879" label="1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q713804" start="7902" end="7914" title="Henri Tauzin" label="Henri Tauzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="7942" end="7946" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q213688" start="7949" end="7963" title="Artur Schnabel" label="Artur Schnabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="8004" end="8008" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q563264" start="8011" end="8021" title="Herms Niel" label="Herms Niel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="8075" end="8079" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q437335" start="8082" end="8096" title="George Adamski" label="George Adamski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="8146" end="8150" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156866" start="8153" end="8172" title="Robert Dean Frisbie" label="Robert Dean Frisbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="8213" end="8217" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891835" start="8220" end="8232" title="Señor Wences" label="Señor Wences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="8276" end="8280" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q175532" start="8283" end="8303" title="Nisargadatta Maharaj" label="Nisargadatta Maharaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q155087" start="8356" end="8371" title="Thornton Wilder" label="Thornton Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340231" start="8425" end="8444" title="Edouard Wyss-Dunant" label="Edouard Wyss-Dunant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="8489" end="8493" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q512850" start="8496" end="8515" title="Aleksander Klumberg" label="Aleksander Klumberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="8577" end="8581" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q694009" start="8584" end="8599" title="Nicolas Nabokov" label="Nicolas Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q364868" start="8659" end="8677" title="Gregor Piatigorsky" label="Gregor Piatigorsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q709532" start="8738" end="8751" title="Morgan Taylor" label="Morgan Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="8791" end="8795" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687485" start="8798" end="8814" title="Louis Jean Heydt" label="Louis Jean Heydt"/>
<link wikidata="Q462769" start="8865" end="8876" title="Arthur Lake (actor)" label="Arthur Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="8904" end="8908" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509066" start="8911" end="8926" title="Sidney Garfield" label="Sidney Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721601" start="8959" end="8976" title="Kaiser Permanente" label="Kaiser Permanente"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="8988" end="8992" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q12950" start="8995" end="9006" title="Alain Poher" label="Alain Poher"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="9027" end="9046" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="9058" end="9062" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q562162" start="9065" end="9082" title="Evangelos Averoff" label="Evangelos Averoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217086" start="9116" end="9141" title="List of defence ministers of Greece" label="Greek Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156109" start="9161" end="9170" title="Ivan Goff" label="Ivan Goff"/>
<link wikidata="Q310078" start="9228" end="9243" title="Helenio Herrera" label="Helenio Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="9286" end="9290" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q358479" start="9293" end="9304" title="Hervé Bazin" label="Hervé Bazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531939" start="9348" end="9361" title="Lester Rodney" label="Lester Rodney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="9406" end="9410" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q215929" start="9413" end="9426" title="Marta Eggerth" label="Marta Eggerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="9477" end="9481" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508432" start="9484" end="9496" title="George Davis (art director)" label="George Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882493" start="9539" end="9548" title="Mac Raboy" label="Mac Raboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="9582" end="9586" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775157" start="9589" end="9603" title="Martin Clemens" label="Martin Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q682197" start="9641" end="9649" title="Joe Foss" label="Joe Foss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626318" start="9689" end="9713" title="Governor of South Dakota" label="Governor of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4208040" start="9733" end="9749" title="Regina Ghazaryan" label="Regina Ghazaryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="9779" end="9783" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q422413" start="9786" end="9795" title="Win Maung" label="Win Maung"/>
<link wikidata="Q887124" start="9801" end="9830" title="President of Union of Myanmar" label="President of Union of Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14638518" start="9850" end="9864" title="A. Thiagarajah" label="A. Thiagarajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q194291" start="9920" end="9941" title="Sirimavo Bandaranaike" label="Sirimavo Bandaranaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758894" start="9943" end="9970" title="Prime Minister of Sri Lanka" label="Prime Minister of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="10024" end="10028" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q95002" start="10031" end="10045" title="William Holden" label="William Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="10073" end="10077" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524494" start="10080" end="10097" title="Gilles Lamontagne" label="Gilles Lamontagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238289" start="10140" end="10169" title="Lieutenant Governor of Quebec" label="Lieutenant Governor of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q236024" start="10189" end="10203" title="Chavela Vargas" label="Chavela Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="10266" end="10270" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q455509" start="10273" end="10293" title="Edmonde Charles-Roux" label="Edmonde Charles-Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="10335" end="10339" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q298352" start="10342" end="10358" title="Lindsay Anderson" label="Lindsay Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558382" start="10421" end="10432" title="Solly Hemus" label="Solly Hemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004789" start="10498" end="10514" title="Neville McNamara" label="Neville McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334181" start="10558" end="10573" title="Gianni Raimondi" label="Gianni Raimondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q704026" start="10614" end="10628" title="Harry Reasoner" label="Harry Reasoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="10673" end="10677" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089944" start="10680" end="10700" title="Kenneth Norman Jones" label="Kenneth Norman Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240288" start="10747" end="10760" title="Donald Richie" label="Donald Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="10809" end="10813" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q471263" start="10816" end="10827" title="René Moawad" label="René Moawad"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001564" start="10866" end="10886" title="President of Lebanon" label="President of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="10898" end="10902" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689" start="10905" end="10917" title="Joan Lorring" label="Joan Lorring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514903" start="10954" end="10966" title="Gerry McNeil" label="Gerry McNeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="11018" end="11022" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q76893" start="11025" end="11040" title="Margot Honecker" label="Margot Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="11091" end="11095" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109621" start="11098" end="11111" title="Victor Lownes" label="Victor Lownes"/>
<link wikidata="Q444849" start="11153" end="11166" title="Cynthia Ozick" label="Cynthia Ozick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700823" start="11229" end="11240" title="Heinz Putzl" label="Heinz Putzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063659" start="11267" end="11277" title="Fabien Roy" label="Fabien Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="11325" end="11329" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q57213" start="11332" end="11342" title="James Last" label="James Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="11405" end="11409" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q491092" start="11412" end="11424" title="Chris Barber" label="Chris Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="11471" end="11475" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220866" start="11478" end="11490" title="John Barrett (tennis)" label="John Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q952789" start="11540" end="11554" title="Malcolm Browne" label="Malcolm Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="11604" end="11608" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239246" start="11611" end="11623" title="Don Kirshner" label="Don Kirshner"/>
<link wikidata="Q671591" start="11677" end="11689" title="Peter Morris (surgeon)" label="Peter Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="11742" end="11746" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983919" start="11749" end="11759" title="Bud Paxson" label="Bud Paxson"/>
<link wikidata="Q452340" start="11791" end="11812" title="Home Shopping Network" label="Home Shopping Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="11817" end="11823" title="Pax TV" label="Pax TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="11835" end="11839" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516137" start="11842" end="11850" title="Urs Wild" label="Urs Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="11877" end="11881" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364926" start="11884" end="11897" title="Ronald Hamowy" label="Ronald Hamowy"/>
<link wikidata="Q78713" start="11950" end="11965" title="Ferdinand Piëch" label="Ferdinand Piëch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="12019" end="12023" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885273" start="12026" end="12036" title="Ben Barnes (Texas politician)" label="Ben Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q639115" start="12080" end="12108" title="Lieutenant Governor of Texas" label="Lieutenant Governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300663" start="12118" end="12128" title="Doug Lewis (politician)" label="Doug Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315120" start="12167" end="12195" title="Minister of Justice (Canada)" label="Canadian Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364917" start="12205" end="12221" title="Ronald H. Miller" label="Ronald H. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q320281" start="12284" end="12306" title="Kerry Wendell Thornley" label="Kerry Wendell Thornley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="12348" end="12352" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347680" start="12355" end="12368" title="Robert Miller (art dealer)" label="Robert Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="12401" end="12405" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386346" start="12408" end="12419" title="Eric Dancer" label="Eric Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836789" start="12457" end="12481" title="Lord Lieutenant of Devon" label="Lord Lieutenant of Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q863103" start="12491" end="12501" title="Billy Fury" label="Billy Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069458" start="12548" end="12562" title="John McCririck" label="John McCririck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967602" start="12602" end="12616" title="Chuck Menville" label="Chuck Menville"/>
<link wikidata="Q64417" start="12672" end="12682" title="Anja Silja" label="Anja Silja"/>
<link wikidata="Q395751" start="12720" end="12736" title="Agostino Vallini" label="Agostino Vallini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729117" start="12759" end="12780" title="Vicar General of Rome" label="vicar general of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="12782" end="12786" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q293127" start="12789" end="12800" title="Lagle Parek" label="Lagle Parek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294315" start="12837" end="12870" title="Minister of the Interior (Estonia)" label="Estonian Minister of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="12872" end="12876" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017782" start="12879" end="12894" title="Buster Williams" label="Buster Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q26466209" start="12928" end="12946" title="Dnyaneshwar Agashe" label="Dnyaneshwar Agashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="12992" end="12996" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323685" start="12999" end="13020" title="Richard Allen Epstein" label="Richard Allen Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="13061" end="13065" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126164" start="13068" end="13081" title="Clare Francis" label="Clare Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="13110" end="13114" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538991" start="13117" end="13142" title="Nigel Emslie, Lord Emslie" label="Nigel Emslie, Lord Emslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325666" start="13179" end="13192" title="Richard Field (judge)" label="Richard Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q319569" start="13228" end="13242" title="Sherrie Levine" label="Sherrie Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q846709" start="13275" end="13292" title="Tsutomu Wakamatsu" label="Tsutomu Wakamatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="13340" end="13344" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q366671" start="13347" end="13357" title="Jan Hammer" label="Jan Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725901" start="13406" end="13418" title="Alice Harden" label="Alice Harden"/>
<link wikidata="Q954901" start="13472" end="13484" title="Pekka Vasala" label="Pekka Vasala"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="13502" end="13506" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q234293" start="13509" end="13522" title="Olivia Hussey" label="Olivia Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q739746" start="13571" end="13584" title="Börje Salming" label="Börje Salming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="13639" end="13643" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691318" start="13646" end="13657" title="Joe Alaskey" label="Joe Alaskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385386" start="13699" end="13711" title="Pierre Guité" label="Pierre Guité"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701012" start="13749" end="13760" title="John McColl (British Army officer)" label="John McColl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281611" start="13794" end="13823" title="Lieutenant Governor of Jersey" label="Lieutenant Governor of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q245198" start="13833" end="13850" title="Željko Ražnatović" label="Željko Ražnatović"/>
<link wikidata="Q480150" start="13907" end="13921" title="John Robertson (Glasgow politician)" label="John Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="13960" end="13964" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q172759" start="13967" end="13983" title="Riccardo Patrese" label="Riccardo Patrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q59630" start="14018" end="14029" title="Roddy Piper" label="Roddy Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929388" start="14091" end="14107" title="Michael Sembello" label="Michael Sembello"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="14151" end="14155" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812500" start="14158" end="14172" title="Todd Lickliter" label="Todd Lickliter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141280" start="14220" end="14232" title="Pete Shelley" label="Pete Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848971" start="14293" end="14304" title="Mike Stroud (physician)" label="Mike Stroud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="14338" end="14342" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145630" start="14345" end="14366" title="Colin Tyre, Lord Tyre" label="Colin Tyre, Lord Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="14395" end="14399" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q536330" start="14402" end="14413" title="Teri Austin" label="Teri Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q316872" start="14441" end="14457" title="Afrika Bambaataa" label="Afrika Bambaataa"/>
<link wikidata="Q660606" start="14489" end="14500" title="Dwane Casey" label="Dwane Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q313007" start="14537" end="14548" title="Nick Hornby" label="Nick Hornby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306553" start="14614" end="14625" title="Julia Macur" label="Julia Macur"/>
<link wikidata="Q534004" start="14661" end="14676" title="Frank McDonough" label="Frank McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="14697" end="14701" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493742" start="14704" end="14716" title="Laslo Babits" label="Laslo Babits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="14754" end="14758" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q191104" start="14761" end="14770" title="Sean Bean" label="Sean Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179078" start="14795" end="14805" title="Jimmy Mann (ice hockey)" label="Jimmy Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q290108" start="14843" end="14851" title="Li Meisu" label="Li Meisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="14874" end="14878" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892317" start="14881" end="14898" title="Vladimir Polyakov (pole vaulter)" label="Vladimir Polyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527603" start="14930" end="14943" title="Norman Cowans" label="Norman Cowans"/>
<link wikidata="Q725373" start="14981" end="14995" title="Boomer Esiason" label="Boomer Esiason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076643" start="15048" end="15059" title="Bella Freud" label="Bella Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="15087" end="15091" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152727" start="15094" end="15107" title="Paul Nicholls (horse racing)" label="Paul Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="15137" end="15141" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365003" start="15144" end="15155" title="Ken Daneyko" label="Ken Daneyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q311621" start="15210" end="15230" title="Maynard James Keenan" label="Maynard James Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279347" start="15282" end="15295" title="Rachel Notley" label="Rachel Notley"/>
<link wikidata="Q450338" start="15326" end="15337" title="Lela Rochon" label="Lela Rochon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="15357" end="15361" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363587" start="15364" end="15370" title="Vikram (actor)" label="Vikram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="15397" end="15401" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q294404" start="15404" end="15420" title="Henry Ian Cusick" label="Henry Ian Cusick"/>
<link wikidata="Q448975" start="15455" end="15469" title="Kimberly Elise" label="Kimberly Elise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294778" start="15497" end="15512" title="Marquis Grissom" label="Marquis Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147285" start="15558" end="15567" title="Ian Jones (rugby union, born 1967)" label="Ian Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861362" start="15603" end="15616" title="Barnaby Joyce" label="Barnaby Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261065" start="15646" end="15680" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia" label="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258761" start="15690" end="15699" title="Liz Phair" label="Liz Phair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="15743" end="15747" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921705" start="15750" end="15765" title="Julie Fagerholt" label="Julie Fagerholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653011" start="15800" end="15814" title="Phil Henderson (basketball)" label="Phil Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351428" start="15872" end="15883" title="Eric Lamaze" label="Eric Lamaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359042" start="15910" end="15921" title="Roger Twose" label="Roger Twose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431458" start="15954" end="15969" title="Richie Woodhall" label="Richie Woodhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="15998" end="16002" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q313138" start="16005" end="16011" title="Redman (rapper)" label="Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="16052" end="16056" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125325" start="16059" end="16073" title="Claire Sweeney" label="Claire Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="16093" end="16097" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098522" start="16100" end="16112" title="Gary Bennett (baseball)" label="Gary Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490861" start="16148" end="16160" title="Tony Boselli" label="Tony Boselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q172044" start="16213" end="16228" title="Jennifer Garner" label="Jennifer Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q379709" start="16257" end="16277" title="Muttiah Muralitharan" label="Muttiah Muralitharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q299249" start="16309" end="16325" title="Yuichi Nishimura" label="Yuichi Nishimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380937" start="16368" end="16383" title="Terran Sandwith" label="Terran Sandwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="16413" end="16417" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377884" start="16420" end="16431" title="Katrin Koov" label="Katrin Koov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924616" start="16461" end="16472" title="Brett Maher (basketball)" label="Brett Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q516314" start="16529" end="16541" title="Theo Ratliff" label="Theo Ratliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="16571" end="16575" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q450285" start="16578" end="16594" title="Mikael Åkerfeldt" label="Mikael Åkerfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19810" start="16657" end="16673" title="Victoria Beckham" label="Victoria Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="16713" end="16717" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q259359" start="16720" end="16735" title="Heidi Alexander" label="Heidi Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450673" start="16765" end="16775" title="Travis Roy" label="Travis Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="16815" end="16819" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384843" start="16822" end="16837" title="Maurice Wignall" label="Maurice Wignall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="16873" end="16877" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q434352" start="16880" end="16892" title="Chad Hedrick" label="Chad Hedrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q946146" start="16925" end="16939" title="Frederik Magle" label="Frederik Magle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="16981" end="16985" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q65171" start="16988" end="17014" title="Monika Bergmann-Schmuderer" label="Monika Bergmann-Schmuderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241446" start="17038" end="17053" title="Lindsay Hartley" label="Lindsay Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q932319" start="17081" end="17092" title="Jason White (rugby union)" label="Jason White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="17117" end="17121" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342539" start="17124" end="17135" title="Eric Brewer (ice hockey)" label="Eric Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570472" start="17173" end="17186" title="Marija Šestak" label="Marija Šestak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="17221" end="17225" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332517" start="17228" end="17241" title="Fabián Vargas" label="Fabián Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195927" start="17273" end="17289" title="Curtis Woodhouse" label="Curtis Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="17331" end="17335" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q257647" start="17338" end="17351" title="Jenny Meadows" label="Jenny Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q230041" start="17377" end="17392" title="Hanna Pakarinen" label="Hanna Pakarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748741" start="17429" end="17440" title="Ryan Raburn" label="Ryan Raburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q541186" start="17476" end="17490" title="Chris Thompson (athlete)" label="Chris Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q713995" start="17516" end="17528" title="Zhang Yaokun" label="Zhang Yaokun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="17550" end="17554" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q896759" start="17557" end="17567" title="Brad Boyes" label="Brad Boyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089159" start="17605" end="17618" title="Chuck Kobasew" label="Chuck Kobasew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075426" start="17656" end="17669" title="Tyron Woodley" label="Tyron Woodley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="17702" end="17706" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067546" start="17709" end="17726" title="Stanislav Chistov" label="Stanislav Chistov"/>
<link wikidata="Q726854" start="17763" end="17778" title="Roberto Jiménez (footballer, born 1983)" label="Roberto Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077593" start="17809" end="17823" title="Andrea Marcato" label="Andrea Marcato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="17847" end="17851" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191808" start="17854" end="17877" title="Pablo Sebastián Álvarez" label="Pablo Sebastián Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014407" start="17911" end="17921" title="Jed Lowrie" label="Jed Lowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q282551" start="17957" end="17975" title="Raffaele Palladino" label="Raffaele Palladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="17997" end="18001" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q228766" start="18004" end="18015" title="Rooney Mara" label="Rooney Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q458479" start="18043" end="18056" title="Luke Mitchell" label="Luke Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192661" start="18094" end="18112" title="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga" label="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="18136" end="18140" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q82742" start="18143" end="18158" title="Romain Grosjean" label="Romain Grosjean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="18184" end="18188" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059471" start="18191" end="18208" title="Takahiro Moriuchi" label="Takahiro Moriuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="18239" end="18243" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q269936" start="18246" end="18268" title="Paraskevi Papachristou" label="Paraskevi Papachristou"/>
<link wikidata="Q29635010" start="18299" end="18309" title="Avi Kaplan" label="Avi Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="18334" end="18338" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809908" start="18341" end="18355" title="Jonathan Brown (Welsh footballer)" label="Jonathan Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="18375" end="18379" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468454" start="18382" end="18397" title="Lachlan Maranta" label="Lachlan Maranta"/>
<link wikidata="Q41967606" start="18442" end="18450" title="Jinho" label="Jo Jinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="18473" end="18477" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607791" start="18480" end="18493" title="Alanna Goldie" label="Alanna Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q41201062" start="18519" end="18532" title="Hongseok" label="Yang Hongseok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="18565" end="18569" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q19603930" start="18572" end="18583" title="Wheein" label="Jung Wheein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="18606" end="18610" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979205" start="18613" end="18629" title="Lorna Fitzgerald" label="Lorna Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q100935287" start="18656" end="18670" title="Caitlin Parker" label="Caitlin Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q115631532" start="18698" end="18713" title="Helene Spilling" label="Helene Spilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="18733" end="18737" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q65280989" start="18740" end="18765" title="Suppapong Udomkaewkanjana" label="Suppapong Udomkaewkanjana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="18798" end="18802" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q60870265" start="18805" end="18816" title="Ryujin (rapper)" label="Shin Ryujin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31001" start="18885" end="18888" title="485" label="485"/>
<link wikidata="Q271809" start="18891" end="18898" title="Proclus" label="Proclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31036" start="18947" end="18950" title="617" label="617"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036184" start="18953" end="18967" title="Donnán of Eigg" label="Donnán of Eigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q30618" start="18994" end="18997" title="648" label="648"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066885" start="19000" end="19004" title="Empress Xiao (Sui dynasty)" label="Xiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="19021" end="19032" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23608" start="19035" end="19038" title="744" label="744"/>
<link wikidata="Q128307" start="19041" end="19052" title="Al-Walid II" label="Al-Walid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="19054" end="19061" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25083" start="19080" end="19083" title="818" label="818"/>
<link wikidata="Q333319" start="19086" end="19102" title="Bernard of Italy" label="Bernard of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30371" start="19129" end="19132" title="858" label="858"/>
<link wikidata="Q172445" start="19135" end="19147" title="Pope Benedict III" label="Benedict III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19161" end="19176" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19432" start="19178" end="19182" title="1071" label="1071"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286784" start="19185" end="19200" title="Manuel Komnenos (kouropalates)" label="Manuel Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q19448" start="19245" end="19249" title="1080" label="1080"/>
<link wikidata="Q225212" start="19252" end="19273" title="Harald III of Denmark" label="Harald III of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q19522" start="19285" end="19289" title="1111" label="1111"/>
<link wikidata="Q503235" start="19292" end="19309" title="Robert of Molesme" label="Robert of Molesme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563" start="19348" end="19352" title="1298" label="1298"/>
<link wikidata="Q252282" start="19355" end="19370" title="Árni Þorláksson" label="Árni Þorláksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769" start="19400" end="19404" title="1321" label="1321"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755558" start="19407" end="19433" title="Blanche of Portugal (1259–1321)" label="Infanta Branca of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q295850" start="19452" end="19474" title="Afonso III of Portugal" label="Afonso III of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000" start="19486" end="19490" title="1331" label="1331"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351443" start="19493" end="19527" title="Robert de Vere, 6th Earl of Oxford" label="Robert de Vere, 6th Earl of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073" start="19557" end="19561" title="1344" label="1344"/>
<link wikidata="Q735233" start="19564" end="19595" title="Constantine II, King of Armenia" label="Constantine II, King of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123" start="19597" end="19601" title="1355" label="1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q434940" start="19604" end="19616" title="Marin Falier" label="Marin Falier"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="19618" end="19632" title="Doge of Venice" label="Doge of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6305" start="19644" end="19648" title="1427" label="1427"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335790" start="19651" end="19675" title="John IV, Duke of Brabant" label="John IV, Duke of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479" start="19687" end="19691" title="1539" label="1539"/>
<link wikidata="Q719626" start="19694" end="19716" title="George, Duke of Saxony" label="George, Duke of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680" start="19728" end="19732" title="1574" label="1574"/>
<link wikidata="Q64361" start="19735" end="19753" title="Joachim Camerarius" label="Joachim Camerarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602" start="19812" end="19816" title="1669" label="1669"/>
<link wikidata="Q552272" start="19819" end="19834" title="Antonio Bertali" label="Antonio Bertali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642" start="19878" end="19882" title="1680" label="1680"/>
<link wikidata="Q609" start="19885" end="19902" title="Kateri Tekakwitha" label="Kateri Tekakwitha"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="19904" end="19910" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="19916" end="19931" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696" start="19949" end="19953" title="1695" label="1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q183074" start="19956" end="19977" title="Juana Inés de la Cruz" label="Juana Inés de la Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699" start="20015" end="20019" title="1696" label="1696"/>
<link wikidata="Q237103" start="20022" end="20067" title="Marie de Rabutin-Chantal, marquise de Sévigné" label="Marie de Rabutin-Chantal, marquise de Sévigné"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866" start="20094" end="20098" title="1711" label="1711"/>
<link wikidata="Q152480" start="20101" end="20129" title="Joseph I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873" start="20141" end="20145" title="1713" label="1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q68868" start="20148" end="20161" title="David Hollatz (dogmatician)" label="David Hollatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659" start="20203" end="20207" title="1764" label="1764"/>
<link wikidata="Q170333" start="20210" end="20226" title="Johann Mattheson" label="Johann Mattheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775" start="20273" end="20277" title="1790" label="1790"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="20280" end="20297" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q879318" start="20349" end="20374" title="List of Governors of Pennsylvania" label="President of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827" start="20386" end="20390" title="1799" label="1799"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326956" start="20393" end="20405" title="Richard Jupp" label="Richard Jupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619" start="20449" end="20453" title="1840" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q441515" start="20456" end="20477" title="Hannah Webster Foster" label="Hannah Webster Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629" start="20521" end="20525" title="1843" label="1843"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471196" start="20528" end="20540" title="Samuel Morey" label="Samuel Morey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="20571" end="20575" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541092" start="20578" end="20593" title="George Jennings" label="George Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q268534" start="20638" end="20650" title="flush toilet" label="flush toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="20662" end="20666" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q721839" start="20669" end="20681" title="E. G. Squier" label="E. G. Squier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="20732" end="20736" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q128708" start="20739" end="20758" title="Alexander Mackenzie (politician)" label="Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="20794" end="20818" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="20850" end="20854" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393103" start="20857" end="20873" title="Svetozar Ćorović" label="Svetozar Ćorović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="21045" end="21049" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573895" start="21052" end="21065" title="Manwel Dimech" label="Manwel Dimech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="21122" end="21126" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500610" start="21129" end="21145" title="Laurence Ginnell" label="Laurence Ginnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="21186" end="21190" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q945505" start="21193" end="21210" title="Aleksandr Golovin (artist)" label="Alexander Golovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="21258" end="21262" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467738" start="21265" end="21283" title="Kote Marjanishvili" label="Kote Marjanishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="21329" end="21333" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q983186" start="21336" end="21365" title="Charles Ruijs de Beerenbrouck" label="Charles Ruijs de Beerenbrouck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058109" start="21401" end="21434" title="Prime Minister of the Netherlands" label="Prime Minister of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="21446" end="21450" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q134085" start="21453" end="21473" title="Jean Baptiste Perrin" label="Jean Baptiste Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="21514" end="21525" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="21546" end="21550" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527191" start="21553" end="21565" title="J. T. Hearne" label="J. T. Hearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028215" start="21614" end="21631" title="Dimitrios Psarros" label="Dimitrios Psarros"/>
<link wikidata="Q562101" start="21663" end="21693" title="National and Social Liberation" label="National and Social Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="21705" end="21709" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q650211" start="21712" end="21732" title="Juan Bautista Sacasa" label="Juan Bautista Sacasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q852448" start="21781" end="21803" title="President of Nicaragua" label="President of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="21815" end="21819" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q335198" start="21822" end="21836" title="Kantarō Suzuki" label="Kantarō Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q274948" start="21876" end="21899" title="Prime Minister of Japan" label="Prime Minister of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="21911" end="21915" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q838996" start="21918" end="21937" title="Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu" label="Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528718" start="21971" end="21999" title="Ministry of Justice (Romania)" label="Romanian Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="22011" end="22015" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969" start="22018" end="22031" title="Eddie Cochran" label="Eddie Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="22086" end="22090" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353882" start="22093" end="22106" title="Elda Emma Anderson" label="Elda Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="22160" end="22164" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383538" start="22167" end="22176" title="Red Allen" label="Red Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="22224" end="22228" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q156349" start="22231" end="22255" title="Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan" label="Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="22296" end="22314" title="President of India" label="President of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="22326" end="22330" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q190501" start="22333" end="22343" title="Henrik Dam" label="Henrik Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="22381" end="22392" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="22413" end="22417" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143029" start="22420" end="22434" title="William Conway (cardinal)" label="William Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="22462" end="22466" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q389779" start="22469" end="22485" title="Felix Pappalardi" label="Felix Pappalardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="22552" end="22556" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q361470" start="22559" end="22573" title="Claude Provost" label="Claude Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="22622" end="22626" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q160802" start="22629" end="22644" title="Marcel Dassault" label="Marcel Dassault"/>
<link wikidata="Q460487" start="22674" end="22691" title="Dassault Aviation" label="Dassault Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="22703" end="22707" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056109" start="22710" end="22731" title="Cecil Harmsworth King" label="Cecil Harmsworth King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026633" start="22770" end="22780" title="Dick Shawn" label="Dick Shawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="22808" end="22812" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531" start="22815" end="22830" title="Louise Nevelson" label="Louise Nevelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="22884" end="22888" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q545488" start="22891" end="22906" title="Ralph Abernathy" label="Ralph Abernathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="22950" end="22954" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q180280" start="22957" end="22968" title="Turgut Özal" label="Turgut Özal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922067" start="23007" end="23026" title="president of Turkey" label="president of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119552" start="23046" end="23058" title="Gamal Hamdan" label="Gamal Hamdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="23103" end="23107" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q232305" start="23110" end="23130" title="Roger Wolcott Sperry" label="Roger Wolcott Sperry"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="23169" end="23180" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="23201" end="23205" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205730" start="23208" end="23223" title="Frank E. Resnik" label="Frank E. Resnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="23270" end="23274" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q359592" start="23277" end="23286" title="Piet Hein (scientist)" label="Piet Hein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="23329" end="23333" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q295141" start="23336" end="23348" title="Chaim Herzog" label="Chaim Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q327948" start="23395" end="23414" title="President of Israel" label="President of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="23426" end="23430" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q228899" start="23433" end="23448" title="Linda McCartney" label="Linda McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="23507" end="23511" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q638020" start="23514" end="23527" title="Robert Atkins (nutritionist)" label="Robert Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q756030" start="23578" end="23589" title="Atkins diet" label="Atkins diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628062" start="23609" end="23621" title="H. B. Bailey" label="H. B. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q328424" start="23667" end="23687" title="John Paul Getty, Jr." label="John Paul Getty, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q931607" start="23740" end="23749" title="Earl King" label="Earl King"/>
<link wikidata="Q455562" start="23818" end="23832" title="Yiannis Latsis" label="Yiannis Latsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="23863" end="23867" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047955" start="23870" end="23883" title="Edmond Pidoux" label="Edmond Pidoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="23918" end="23922" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q928270" start="23925" end="23937" title="Jean Bernard (physician)" label="Jean Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260812" start="23993" end="24005" title="Scott Brazil" label="Scott Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981481" start="24057" end="24075" title="Henderson Forsythe" label="Henderson Forsythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="24103" end="24107" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q433459" start="24110" end="24124" title="Kitty Carlisle" label="Kitty Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="24196" end="24200" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q223955" start="24203" end="24215" title="Aimé Césaire" label="Aimé Césaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q561921" start="24273" end="24287" title="Danny Federici" label="Danny Federici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="24339" end="24343" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386622" start="24346" end="24356" title="Eric Gross" label="Eric Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q601625" start="24418" end="24434" title="Michael Sarrazin" label="Michael Sarrazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350612" start="24470" end="24484" title="Robert Vickrey" label="Robert Vickrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="24524" end="24528" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519848" start="24531" end="24541" title="Leila Berg" label="Leila Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019314" start="24592" end="24608" title="J. Quinn Brisben" label="J. Quinn Brisben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226042" start="24662" end="24681" title="Dimitris Mitropanos" label="Dimitris Mitropanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574946" start="24715" end="24735" title="Nityananda Mohapatra" label="Nityananda Mohapatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274670" start="24796" end="24813" title="Jonathan V. Plaut" label="Jonathan V. Plaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q256412" start="24860" end="24880" title="Stanley Rogers Resor" label="Stanley Rogers Resor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591470" start="24928" end="24963" title="United States Secretary of the Army" label="United States Secretary of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="24975" end="24979" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q709745" start="24982" end="24994" title="Carlos Graça" label="Carlos Graça"/>
<link wikidata="Q942210" start="25019" end="25058" title="Prime Minister of São Tomé and Príncipe" label="Prime Minister of São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775226" start="25078" end="25087" title="Bi Kidude" label="Bi Kidude"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="25089" end="25097" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564596" start="25099" end="25105" title="Taarab" label="Taarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054054" start="25133" end="25142" title="Yngve Moe" label="Yngve Moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543227" start="25200" end="25214" title="V. S. Ramadevi" label="V. S. Ramadevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276082" start="25240" end="25261" title="Governor of Karnataka" label="Governor of Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="25273" end="25277" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878" start="25280" end="25302" title="Gabriel García Márquez" label="Gabriel García Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="25337" end="25348" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894011" start="25377" end="25389" title="Bernat Klein" label="Bernat Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556687" start="25456" end="25476" title="Wojciech Leśnikowski" label="Wojciech Leśnikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373289" start="25536" end="25548" title="Karpal Singh" label="Karpal Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="25593" end="25597" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q366553" start="25600" end="25617" title="Robert P. Griffin" label="Robert P. Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436656" start="25679" end="25694" title="Scotty Probasco" label="Scotty Probasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378492" start="25755" end="25773" title="Jeremiah J. Rodell" label="Jeremiah J. Rodell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647507" start="25811" end="25828" title="A. Alfred Taubman" label="A. Alfred Taubman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="25881" end="25885" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q466683" start="25888" end="25893" title="Chyna" label="Chyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q232959" start="25932" end="25945" title="Doris Roberts" label="Doris Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="25975" end="25979" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="25982" end="25994" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="26048" end="26079" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q280808" start="26097" end="26129" title="Second ladies and gentlemen of the United States" label="Second Lady of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040418" start="26161" end="26172" title="Carl Kasell" label="Carl Kasell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="26212" end="26216" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q167211" start="26219" end="26230" title="Alan García" label="Alan García"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708511" start="26278" end="26295" title="President of Peru" label="President of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="26307" end="26311" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q472114" start="26314" end="26323" title="Radu Lupu" label="Radu Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="26392" end="26401" title="Calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036184" start="26405" end="26419" title="Donnán of Eigg" label="Donnán of Eigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070122" start="26422" end="26433" title="Henry Heath (martyr)" label="Henry Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q609" start="26436" end="26453" title="Kateri Tekakwitha" label="Kateri Tekakwitha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="26455" end="26461" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q503235" start="26465" end="26482" title="Robert of Molesme" label="Robert of Molesme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166439" start="26485" end="26502" title="Shemon bar Sabbae" label="Shemon bar Sabbae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781854" start="26505" end="26542" title="April 17 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="April 17 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118788" start="26544" end="26566" title="Evacuation Day (Syria)" label="Evacuation Day (Syria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070656" start="26646" end="26653" title="FAO Day" label="FAO Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="26655" end="26659" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q242502" start="26662" end="26687" title="Flag Day (American Samoa)" label="Flag Day (American Samoa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742117" start="26689" end="26705" title="Malbec World Day" label="Malbec World Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257783" start="26708" end="26724" title="Public holidays in Gabon" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="26726" end="26731" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127377" start="26734" end="26754" title="World Hemophilia Day" label="World Hemophilia Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
